- A BORDERLESS BATTLE: DEFENDING AGAINST CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A BORDERLESS BATTLE: DEFENDING AGAINST CYBER THREATS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 22, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-9

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-907 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
John Katko, New York                 Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas                     Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Martha McSally, Arizona              J. Luis Correa, California
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Val Butler Demings, Florida
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin
Clay Higgins, Louisiana
John H. Rutherford, Florida
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Kathleen Crooks Flynn, Deputy General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

General Keith B. Alexander (Ret. USA), President and Chief
Executive Officer, IronNet Cybersecurity:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Michael Daniel, President, Cyber Threat Alliance:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Mr. Frank J. Cilluffo, Director, Center for Cyber and Homeland
Security, George Washington University:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. Bruce W. McConnell, Global Vice President, EastWest
Institute:
Oral Statement.................................................    28
Prepared Statement.............................................    29

APPENDIX

Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Keith B. Alexander.    63
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Keith B. Alexander...    65
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Michael Daniel.....    66
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Michael Daniel.......    68
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Frank J. Cilluffo..    69
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Frank J. Cilluffo....    69
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Bruce W. McConnell.    70
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Bruce W. McConnell...    71

A BORDERLESS BATTLE: DEFENDING AGAINST CYBER THREATS

----------

Wednesday, March 22, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:18 a.m., in
Room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. Michael T. McCaul
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives McCaul, Rogers, Perry, Katko,
Hurd, McSally, Ratcliffe, Donovan, Higgins, Rutherford,
Fitzpatrick, Thompson, Jackson Lee, Langevin, Richmond, Vela,
Watson Coleman, Rice, Correa, Demings, and Barragan.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from
cybersecurity experts on the evolving cyber threat landscape
and the Department of Homeland Security's civilian cyber
defense mission.
I recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today I look forward to discussing the borderless battle
being waged against us by nation-states, hacktivists, and
faceless criminals in cyber space. Last month I spoke at the
RSA Conference in San Francisco, and my message today is the
same as it was then: We are in the fight of our virtual lives,
and we are not winning.
Our adversaries are turning digital breakthroughs into
digital bombs. From Russia and Chinese hacking to brand-name
breaches, our cyber rivals are overtaking our defenses.
Nation-states are using cyber tools to steal our country's
secrets and intellectual property. Hackers snatch our financial
data and lock down access to our health care records and other
sensitive information. Terrorists are abusing encryption and
social media to crowd-source the murder of innocent people.
Our exposure to cyber threats grows we understand the
importance of not only being aware of each individual attack
and piece of malware, but also the patterns of the
sophisticated campaigns and life cycle of each threat.
It is clear that cyber attacks are becoming incredibly
personal, and the phones in our pockets are now the battle
space. Our most private information is at stake.
Just last week the Department of Justice indicted two
Russian spies for their involvement in the hack of at least 500
million e-mail accounts at Yahoo. In 2015 Chinese hackers stole
20 million security clearances--including my own and many, I am
sure, here in this room--in a breach of the U.S. Government's
Office of Personnel Management. Recently an alleged attack of
the CIA has WikiLeaks publishing over 8,000 pages of documents
with some of the most highly sensitive cyber weapons.
Cyber criminals are targeting our wallets, as well. One of
our witnesses today, General Keith Alexander, said on-line
theft has resulted in the greatest transfer of wealth in human
history.
Last year we also realized our democracy itself was at risk
as the Russian government sought to undermine democratic
institutions and influence our elections. They broke into
political institutions, invaded the privacy of private
citizens, spread false propaganda, and created discord in the
lead-up to a historic vote.
The conclusion from all this chaos is clear: Our digital
defenses need to be strengthened and our attackers must feel
the consequences of their actions.
Unfortunately, the U.S. Government is fighting 21st Century
threats with a 20th Century mindset and a 19th Century
bureaucracy. Bigger Federal agencies are not necessarily the
answer. We need to better tap into private-sector innovation,
and more quickly.
But Government does play a critical coordinating role. When
it comes to domestic cybersecurity it is important that our
efforts are led by a civilian department, not by the military
and not by intelligence agencies.
Just as we do not allow soldiers to police our city
streets, we should not have organizations like the military or
intelligence agencies patrolling domestic networks.
That is why in both 2014 and 2015 Congress passed
legislation that I championed that better defined interagency
cyber responsibilities. Those bills put DHS in the lead for
operationally securing the so-called dot.gov space, helping to
better protect critical infrastructure, being the hub for cyber
threat information sharing, and providing voluntary assistance
to private sector.
At the end of last year the Department announced it was
providing cybersecurity services to 93 of the Executive
branch's civilian work force. But perimeter detection is only
one tool in our toolbox. We need defense-in-depth strategies
and a talented cyber work force on the front lines.
Unfortunately, we are not attracting top cyber talent
because morale is poor on the inside and money is better on the
outside.
I propose the creation of a stronger, consolidated
cybersecurity agency at the Department of Homeland Security.
This will help us step up our cyber defense efforts and attract
top talent, and we have already begun to work with the new
administration and others to make that a reality in the near
future.
Finally, winning battles in cyber space depends on our
ability to deliver consequences. As a former Federal
prosecutor, I know that if you don't make the costs outweigh
the benefits, bad behavior will continue. This requires strong
leadership and a willingness to track down rogue hackers, and a
determination to hold hostile countries accountable.
Russia is the most immediate challenge. We cannot allow the
Kremlin to get away with meddling in our democracy. We need a
tough response, both seen and unseen, including tighter
sanctions.
It is not just about what happened in 2016; it is about
2017, 2018, and beyond. Our adversaries are trying to break up
the Western Alliance and interfere in other upcoming elections.
We have great witnesses here today to discuss all these
threats, and I look forward to your testimony and
recommendations.
[The prepared statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
March 22, 2017
Today, I look forward to discussing the borderless battle being
waged against us by nation-states, hacktivists, and faceless criminals
in cyber space.
Last month I spoke at the RSA Conference in San Francisco. And my
message today is the same as it was then: We are in the fight of our
virtual lives, and we . . . are . . . NOT . . . winning.
Our adversaries are turning digital breakthroughs into digital
bombs.
From Russian and Chinese hackings to brand-name breaches, our cyber
rivals are overtaking our defenses. Nation-states are using cyber tools
to steal our country's secrets and intellectual property.
Hackers snatch our financial data and lock down access to our
health care records and other sensitive information. And terrorists are
abusing encryption and social media to crowd-source the murder of
innocent people.
As our exposure to cyber threats grows, we understand the
importance of not only being aware of each individual attack and piece
of malware but also the patterns of the sophisticated campaigns and the
life cycle of each threat.
It is clear that cyber attacks are becoming incredibly personal,
and the phones in our pockets are now the battle space.
Our most private information is at stake. Just last week, the
Department of Justice indicted two Russian spies for their involvement
in the hack of at least 500 million email accounts at Yahoo.
In 2015, Chinese hackers stole 20 million security clearances--
including my own--in a breach of the U.S. Government's Office of
Personnel Management.
And recently, an alleged hack of the CIA has Wikileaks publishing
over 8,000 pages of documents with some of the most highly sensitive
cyber weapons.
Cyber criminals are targeting our wallets too. One of our witnesses
today, General Keith Alexander, said on-line theft has resulted in the
``greatest transfer of wealth in history.''
Last year, we also realized our democracy itself was at risk, as
the Russian government sought to undermine democratic institutions and
influence our elections.
They broke into political institutions, invaded the privacy of
private citizens, spread false propaganda, and created discord in the
lead-up to a historic vote.
The conclusion from all of this chaos is clear: Our digital
defenses need to be strengthened--and our attackers must feel the
consequences of their actions. Unfortunately, the U.S. Government is
fighting 21st Century threats with a 20th Century mindset and a 19th
Century bureaucracy.
Bigger Federal agencies are not necessarily the answer. We need to
better tap into private-sector innovation--and more quickly. But
Government does play a critical coordinating role.
When it comes to domestic cybersecurity, it is important that our
efforts are led by a civilian department. Not by the military. And not
by intelligence agencies.
Just as we do not allow soldiers to police our city streets, we
should not have organizations like the military or intelligence
agencies patrolling domestic networks. That is why in both 2014 and
2015 Congress passed legislation I championed that better defined
interagency cyber responsibilities.
Those bills put DHS in the lead for operationally securing the so-
called ``dot gov'' domain, helping to better protect critical
infrastructure, being the hub for cyber threat information sharing, and
providing voluntary assistance to the private sector.
At the end of last year, the Department announced it was providing
cybersecurity services to 93 percent of the Executive branch's civilian
workforce.
But perimeter detection is only one tool in our tool box. We need
defense-in-depth strategies and a talented cyber workforce on the front
lines.
Unfortunately, we are not attracting top cyber talent because
morale is poor on the inside and the money is better on the outside.
I have proposed the creation of a stronger, consolidated
cybersecurity agency at the Department of Homeland Security. This will
help us step-up our cyber defense efforts and attract top talent.
And we have already begun to work with the Trump administration and
others to make that a reality in the near future.
Finally, winning battles in cyber space depends on our ability to
deliver consequences. As a former Federal prosecutor, I know that if
you don't make the costs outweigh the benefits bad behavior will
continue.
This requires strong leadership, a willingness to track down rogue
hackers, and a determination to hold hostile countries accountable.

Chairman McCaul. With that, the Chair now recognizes the
Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
for holding this hearing.
Cybersecurity is at the forefront of American politics in a
way that in my 24 years here in Congress I have never seen
before. On this committee we regularly gather to hear from
cybersecurity leaders on the most pressing security
vulnerabilities to our Nation and the novel ways enemies seek
to exploit them.
This past fall details began to emerge about an entirely
new attack vector--a hacking campaign designed to impact the
Presidential election. Even before the election Secretary of
Homeland Security Jeh Johnson and Director of National
Intelligence James Clapper warned that Russian President
Vladimir Putin directed hackers to penetrate the e-mail
accounts of high-ranking Democratic officials to acquire
information for the purpose of embarrassing and undermining the
candidacy of Secretary Clinton.
We may never know whether the Russian intervention was the
determining factor in such a close election. Still, Congress
has a responsibility to address the unanimous determination of
our intelligence community that Putin's government successfully
meddled in our democracy and, in the view of the intelligence
community, will do so again.
In fact, in response to a question about the risk of future
Russian hacking against our election systems, FBI Director
James Comey said, ``They will be back.''
The full scale of this state-sponsored hacking campaign is
still not fully known, but what we do know is that in addition
to hacking private e-mail accounts of prominent Democrats, the
Russian hackers tried to infiltrate vital networks and
equipment maintained by state election authorities. The Russian
cyber campaign sought to strike at the heart of our democracy.
As such, legitimate questions about contacts between
President Trump's inner circle and associates of the Putin
regime need to be brought to light. That is why I support an
independent, 9/11-style commission to investigate the Russian
cyber campaign.
For our part, this committee needs to do aggressive
oversight into this matter.
It is disheartening to see President Trump be dismissive
about investigating this very significant cyber attack, even as
DHS and its Federal partners work to raise the level of cyber
awareness and hygiene across the country.
Just this week President Trump responded to the testimony
from the FBI and NSA before the House Intelligence Committee
that laid bare that there is no truth to the President's
allegation that former President Obama tapped his wires--
tweeted, ``The Democrats made up and pushed the Russian
story.''
If this was all fake news then why would FBI Director Comey
be dedicating scarce resources since July to investigating the
Russian government's interference with our election and any
links between individuals associated with the Trump campaign
and the Russian government?
What seems to be lost on President Trump, who, during the
campaign, repeatedly expressed support for DOD using cyber
offensive capabilities, is that there can be no retribution
without attribution.
I am pleased that we have with us today cybersecurity
leaders who understand the dangers posed by state actors like
Russia and who can speak to what we should be doing inside our
Government and with our allies, including NATO, to protect
critical infrastructure, including election infrastructure.
Before I yield back, Mr. Chair, I must express my deep
concern also about the aloof--bordering on belligerent--posture
taken by the Trump administration with respect to our NATO
allies. Last week the President not only repeated an
unsubstantiated Fox News claim that defamed the United Kingdom
intelligence service, but when asked by German Chancellor
Merkel to shake her hand at a White House press event, he
refused.
This week we hear the Secretary of State will not be
attending a long-scheduled NATO meeting, but plan to visit
Russia in April. At this heightened threat to Europe, it is
critical that this administration reverse course and reassure
our NATO allies that we are full partners against all threats,
but they and cyber or conventional threats also.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 22, 2017
Cybersecurity is at the forefront of American politics in a way
that, in my 24 years in Congress, I have never seen.
On this committee, we regularly gather to hear from cybersecurity
leaders on the most pressing security vulnerabilities to our Nation and
the novel ways our enemies seek to exploit them.
This past fall, details began to emerge about an entirely new
attack vector--a hacking campaign designed to impact the Presidential
election.
Even before the election, Secretary of Homeland Security Jeh
Johnson and Director of National Intelligence James Clapper warned that
Russian President Vladimir Putin directed hackers to penetrate the
email accounts of high-ranking Democratic officials to acquire
information for the purpose of embarrassing and undermining the
candidacy of Secretary Clinton.
We may never know whether the Russian intervention was the
determining factor in such a close election. Still, Congress has a
responsibility to address the unanimous determination of our
intelligence community that Putin's government successfully meddled in
our democracy and, in the view of the IC, will do so again.
In fact, in response to a question about the risk of future Russian
hacking against our election systems, FBI Director James Comey said
``they'll be back.''
The full scale of this state-sponsored hacking campaign is still
not fully known, but what we do know is that in addition to hacking
private email accounts of prominent Democrats, the Russian hackers
tried infiltrate vital networks and equipment maintained by state
election authorities.
The Russian cyber campaign sought to strike at the heart of our
democracy. As such, legitimate questions about contacts between
President Trump's inner circle and associates of the Putin regime need
to be brought to light.
That is why I support an independent 9/11-style commission to
investigate the Russian cyber campaign. For our part, this committee
needs to do aggressive oversight into this matter.
It is disheartening to see President Trump be dismissive about
investigating this very significant cyber attack, even as DHS and its
Federal partners work to raise the level of cyber awareness and hygiene
across the country.
Just this week, President Trump, responding to testimony from the
FBI and NSA before the House Intelligence Committee that laid bare that
there is no truth to the President's allegations that former-President
Obama ``tapped his wires,'' tweeted ``the Democrats made up and pushed
the Russian story.''
If this was all ``fake news'' then why would FBI Director Comey be
dedicating scarce resources, since July, to investigating the Russian
government's interference with our election and ``any links between
individuals associated with the Trump campaign and the Russian
government''?
What seems to be lost on President Trump who, during the campaign,
repeatedly expressed support for DoD using cyber offensive capabilities
is that there can be no retribution without attribution.
I am pleased that we have with us today cybersecurity leaders who
understand the dangers posed by state actors like Russia and can speak
to what we should be doing inside our Government and with our allies,
including NATO, to protect critical infrastructure, including election
infrastructure.
Before I yield back, I must express my deep concern about the
aloof, bordering on belligerent, posture taken by the Trump
administration with respect to our NATO allies. Last week, the
President not only repeated an unsubstantiated Fox News claim that
defamed the U.K. intelligence service but, when asked by German
Chancellor Merkel to shake her hand at a White House press event,
refused.
This week, we hear that his Secretary of State will not be
attending a long-scheduled NATO meeting but plans to visit Russia in
April. At a time of heightened threat to Europe, it is critical that
the Trump administration reverse course and reassure our NATO allies
that we are full partners against all threats--be they cyber or
conventional.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members are reminded they may submit opening
statements for the record.
We have a distinguished panel.
First, retired General Keith Alexander, president and CEO
of the IronNet Cybersecurity. Prior to his work at IronNet the
four-star general was the director of the National Security
Agency.
Thank you, sir, for being here today.
Next we have Mr. Michael Daniel, president of the Cyber
Threat Alliance, or CTA. Before that he served as special
assistant to the president and cybersecurity coordinator on the
National Security Council staff.
Thank you, sir, as well.
Mr. Frank Cilluffo is the director of the Center for Cyber
and Homeland Security at the George Washington University and
is co-director of G.W.'s Cyber Center for National and Economic
Security.
Thank you, sir.
Finally, Mr. Bruce McConnell is the global vice president
of the EastWest Institute. Prior to joining the institute he
served as deputy under secretary for cybersecurity at the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security.
Thank you, sir.
I want to thank all of you for being here.
I now recognize General Alexander.

STATEMENT OF GENERAL KEITH B. ALEXANDER (RET. USA), PRESIDENT
AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, IRONNET CYBERSECURITY

General Alexander. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Thompson, distinguished Members of the committee, it is an
honor to be here.
Chairman McCaul, I am going to take from some of your
statements and walk through my thoughts on the threat, where I
think we need to go as a Nation, and specifically with respect
to the Department of Homeland Security in the next 4 hours--no,
I am going to take my 5 minutes.
So you are right, the threats out there are growing,
Chairman, as we see them. You see it from Russia. It has hit
our elections; it has hit a number of areas.
We see this around the world with Iran on Saudi Arabia,
most disturbing and the ones that concern me the most. You have
seen North Korea on Sony and others. It is growing.
I think there are two aspects of this that we need to
address. First, our defense is terrible--between Government and
industry, and with industry getting the information they need
from Government, and the coordination within Government. It has
to be better.
You know, it was interesting being on the Presidential
commission. One of the things that we recognized is people said
it is too hard to do A, B, C, or D, but when you look at our
Constitution it says ``for the common defense.'' It doesn't
have in parentheses, ``unless it is too hard.''
It says it is for the common defense. That is what we have
our Government for.
Actually, we can defend this Nation in cybersecurity
working with industry. Actually, what Mr. Daniel is doing with
Cyber Threat Alliance, and what Homeland Security is doing, and
what the rest of the Government is doing sets the pieces in
place.
We have got to force that together. Let me give you some
thoughts on how to do that.
When we talk about this bubble chart that you mentioned
about how we got the agencies together, it gave clear--fairly
clear--missions to the Defense Department, to the Department of
Justice, FBI, and to Homeland Security. But words matter, and
what I see in those words is there is a lot of confusion over
the difference in some of the words.
So what do you mean by ``protect'' and what do you mean by
``defend''? Whose responsibility is it, and how are we going to
work together?
It is clear that if we work together--and industry sees
this. You see the financial sector starting to work together;
they are passing things through the FS-ISAC. You see the energy
sector and all the other sectors doing that, in large part led
by some of the DHS efforts on critical infrastructure.
That is a step in the right direction.
What Mr. Daniel is working on is a cyber threat alliance,
sharing information. What we have got to get to is how we share
information within Government and with industry at network
speed so that when this Nation is attacked all the elements of
our Government are prepared to do their job, which I would tell
you from my perspective today, we are not prepared.
We need to up that defense. We need to share information so
that DHS can do the job that I believe it is there for, which,
as you noted in yours, it is not the Defense Department or the
intelligence community's job to police domestic networks--nor,
actually, is it any Government--but they have to get
information from them when they are being attacked.
I will use Sony as a case in point. Let's say that we
determined that Sony was critical infrastructure--I will leave
that to someone else. But if Sony is being attacked by a
nation-state, whose job is it to defend Sony if we will not
allow Sony to counter-attack?
That is the Government's job, in my opinion.
But the Government did not and could not see that attack.
We didn't have the information at network speed; we had not
practiced it; and as you said, Chairman, we don't have the
rules of engagement and we haven't set this up.
We need to fix that now.
First, industry, from my perspective, is more than willing
to share. It is not personally identifiable information; it is
threat information, and we can share that at network speed. If
industry can share it amongst companies within a sector, they
could also share that with the Government.
We agreed early on that that would go through DHS but
should be shared to the rest of Government so those that have a
responsibility--whether it is law enforcement--for defense of
the country could do their job at network speed. I know you
have pushed hard on that, Chairman, to make sure that that is
right. We should ensure that is right and practice that.
If we did that, when Sony is being attacked by North Korea
in that case, and if the President and the Secretary of Defense
determine a cyber response was valid, they would have the means
and wherewithal to do a cyber response before we lost Sony.
Companies don't want the Government there for incident
response. They want us there when they are being defended. They
don't want to end up to be a victim like Sony, and we can't
afford that in many of our sectors, so we have to get this
right.
Chairman, I am prepared to answer any questions that you
have. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of General Alexander follows:]
Prepared Statement of Keith B. Alexander
March 22, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, Members of the committee:
Thank you for inviting me to discuss Defending Against Cyber Threats
with you today, and specifically, the current cyber threat landscape,
civilian cyber defense capabilities, and deterrence. I plan to speak
candidly about the authorities, roles, and responsibilities of the
Federal Government in cyber space, and how we can provide for our
Nation's common defense in cyber space. While some see the offense as
superior to the defense when it comes to cybersecurity, I believe that
these need to be worked together between the Government and industry.
I want to thank both Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member Thompson
for making cybersecurity a top priority, including your bipartisan
efforts to develop much of the legislation at the heart of the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015 and earlier legislation that set the stage
for it. This includes the efforts to codify and strengthen the
authorities related to the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) and to improve Federal cyber defense
efforts, including positive changes to the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA) and provisions that will make it easier for us
to grow a more capable Federal cyber workforce.
We live in an age in which data, and access to data, are key
resources. Never has technology been so focused on how we create, use,
and communicate data, and this revolution will benefit us as it leads
the way for significant strides in technology. It was just over 10
years ago that Apple introduced the first iPhone, a portable
communications device with a faster processor, more memory, and more
storage space than the Cray supercomputers of the 1980's and 1990's. In
the same year the iPhone was introduced, we witnessed cyber attacks
being used as an element of National power in the attacks on Estonia,
the most digitally dependent country in the world. Ten years later, we
continue to witness an astounding rate of growth in the amount of
unique, new information available world-wide, not to mention huge
increases in the velocity of data being transmitted and types of
devices communicating information. With the birth of the Internet of
Things (IoT) and the continued development and rapid iteration of
technology, these trends are likely to continue to accelerate.
We have also witnessed a troubling change in cyber attacks,
including an increase in major disruptive attacks, as well as the use
of actual destructive attacks on both public and private-sector
entities in the United States and abroad. In 2012, we saw the advent of
destructive attacks against Saudi Aramco, with over 20,000 computers
affected, and a follow-on attack against Qatari RasGas.\1\ Similar
attacks have recently been reported against the Saudi government.\2\
Here in the United States, we have seen destructive attacks conducted
by nation-states against private institutions, including the Las Vegas
Sands Corporation and Sony Corporation.\3\ We have likewise seen
massive disruptive attacks targeting American financial institutions,
including major attacks taking place multiple times in the last 5
years. Most recently, we have seen what appear to be cyber-enabled
efforts targeting the election of the President of the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper,
Statement for the Record: Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S.
Intelligence Community 2013 at 1, Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence (Mar. 12, 2013), available on-line at https://www.dni.gov/
files/documents/Intelligence%20Reports/
2013%20ATA%20SFR%20for%20SSCI%2012%20Mar%202013.pdf; Kim Zetter, Qatari
Gas Company Hit With Virus in Wave of Attacks on Energy Companies (Aug.
30, 2012), available on-line at https://www.wired.com/2012/08/hack-
attack-strikes-rasgas/.
\2\ See Zahraa Alkhalisi, Saudi Arabia Warns of New Crippling
Cyberattack, CNN (Jan. 26, 2017), available on-line at  http://
money.cnn.com/2017/01/25/technology/saudi-arabia-cyberattack-warning/;
see also Jose Pagliery, Hackers Destroy Computers at Saudi Aviation
Agency, CNN (Dec. 2, 2016) available on-line at http://money.cnn.com/
2016/12/01/technology/saudi-arabia-hack-shamoon/?iid=EL.
\3\ See Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper, Opening
Statement to Worldwide Threat Assessment Hearing, Senate Armed Services
Committee (Feb. 26, 2015), available on-line at https://www.dni.gov/
files/documents/2015%20WWTA%20As%20Delivered%20DNI%20-
Oral%20Statement.pdf (``2014 saw, for the first-time, destructive cyber
attacks carried out on U.S. soil by nation-state entities, marked first
by the Iranian attack on the Las Vegas Sands Casino a year ago this
month and the North Korean attack against Sony in November. Although
both of these nations have lesser technical capabilities in comparison
to Russia and China, these destructive attacks demonstrate that Iran
and North Korea are motivated and unpredictable cyber actors.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have also seen massive data breaches targeting nearly every
major economic sector here in the United States, perhaps most
prominently in the customer facing sides of key retailers and health
insurers. We have likewise seen an increasing trend with respect to the
use of ransomware by organized criminal groups and small actors alike,
seeking to hold data or systems hostage at a range of organizations
across our Nation, from hospitals to educational institutions.
According to one report, the key sectors affected by ransomware include
the services and manufacturing sectors, making up a combined 55% of
ransomware infections.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See Symantec, An ISTR Report: Ransomware and Businesses 2016,
at 8, available on-line at http://www.symantec.com/content/en/us/
enterprise/media/security_response/whitepapers/
ISTR2016_Ransomware_and_Businesses.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This does not even account for the on-going theft of intellectual
property from American companies, which I believe continues to
represent the greatest transfer of wealth in human history. While we
have ostensibly seen a significant down tick in cyber-enabled
intellectual property theft by key nation-state actors, it remains to
be seen whether this change will be sustained in the long-run and
whether it represents an actual reduction in significant activity
versus simply a more refined focus on key high-value theft.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Federal News Service, Transcript: Hearing Before the Senate
Armed Services Committee on Cybersecurity Policy and Threats at 8
(Sept. 29, 2015) (``McCain: As a result of the Chinese leader in
Washington there was some agreement announced between the United States
and China. Do you believe that that will result in an elimination of
Chinese cyber attacks? Clapper: Well, hope springs eternal. I think we
will have to watch what they're behavior is and it will be incumbent on
the intelligence community I think to depict, portray to policymakers
what behavioral changes if any, result from this agreement. McCain: Are
you optimistic? Clapper: No.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And it is worth noting that the same network penetrations that
permit threat actors to steal data can potentially be used to disrupt
networks or destroy data. This is particularly important to understand
as we watch the increasing convergence of our systems and networks,
whether we are talking about the increased links between industrial
control systems and corporate networks or the proliferation of devices
that are connected to the global network as part of the expansion of
the IoT.
We recently saw the practical implications of broad connectivity
and convergence when the Mirai botnet turned run-of-the-mill devices
into a virtual IoT army and used them to execute a Distributed Denial
of Service (DDoS) attack on Dyn (recently acquired by Oracle), a
managed DNS and traffic optimization company that serves more than
3,500 enterprise customers, including major companies like Netflix,
Twitter, LinkedIn, and CNBC.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Dyn, About Dyn, available on-line at http://dyn.com/about/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a free society, we have many vulnerabilities and leave ourselves
open to various threats that more authoritarian nations are more
capable of combating by limiting access to resources or restricting the
freedom of their people. Here in the United States, we are most
vulnerable to two asymmetric threats: Terrorist attacks and cyber-
enabled attacks. While these two types of attacks may overlap, and
terrorist groups seek to obtain such capabilities, today the most
advanced capabilities are in the hands of nation-states. This is not to
discount the threat posed by criminal actors; To the contrary, the most
wide-spread threat to our people today comes from organized criminal
groups employing cyber-enabled capabilities to make money.
It is worth noting that our enemies today need not attack our
Government to have a substantive strategic effect on our Nation.
Attacking civilian or economic infrastructure may be a more effective
approach in the modern era, particularly for asymmetric actors like
terrorist groups. Our increasing reliance on digital, connected devices
means that while tanks, bombers, and fighter jets are certainly not
obsolete, there are newer and perhaps more insidious ways of having
similar effects without the need for the large investment that those
assets require. Nation-states have long sought access to the critical
systems of other nations for espionage, and we now see an expansion
from these traditional activities to more aggressive actions by nation-
states. The number of nations that possess the capability to exploit
and attack continues to grow with less of an incentive to act with
appropriate state-to-state behavior and the using these cyber
capabilities in a more aggressive way.
Similarly, an increasing number and range of non-state groups use
cyber-enabled methods to advance their own agendas. Major criminal
gangs, organized crime groups, and terrorist organizations are growing
their cyber capabilities to go beyond mere communication, recruitment,
and incitement. And though the RAND Corporation estimates that the
malware black market can be more profitable than the illegal drug
trade,\7\ we do not treat cyber space threats as an epidemic. Nor do we
treat nation-state threats, or worse, nation-state actions, in cyber
space as we would treat the presence of nation-states key naval assets
inside our territorial waters. Rather, we treat cyber threats largely
as nuisance or, at worst, criminal activity to be dealt with
principally through private-sector defensive measures and after-the-
fact government action, typically by traditional law enforcement
agencies. The future of warfare is here, and we need to structure and
architect our Nation to defend our country in cyber space.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Lillian Ablon, Martin C. Libicki, and Andrea A. Golay,
Markets for Cybercrime Tools and Stolen Data at 11, RAND Corporation
(2014), available on line at http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/
RR610.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is critical that as a Nation, we fundamentally rethink how the
Government and the private sector relate to one another in cyber space.
We need to draw clear lines and make explicit certain responsibilities,
capabilities, and authorities. The private sector controls the vast
majority of the real estate in cyber space, particularly when it comes
to critical infrastructure and key resources.\8\ Given the private
sector's role in running the infrastructure upon which our Nation
relies, there is likewise no question that the Government and private
sector must collaborate. We need to recognize that neither the
Government nor the private sector can capably protect the systems and
networks they need to without extensive and close cooperation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See, e.g., Office of the Director of National Intelligence,
Office of the Program Manager-Information Sharing Environment, Critical
Infrastructure and Key Resources, available on-line at https://
www.ise.gov/missionpartners/critical-infrastructure-and-key-resources
(``The private sector owns and operates an estimated 85% of
infrastructure and resources critical to our Nation's physical and
economic security.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
One of the key issues we must address is determining where to place
responsibility for the cyber defense of the Nation, including its key
infrastructures and economic sectors. Today, the basic expectation is
that the private sector is responsible for defending itself in cyber
space regardless of the enemy, scale of attack, or type of capabilities
employed. However, the reality is that commercial, private-sector
entities cannot practically be expected to defend themselves against
nation-state attacks in cyber space. They do not have the capacity or
capability to respond in a way that would be fully effective against a
nation-state attacker, whether from a deterrence or strategic
perspective.
For over 200 years, our Constitution has made clear that one of the
core goals of our forefathers in forming a Federal union was to provide
``for the common defense.''\9\ And yet today, as we face a rapidly
expanding threat environment in cyber space and as our National
institutions and our economic base in the private sector increasingly
come under direct attack from a wide range of actors including highly
capable nation-states, we simply do not provide such common defense, at
least not in any practical sense of the phrase.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. Const., preamble (emphasis added and spelling modernized).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2012, then-Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta noted that ``the
Department [of Defense] has a responsibility . . . to be prepared to
defend the Nation and our National interests against an attack in or
through cyber space.''\10\ Even at that time, it was clear that in
order to make our overall national cyber architecture truly defensible,
we needed to establish a shared understanding of our respective roles
and responsibilities, first within the Government, then between the
Government and the private sector. As a result, we worked closely with
our colleagues in other agencies across the Government spending many
hours, days, weeks, and months to put in place a workable structure for
sharing authorities and assigning responsibilities at the National
level. Indeed, by one count, it took 75 drafts to get agreement on a
single slide regarding the National division of responsibilities for
cybersecurity.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See Department of Defense, Remarks by Secretary Panetta on
Cybersecurity to the Business Executives for National Security, New
York City (Oct. 11, 2012), available on-line at http://
archive.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=5136.
\11\ See Department of Defense Information Operations Center for
Research and Army Reserve Cyber Operations Group, Cyber Endeavor 2014:
Final Report--When the Lights Go Out, at 5 (June 26, 2014), available
on-line at https://my.nps.edu/documents/105372694/0/
Cyber_Endeavour_2014-Final_Report-2014-08-13.pdf. (``The need to define
these partnerships and relationships [] led the Government and U.S.
Federal Cybersecurity Operations Team to define their National roles
and relationships as highlighted in Figure 1, which is commonly
referred to as the `Bubble Chart.' There were seventy-five (75)
versions made of this chart before all parties agreed on how this
works, and it was powerful and important just to get an agreement.'')
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the end of that process, we assigned the responsibilities as
follows: The Justice Department would, among other things,
``[i]nvestigate, attribute, disrupt, and prosecute cyber crimes; [l]ead
domestic national security operations; and [c]onduct domestic
collection, analysis, and dissemination of cyber threat intelligence;''
DHS would ``[c]oordinate the national protection, prevention,
mitigation of, and recovery from cyber incidents; [d]isseminate
domestic cyber threat and vulnerability analysis; and [p]rotect
critical infrastructure;'' and DOD would ``[d]efend the Nation from
attack; [g]ather foreign threat intelligence and determine attribution;
[s]ecure national security and military systems.''\12\ Moreover, the
``bubble chart,'' as this document was called, assigned the following
lead roles: DOJ: investigation and enforcement; DHS: protection; and
DOD: National defense.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See id. at 6, Fig. 1.
\13\ See id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The reality, however, is that the vision of the ``bubble chart''
has never been fully realized. The truth is that today, our Government
agencies appear to be confused by the different terms of protection,
incident response, and National defense. More needs to be done in
defining these roles within the key departments, and we must practice
how the Government is going to collectively execute their
responsibilities. The relationships amongst our various Government
agencies and between the Government and the private sector continue to
be a source of friction, the ``bubble chart'' notwithstanding. Clearly
more remains to be done to fully achieve the valuable vision set forth
in the ``bubble chart.''
Many have also argued that it is important for the creation of ``a
new component agency, or [the] repurpose[ing of] an existing agency, to
serve as a fully operational cybersecurity and critical infrastructure
protection agency on par with other component agencies.''\14\ This
agency would be a ``DISA equivalent'' for the civilian Government
agencies. This could be run by the Government or outsourced to a
commercial entity. As I've previously noted, I generally support this
recommendation, and think that it is important that the new
administration give this idea some serious consideration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Id. at 44 (action item 5.5.2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the Government to effectively work with the private sector to
secure the Nation in cyber space, perhaps the single most important
thing the Government can do is to build real connectivity and
interoperability with the private sector. Such connectivity and
interoperability on a technology level is critical, but it is also
important on the policy and governance level. That is, in part why the
Commission recommended the creation of a National Cybersecurity Public-
Private Partnership (NCP\3\).\15\ This entity, as set forth in
Commission's report, would serve the President directly, reporting
directly through the National Security Advisor and would be used ``as a
forum for addressing cybersecurity issues through a high-level, joint
public-private collaboration.''\16\ Part of the NCP\3\'s key role would
be to ``identify clear roles and responsibilities for the private and
public sectors in defending the Nation in cyber space,'' including
addressing critical issues like ``attribution, sharing of Classified
information [and] an approach--including recommendations on the
authorities and rules of engagement needed--to enable cooperative
efforts between the Government and private sector to protect the
Nation, including cooperative operations, training, and exercises.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Id. at 14 (action item 1.2.1).
\16\ Id. at 14-15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In line with this recommendation, the Commission also recommended
that the ``[t]he private sector and administration should launch a
joint cybersecurity operation program for the public and private
sectors to collaborate on cybersecurity activities to identify, protect
from, detect, respond to, and recover from cyber incidents affecting
critical infrastructure.''\17\ In my view, empowering such joint
efforts is critical to ensuring our long-term National security in
cyber space. As the Commission indicated, ``[k]ey aspects of any
collaborative defensive effort between the Government and private
sector [will] include coordinated protection and detection approaches
to ensure resilience; fully integrated response, recovery, and plans; a
series of annual cooperative training programs and exercises
coordinated with key agencies and industry; and the development of
interoperable systems.''\18\ Having such mechanisms in place well ahead
of crisis is critical so that public and private sector entities can
jointly train and exercise these rules of engagement and mitigate any
potential spillover effects on on-going business or Government
activities. In my view, implementing these two recommendations of the
Commission are amongst the most important things we might do as a
Nation in the near term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Id. at 15 (action item 1.2.2.)
\18\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, I think it is worth highlighting that it is critical that
this be a two-way partnership between Government and the private
sector. The Government can and must do more when it comes to partnering
with the private sector, building trust, and sharing threat
information--yes, even highly Classified threat information--at network
speed and in a form that can be actioned rapidly. Building out a cross-
cutting information-sharing capability allows the Government and
private sector to develop a common operating picture, analogous to the
air traffic control picture. As the air traffic control picture ensures
our aviation safety and synchronizes Government and civil aviation, the
cyber common operational picture can be used to synchronize a common
cyber defense for our Nation, drive decision making, and enable rapid
response across our entire National cyber infrastructure. This would
prove a critical defensive capability for the Nation.
The information-sharing legislation enacted by Congress as part of
the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 is a step in the right direction.
However, it lacks key features to truly encourage robust sharing,
including placing overbearing requirements on the private sector,
overly limiting liability protections, restricting how information
might effectively be shared with the Government, and keeping the
specter of potential Government regulation looming in the
background.\19\ Moreover, while the Government has placed this
responsibility with the DHS today,\20\ and DHS established the
Automated Indicator Sharing platform (AIS) as a ``capability [that]
enables the exchange of cyber threat indicators between the Federal
Government and the private sector at machine speed,''\21\ it is
important for this Committee--as the primary oversight organization for
the Department--to recognize the perception in industry is that DHS
faces significant challenges in this area and that it simply lacks the
technical capabilities to succeed.\22\ When we first discussed this
approach, DHS was the portal, but it would be a true partnership
between DOD, DHS, and DOJ. We must help drive DOD, DHS, and DOJ to work
together to evolve our Government's roles and responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See, e.g., Jamil N. Jaffer, Carrots and Sticks in Cyberspace:
Addressing Key Issues in the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of
2015,_S. Car. L. Rev._ (forthcoming 2017).
\20\ See, e.g., Executive Order 13691, Promoting Private Sector
Cybersecurity Information Sharing (Feb. 13, 2015),available on-line at
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/02/13/executive-order-
promoting-private-sector-cybersecurity-information-shari (``The
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC),
established under section 226(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002.
. . shall engage in continuous, collaborative, and inclusive
coordination with ISAOs on the sharing of information related to
cybersecurity risks and incidents.'').
\21\ See DHS US-CERT, Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS), available
on-line at https://www.us-cert.gov/ais.
\22\ See Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity, Testimony
of Greg Rattray, Director of Global Cyber Partnerships & Government
Strategy, J.P. Morgan Chase (May 16, 2016) (describing DHS's six
information sharing initiatives, as ``too broad and [simply] not
meet[ing] the need [] to enhance cyber defense''); Testimony of Mark
Gordon, n. 13 supra (arguing that while tactically accelerating
automating and systemizing threat indicator content with the Government
is a big vision, it is not a reality today); see also Jaffer, n. 14
supra, at_ (``DHS is generally seen as facing major challenges in
capability in the cyber area and a number of other agencies, from DOD/
NSA to FBI, are seen by industry as more capable, reliable, or
secure.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More can be done here, and I stand ready to work with this
committee and others in Congress and the administration as we seek a
path forward on this important issue. As with the recommendations of
the Commission above, I believe that implementing real, robust real-
time threat information sharing across the private sector and with the
Government could be a game-changer when it comes to cyber defense.
In sum, Mr. Chairman, I think much remains to be done to fully put
our Nation on a path to real security in cyber space, but I am strongly
hopeful for our future. With your leadership and that of the Ranking
Member, working together collaboratively across the aisle and with the
White House and key players in the private sector as well as other key
committees in Congress, I think we can achieve some real successes in
the near future.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, General.
Chair recognizes Mr. Daniel.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL DANIEL, PRESIDENT, CYBER THREAT ALLIANCE

Mr. Daniel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Thompson, other distinguished committee Members. It is very
nice to be here with you today with such a distinguished panel.
I want to build on what General Alexander was saying in
terms of how I see the threat evolving and talk briefly about
why this problem is actually hard, because it is not obvious on
the surface of it, and then talk a little bit about how we have
some strategies for dealing with it and how CTA can play a role
in that.
When you take a look at the threat space that we are
talking about you can see three trends that make it--that make
this problem continue to get worse, one of which is that we are
making it broader. Every day we are hooking up more and more
stuff to the internet, and we are hooking up different kinds of
items.
It is no longer just wired desktops but, you know,
refrigerators and cars and light bulbs and a whole array of
medical devices and other things that are very, very different
from one another. So we are making our problem continually more
difficult.
It is also becoming--the threat is also becoming more
diverse. Many different actors are learning that they can
pursue their interests through cyber space, whether they are
hacktivists or criminals or nation-states, and all of those
factors mean that the problem is becoming along a much greater
continuum than it was before.
It is becoming more dangerous. People are willing to take
actions in cyber space and cause disruption and destruction in
a way that they weren't previously.
Now, it is not obvious on the surface why this problem is
actually hard to deal with, but I think it is because we tend
to treat it as just a technology problem and we keep trying to
impose just technology solutions on this problem. It is not
just a technology problem.
It involves aspects of economics, and human behavior,
business issues, political issues. Until we learn to address it
in that holistic manner and not continue to treat it just as a
technology problem, we are going to continue to fail, as
General Alexander was saying.
But it is also because cyber space has some different
rules. It doesn't operate the way the physical world does.
Certain concepts like near and far, proximity,
sovereignty--all of these things actually have different
meanings in cyber space than they do in the way they manifest
in the physical world. So we have got to learn to grapple with
the different rules that cyber space imposes on us.
Last, this is just a new policy area. We don't have
centuries of experience, decades of a policy framework to draw
on. Almost everything that we are doing in this space--the
bubble chart that General Alexander referenced--that is all
new, and figuring out how to do this is a challenge.
I think overall when I look at where we are trying to get
to, information sharing is obviously a critical enabler. I
would say that it is a necessary but not sufficient part of
what we need to do in terms of our defense.
We have talked about it for a long time. In fact, there are
those that are sort-of tired of talking about information
sharing. Frank is probably one of them. Part of the issue is
that we actually haven't figured out how to do it right.
We have taken some really good steps. The legislation that
this committee helped pass and get through was a critical part
of that, some of the Executive Orders from the previous
administration, some of the steps in the private sector. But we
really haven't gotten to the point where we are doing it at
network speed and at scale.
So I see the model that we are trying with the Cyber Threat
Alliance of bringing together the cybersecurity industry in a
new way, using some new models of how to share that
information, score that information, give that information some
value, emphasize context, not just the raw data itself--if we
begin to pool this information in a way--in this new way we
will actually enable the cybersecurity vendors to raise their
defenses across the entire ecosystem.
But it will also enable us to work with Government better
to actually disrupt what the bad guys are doing and actually
change the dynamic from always being on the defense to actually
being able to take the fight to the bad guys. It will enable us
to do better analysis so we can take that risk-based approach
that the NIST Cybersecurity Framework promotes, and so that
companies can actually implement that much more effectively. It
will make our response and recovery activities much more
effective because it will be based on solid data.
So just to close, you know, this is an area that I agree
with what you said, Mr. Chairman, that this is an absolutely
critical problem for us to tackle, and I am very committed from
both my Government service and in my current role to doing so.
So thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Daniel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Daniel
March 22, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson and Members of the
committee: Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss how new models of collaboration and threat sharing can be a
catalyst toward tangibly reducing threats across the cybersecurity
ecosystem. My name is Michael Daniel and, as of last Monday, I am the
first president of the Cyber Threat Alliance (CTA)--a cyber threat
information-sharing organization that now includes six of the world's
largest cybersecurity companies as founding members. Prior to leading
the CTA, I served for over 20 years in the U.S. Federal Government,
most recently for 4 years as Special Assistant to the President and
Cybersecurity Coordinator at the National Security Council.
First, let me begin my testimony by acknowledging this committee's
longstanding leadership on cybersecurity issues. This committee has
played a central role in passing a range of important cybersecurity
legislation, including legislation that has helped foster a more robust
and trusted environment for responsible cyber threat information
sharing. Having worked on cyber threat information-sharing issues
first-hand for many years, I understand how challenging this process
was and sincerely appreciate this committee's continued hard work and
leadership.
the cyber threat landscape
We live in a digital age. This digital age brings with it
incredible efficiencies and productivity, but it also brings new
challenges and potential vulnerabilities that--left unchecked--threaten
to undermine these very benefits. The increasingly digitized nature of
the world, and the United States in particular, means the threats we
face in cyber space are particularly significant. Our economy, our
National security, our social lives all depend heavily on the internet
and cyber space. Unfortunately, the threat is also growing more acute
in at least three fundamental ways:
1.   The cyber threat is becoming broader: As we increasingly
connect more and more devices up to the internet, we are making
cyber space bigger and dramatically expanding the potential
attack surface. Indeed, even by the Gartner Group's
conservative estimates, there will be over 20 billion devices
connected to the internet by 2020--that translates to adding 10
million devices per day. But more important than just the
numbers are the kind of devices we are connecting to the
internet. They are not desktops, laptops, or even smartphones.
They are light bulbs, refrigerators, cars, thermostats,
sensors, and thousands of other ``things''--a huge array of
different kinds of devices with different functions, protocols,
and security features. This growth in volume and heterogeneity
makes effective cyber defense even harder.
2.   The cyber threat is becoming more frequent: The number of
malicious actors in cyber space continues to grow rapidly as
hacktivists, criminals, and nation-states all learn that they
can pursue their goals relatively cheaply and effectively
through cyber space. The barriers to entry are low and the
potential return on investment is fairly high. As a result, the
volume and frequency of malicious cyber activity is increasing
dramatically.
3.   The cyber threat is becoming more dangerous: Until recently,
cyber actors generally limited their malicious activities to
stealing money or information, temporary denial-of-service
attacks, or website defacements (the digital equivalent of
graffiti). But increasingly, we are now seeing actors move to
much more destructive and disruptive activities. The
destructive cyber attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment, the
physical disruption of the Ukrainian power grid, and the use of
information operations to influence electoral processes are all
recent examples of this trend.
why is cybersecurity a hard challenge to solve?
At first glance, it's not obvious why cyber threats are so hard to
effectively manage. If it's just a technology problem, why can't we
simply deploy innovative technical solutions to stop these threats? The
answer is that cyber threats pose not just technical problems, but also
economic, psychological, and human behavioral challenges. As a result,
our response to threats has to involve not just technical solutions,
but economic, psychological, and human behavioral aspects as well--a
much greater challenge than simply buying a new cybersecurity device or
service.
In addition, cyber space operates according to different rules than
the physical world. I do not mean the social ``rules'' of cyber space
that get a lot of play in the media, but rather the physics and math of
cyber space. The concepts of distance, borders, proximity--all operate
differently in cyber space compared to the physical world. Therefore,
our typical models for addressing certain challenges, such as border
security, simply don't work in cyber space. Developing these new models
will take time and experimentation to get right.
Finally, cyber space and the internet are still very new,
relatively speaking. From a policy and legal perspective, we have not
had the time or the experience to develop the comprehensive frameworks
we need to tackle cybersecurity's challenges. What is the right
division of responsibility between governments and the private sector
in terms of cyber defense? What actions are acceptable for governments,
companies, and individuals to take and which actions are not? Answering
these kinds of questions is the fundamental policy challenge for the
next few years.
what should we do about cybersecurity?
Given the trends, growing complexities, and inherent challenges of
the cyber threat, is it possible to design an effective strategy to
combat it? The short answer is yes--but implementing such a strategy
requires a lot of work, sustained engagement, and a multi-disciplinary,
risk-based approach. As a Nation, an effective cyber strategy will
involve three core elements:
   Raising the level of cybersecurity across the global digital
ecosystem
   Preventing, disrupting, deterring, and constraining our
adversaries' operations in cyber space
   Responding effectively to incidents when they occur
From an organizational perspective, an effective cyber strategy
must also contain several core elements:
   Making cybersecurity a C-suite and organizational priority
   Using a risk-based approach to address cyber threats
   Developing, testing, and exercising an incident response and
recovery plan
In developing their strategies to combat cyber threats, governments
should recognize that no one agency has the full range of capabilities,
authorities, and perspective needed to address the challenge.
Organizations must realize that they cannot relegate cybersecurity to
the Chief Information Officer's (CIO) shop or the geeks in the server
closet. Collectively, we must realize no government or individual
company can effectively address the cyber threat by itself. Instead,
cybersecurity is a fundamentally shared and distributed challenge that
can only be effectively addressed through collaboration that leverages
the unique capabilities and authorities of companies, individuals, and
governments. The private sector, State and local governments, National
governments--all of these entities will have to work together across
boundaries and borders if we want our cybersecurity strategies to be
effective.
In considering how to build this new kind of collaboration, I don't
have ``the'' solution for what it should look like. In fact, there's
almost certainly not just one solution. However, through the hard work
of many people over the past decade and a half, we have started
building the foundations for this new kind of collaboration. This
committee has passed critical legislation that enables this
collaboration within the U.S. The Federal Government has worked hard to
build its capabilities across all the relevant agencies--Homeland
Security, Defense, Commerce, State, Justice, GSA, OMB, and the
intelligence community all have critical roles to play within the U.S.
context. This kind of interagency collaboration will be necessary in
other countries as well. The private sector has also been working hard
globally, creating new structures, like Information Sharing and
Analysis Organizations, building new technologies, and creating whole
new industries, like cyber incident response firms. So the good news is
that we do not need to start over. Instead, we can continue building on
this foundation laid over the last decade to evolve this collaboration
into its effective form.
cyber threat information sharing as a critical component of effective
cybersecurity
Clearly, if we are going to have the kind of interagency,
intercompany, and interorganizational collaboration I described above,
cyber threat information sharing is a critical enabler. In fact, robust
cyber threat information sharing across this entire cybersecurity
ecosystem is a necessity in achieving our shared goals of enhanced
cybersecurity. Of course, cyber threat information sharing won't solve
the problem by itself. If it is not used as a tool to leverage people,
process, and technology to match the highly automated nature of our
adversaries' attacks with automated defenses, then it will not be
effective.
Despite this obvious enabling function, as a society we've had
trouble figuring out how to actually share useful cyber threat
information, do so at a speed that matters, and then to take action
based on that information. That's where the CTA comes in.
how does cta help achieve these goals of automated defense?
Within the cyber threat information-sharing environment,
cybersecurity companies have a unique role to play. They collectively
have the physical infrastructure and processing ability to
automatically deploy preventive measures based on new cyber threat
information to a broad customer base across multiple sectors. For these
reasons, cybersecurity companies can bring a degree of
``actionability'' to cyber threat information sharing that is critical
for achieving the ultimate goal of raising adversary costs and tangibly
improving cybersecurity across the ecosystem.
To make this potential real, a core group of cybersecurity
companies decided to form the Cyber Threat Alliance (CTA). CTA is a new
kind of Information Sharing and Analysis Organization (ISAO) that
features six of the largest global cybersecurity companies as founding
members--Check Point, Cisco, Fortinet, McAfee, Palo Alto Networks and
Symantec. It also includes IntSights, Rapid7, Reversing Labs, RSA, and
Telefonica as affiliate members. This partnership underscores the
philosophy that we can be force multipliers in support of a coordinated
cyber threat information-sharing effort against our shared cyber
adversaries. The CTA cyber threat information-sharing model is novel in
several ways that directly address many of the aspects that have
limited the effectiveness of other cyber threat information-sharing
relationships, both formal and informal:
1. Accountability.--The CTA ensures that there is no anonymity for
member contributions, although the customer's data is
anonymized. Therefore, submitters have to stand behind the
accuracy of the cyber threat information they provide.
2. Participation.--To encourage active participation and meaningful
contributions, the CTA establishes mandatory submission
thresholds for cyber threat information sharing, initially on a
quantitative basis in an ever-evolving scoring system that
measures the qualitative value of shared cyber threat data
based on context.
3. Transparency.--The CTA uses an automated scoring algorithm to
evaluate and assign point totals of submitted cyber threat
intelligence that will be public among all members. CTA members
will all be able to measure their performance on a dashboard.
Using this new cyber threat-sharing model, CTA undertakes two broad
operational lines of effort. First, CTA enables near-real time sharing
of rich, contextual cyber threat information among all cybersecurity
companies, which can be leveraged on an individual basis to update and
improve their products and services. Second, CTA uses this shared cyber
threat information to build ``playbooks'' of malicious cyber activity.
Taken together, these two broad lines of effort enable CTA to support
both National and organizational cybersecurity objectives, including:
1. Improved cyber defense across the entire ecosystem.--By enabling
cybersecurity providers to dramatically expand the pool of
information their defensive products can leverage, every
member's products become more effective for their customers.
Because the CTA members' customers span all industry sectors,
the impact of this cyber threat information sharing can protect
a larger percentage of the global ecosystem than more sector-
specific information sharing entities.
2. Better prevention against, and disruption of our adversaries.--
The CTA is focused on sharing indicators related to an
adversary's playbook--a more limited and predictable series of
steps an adversary must take to complete a successful cyber
attack. Although re-engineering malware requires some time and
effort, relatively speaking it is easy to make small tweaks to
malware so that it can evade detection. However, an
adversaries' total suite of indicators (the ``playbook,''
including tactics, techniques, and procedures, and typical
operational approach) is much more difficult to change and
update. By developing and publishing these playbooks, we can
force adversaries to adapt their business processes--a much
more time consuming and therefore disruptive task.
3. Risk-based.--As CTA's cyber threat information base grows, it
will enable better analysis of cyber threats and trends with
respect to those threats.--In turn, this analysis will enable
our members to better advise clients on the relative risks of
the cyber threats they face and how to prioritize among them.
This type of broad-based sharing of widely used threat
techniques can help neutralize unsophisticated actors and force
sophisticated adversaries, such as nation-state actors, to
develop new (and therefore costlier) techniques. This narrowing
of the threat landscape can enable public and private
organizations to more effectively target high-priority and
advanced persistent adversaries and threats.
4. Incident response and recovery.--CTA cyber threat information
sharing will lead to better information, particularly about
adversary playbooks, that can make incident response and
recovery efforts faster and more effective.
To fulfill these core missions, the CTA has built an automated
cyber threat information-sharing platform with the goal of enabling and
incentivizing the sharing of high-quality, actionable cyber threat
information. The CTA and its platform embody a major step forward in
transforming shared cyber threat information into effective preventive
measures that can automatically be deployed by CTA members to their
respective customers. The CTA platform is not just a concept or a set
of Powerpoint slides--it is a functioning system, actively working to
protect its members and their customers in near-real-time, and thus
contributing to the increased protection of the industry and the world.
For example, recently, a single shared cyber threat sample from one
CTA member allowed another member to build protections before that
organization's customers were targeted--preventing successful attacks
against 29 subsequent organizations. In another instance, cyber threat
data shared through the CTA from one member allowed another member to
identify a targeted attack against its customer and release additional
indicators to defend that organization. The CTA and its platform have
shown that a well-designed and well-built cyber threat information-
sharing program can improve the Nation's cyber defenses and undermine
the efforts of cyber adversaries. CTA is already improving
cybersecurity, with some members finding that 40 to 50 percent of CTA's
shared cyber threat data is new and directly actionable.
better cybersecurity
The cyber threats we face as a world are very serious. For over 40
years, the United States and other like-minded countries have used the
internet and cyber space to derive enormous benefits: Economic growth,
National security improvements, and social well-being. However, if we
do not begin to effectively address the cyber threats we face, those
benefits could wither. That is not a future we want. Tackling this
challenge effectively will require forging new partnerships within
industries, between industries, and between the Government and
industry. It will require organizations to adopt new mindsets and
change old beliefs to reflect the realities of the modern cyber threat
environment. It will require coordinated action in a manner that
reinforces market forces and competition. The Cyber Threat Alliance is
ready to do its part in this endeavor and achieve effective
cybersecurity for everyone around the world.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Daniel. You stayed right on
time. I appreciate that.
Mr. Cilluffo.

STATEMENT OF FRANK J. CILLUFFO, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR CYBER AND
HOMELAND SECURITY, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY

Mr. Cilluffo. Since I barely had an unspoken thought, I
will try to be brief.
But, Mr. Chairman McCaul, Congressman Thompson,
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
To piggyback on some of the comments that General Alexander
and Michael Daniel brought up, we face a dizzying array of
cyber threats coming at us from all directions. I mean,
literally you blink and you have missed the latest hack de
jour.
I think what we all can also recognize is that the threat
tempo is accelerating and magnified by the speed at which
technology evolves and the fact that we are expanding the
attack surface through entities such as the Internet of Things;
but also by the fact that our adversaries continue to adapt
their tactics, techniques, and procedures, or their TTPs, to
defeat our prevention and response measures. This is not a
static set of issues, and we have got to look at it through
both lenses and perspectives.
No one is immune--not our Government, not our businesses,
and not any of us as individuals. But not all hacks are the
same, nor are all hackers or their targets.
I think we face a signal-to-noise dilemma right now. Who
and what do we need to pay attention to, and why?
I will try to be very brief on laying out some of the
threat actors because I hope we will have some time to get
through that during Q&A, but the threat comes in various
shapes, sizes, and forms. At the high end we are dealing with
nation-state actors, to criminal enterprises, to foreign
terrorist organizations, to hacktivists, and script kiddies.
Just as diverse as the threat actors themselves is the wide
variance in their intentions, capabilities, and the tools at
their disposal. While I will pick on four particular countries,
because they are the greatest threat emanating, from the--from
a U.S. perspective, it is important to keep in mind that every
country that has a modern military and intelligence service
also has a computer network attack capability.
Nation-states also vary in their intentions, and some are
more willing to exercise their cyber capabilities to disruptive
and destructive attacks. Think North Korea; think Iran.
Indeed, the line between the ability to exploit and the
ability to attack is paper-thin and turns simply upon the
question of intent. If you can exploit you can also attack, if
your intention is there to do so.
I think it is also important to recognize when we look at
all these threat actors we can't look at cyber in isolation of
the broader political and military components of these
countries. So you can't just look at cyber. It is a tool in
their toolkit to enable some of their overall primary
objectives.
One thing that is compounding the challenge today is that
countries are often turning to proxies to do their bidding.
They do so for a whole host of reasons: To augment some of
their capabilities that they may lack, or obviously to obscure
the--to not send the muddy footprints back to their doorstep,
to provide some plausible deniability. This is what I found
most startling out of the Yahoo indictments, is just how
explicit Russia's role was in terms of turning to cyber
criminals to perpetrate these particular crimes.
Topping the list, from a threat perspective, no surprise to
anyone here: Russia and China. Why? Because they are actually
integrating computer network attack and exploit into their
warfighting capability and doctrine. That is what
differentiates them from other state actors.
The one note I would underscore from Monday's hearings
before the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence was
the banter between Director Comey and Admiral Rogers on whether
or not this will facilitate and embolden Russia to continue to
engage in these sorts of attacks. They were talking about 2018,
2020.
But in addition to Russia, what other countries are
observing--what are they getting out of our mealy-mouth and
weak response? I think that is a fair--all sides are to blame
on that one. That is not a current situation.
But I think we need to get to the point where we can start
articulating a cyber deterrent strategy.
Just two other points on Russia and China that I think are
important: In addition to serving as threat actors, they also
provide virtual safe havens for a number of these criminal
enterprises, and we don't have extradition treaties. So law
enforcement is really stymied in their ability to bring hackers
to justice, and vast majority of these hackers are in Russia
and China.
Very briefly, what Russia--when you are thinking about
countries that are not only looking to computer network exploit
and warfighting capabilities, obviously topping that list is
North Korea and Iran. What they may lack in intent--in
capability they make up for with intent, and they are turning
to more and more destructive attacks.
Iran has got a long history in doing so, and I think we
need to keep an especially close eye on North Korea, given
their recalcitrant behavior right now and given the fact that,
ironically, they are not only engaged in computer network
attack, but they have turned to cyber crime to basically fund
the regime since they have been entirely isolated by the
international economy.
With that, I did go over. Sorry, Mr. Chairman. I hope to
get to some of these questions during the Q&A.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cilluffo follows:]
Prepared Statement of Frank J. Cilluffo
March 22, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished
committee Members thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today on this subject of National importance. As cyber threats continue
to multiply and evolve, your resolve to explore this complex yet
critical area is commendable. My testimony will focus primarily on the
nature of the threat--including how to think about the major threat
actors and their behavior--but will also contain thoughts on how best
to respond to the vexing economic and National security challenges
associated with America's digital footprint.
As individuals, businesses, and Government entities choose to
increasingly utilize the advantages of the internet, they expand their
exposure to the security vulnerabilities of information technologies
that ever more sophisticated and persistent threat actors seek to
leverage for political or monetary gain. Magnifying the security
problems of growing vulnerabilities and already thinly stretched
cybersecurity resources, the threat tempo is accelerating. This is due
to a variety of factors including the continued advantage of offense
over defense in cyber space, the added efficiencies associated with
division of labor and specialization in the maturing economy for cyber
crime, and the weak deterrent force of nascent policy responses that
have yet to fully account for the diverse and transnational nature of
cyber threats. The first step to addressing the policy problems created
by these trends is to seek to understand the complexities of the cyber
threat. In order to do so, we should conceive of it as a spectrum upon
which the many and varied threat actors can be placed. Not all hacks
and not all hackers are the same. To the contrary both intentions and
capabilities vary widely:
Nation-states.--At the high end of the spectrum are nation-states
whose military and intelligence services are both determined and
sophisticated in the cyber domain. Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea
presently top the list; but it is important to understand that every
country with a modern military and intelligence service now possesses
computer network exploitation (CNE) and computer network attack (CNA)
capability. Indeed the line between the ability to exploit and the
ability to attack is reed-thin and turns simply upon the question of
intent. Also keep in mind that cyber strategy and tactics must be
understood in context--as part and parcel of other geopolitical tools
and goals (military, political, economic)--not in isolation from them.
Nation-states often use proxies to do their bidding. Countries do
so for a range of reasons including to augment capabilities or to
obfuscate the true source of the intrusion or attack thereby affording
plausible deniability. Depending upon the reason(s) for which their
services have been engaged, the proxy may be state-sponsored, state-
supported or state-sanctioned.
In previous testimony before this committee I have discussed in
detail the capabilities and intentions of the four leading threat
actors.\1\ Building on that baseline, today I will highlight the latest
developments regarding these countries. Note however that the most
sophisticated threats that we face emanate from Russia and China which
have both integrated CNA and CNE into their warfighting strategy and
doctrine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See for example: Statement of Frank J. Cilluffo before the U.S.
House of Representatives, Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection and Security Technologies,
``Emerging Cyber Threats to the United States,'' February 25, 2016.
https://cchs.gwu.edu/sites/cchs.gwu.edu/files/downloads/
HHSC_Testimony_Feb%2025-2016_Final.pdf. Also see the resource document,
Samantha F. Ravich and Annie Fixler, ``Framework and Terminology for
Understanding Cyber-Enabled Economic Warfare,'' Foundation for Defense
of Democracies, February 22, 2017. http://www.defenddemocracy.org/
content/uploads/documents/22217_Cyber_Definitions.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Russia.--Russia has a long history of cyber aggression against
other nations; to wit: Estonia (2007), Georgia (2008), and Ukraine
(2014-15, and continuing). Russian efforts persisted in 2016-17, with
attempts to interfere in the U.S. election, and information operations
targeting multiple countries in both eastern and western Europe--
including those with upcoming elections, such as France and Germany.
Russia has been particularly adept at integrating cyber into its
strategic plans and operations. In February 2017, Russia's Defense
Minister acknowledged that the country had created a new military
branch: ``information warfare troops.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Vladimir Isachenkov, ``Russia Military Acknowledges New Branch:
Info Warfare Troops,'' The Associated Press, February 22, 2017. http://
www.bigstory.ap.org/article/8b7532462dd0495d9f756c9ae7d2ff3c/russian-
military-continues-massive-upgrade.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the cases of Ukraine and Georgia, Russia combined cyber and
kinetic operations; and in the case of Ukraine, Russia is believed to
have perpetrated the first-ever electricity blackout caused by computer
network attack. In recent years, Russia has demonstrated an increasing
level of assertiveness in the cyber domain, showing--in the words of
then-Director of National Intelligence James Clapper--a ``willingness
to target critical infrastructure systems and conduct espionage
operations even when detected.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ James R. Clapper, Director of National Intelligence,
``Worldwide Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community,''
Statement for the Record before the U.S. Senate, Armed Services
Committee, February 9, 2016. http://www.dni.gov/files/documents/
SASC_Unclassified_2016_ATA_SFR_FINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that cyber-spies from
Russia (and China) had penetrated the U.S. electrical grid, leaving
behind software programs, and trying to navigate the systems and their
controls. What purpose could the mapping of U.S. critical
infrastructure serve, other than intelligence preparation of the
battlefield? The NASDAQ exchange too has allegedly been the target of a
``complex hack'' by a nation-state; again one questions the motivation.
In Russia, the forces of crime, business, and politics have long
converged in a toxic blend; and there is evidence of complicity between
the Russian government and cyber criminals and hackers. Over time,
Russian hackers believed to be doing their government's bidding have
breached the White House, the State Department, and the Defense
Department.
China.--China has demonstrated a remarkable level of persistence
evidenced by the sheer number of acts of espionage that the country has
committed. These aggressive collection efforts have amassed secrets
(military--including plans for the F-35, commercial/proprietary, etc.)
in order to propel China's economic growth, military power, and
technological & scientific capacities--and thereby gain strategic
advantage in relation to (actual and perceived) competitor countries
and adversaries. In May 2015, data theft on a massive scale, affecting
virtually all U.S. Government employees, was traced back to China. The
extent to which the information gleaned from this hack of the U.S.
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) may be used to blackmail and
recruit Americans, to China's benefit, remains to be seen.
In September 2015, China and the United States reached an agreement
on refraining from conducting economic cyber espionage. Initially this
agreement appeared to reduce the level of activity, although it may
simply have pushed China's efforts in a different direction: Greater
efforts directed at U.S. Government (rather than U.S. corporate)
targets can be expected, moving forward; in addition, a notable spike
in Chinese cyber activity in the region (China's ``neighborhood'') has
been observed. Since the 2015 Obama-Xi agreement, moreover, China
appears to have shifted from use of the People's Liberation Army (PLA)
to relying more on its security and intelligence services for a greater
role in hacking foreign companies. However military officers in China
are increasingly known to moonlight as hackers for hire, when off the
clock. While Russia has received an overwhelming amount of attention
during the past year, this should not detract from the cyber activities
and threat posed by other state actors.
Iran.--Iran has invested heavily in recent years in order to deepen
and expand its cyber warfare capabilities, although this capacity was
initially directed internally to repress democratic forces in the
country. This effort came in the wake of the Stuxnet worm, which
targeted Iran's nuclear weapons development program. In recent years
Iran has engaged in a concerted cyber campaign against U.S. banks. U.S.
officials also believe Iran to be responsible for a cyber attack
against the Sands Casino in Las Vegas owned by politically active
billionaire Sheldon Adelson; the attack wiped clean many hard drives
and sought to destroy corporate infrastructure. Hackers linked to the
Iranian government have also used cyber means to compromise the control
system of a dam north of New York City. Iran has long relied heavily on
proxies such as Hezbollah--which now has a companion organization,
Cyber Hezbollah--to strike at perceived adversaries. Iran and Hezbollah
are believed to have perpetrated the cyber attacks against Saudi Aramco
and Qatari RasGas, which compromised 30,000 computers. Elements of
Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) have also relied upon proxy
forces including political/criminal hackers, to work on behalf of the
regime.
Iran is expected to hold a Presidential election in May 2017.
Should a hard-line candidate prevail, there may well be a further
uptick in the country's aggressive behavior in cyber space. U.S.-Iran
relations moving forward are yet to be fully defined, given that there
is also a new administration in the United States that has been in
office for just 2 months. However the Joint Comprehensive Program of
Action (JCPOA) regarding Iran's nuclear program looms large in the
background. Depending upon U.S. actions and policy in this area--
including whether the administration retains the agreement and how it
handles the matter of sanctions against Iran--the Iranian regime may
decide to act out further in the cyber domain. Notably the JCPOA has
resulted in substantial funds being placed in Iranian hands through
sanctions relief. The regime will likely devote these funds to the
further expansion of its cyber capabilities (offensive/defensive) and
should either party move to annul the agreement, we can expect a
significant increase in cyber activity against U.S. interests and
assets.
North Korea.--Many of the details about North Korea's cyber warfare
capabilities are shrouded in secrecy (the same is true of their
military capabilities writ large). What we do know is that, much like
Iran, North Korea has invested heavily in building cyber capabilities.
A recent report by the South Korean Defense Ministry estimates that the
North Korean ``cyber army'' employs an elite squad of 6,000 hackers,
many of whom operate abroad in northeast China and throughout South
East Asia.\4\ And what North Korea lacks in capability it makes up for
with intent (again, like Iran). North Korea has shown little restraint,
engaging in computer network attack--disruptive and/or destructive
attacks (rather than espionage).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Martin Anderson, ``North Korea's Internet Tundra Breeds
Specialised ``Cyber Forces'' Numbering 6,000,'' The Stack, January 7,
2015. https://thestack.com/security/2015/01/07/north-koreas-internet-
tundra-breeds-specialised-cyber-forces-numbering-6000/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In recent months, there has been a major increase in North Korean
cyber attacks (attempted and successful) targeting South Korean
companies and government.\5\ Senior Japanese cybersecurity officials
confirmed this in recent meetings, and expressed significant concern
about both the increase in volume and aggressiveness of North Korean
cyber activity. Outside the region, North Korea also operates without
compunction, targeting U.S. companies; The most notorious case is their
attack on Sony Pictures Entertainment. Recent news articles revealing
alleged U.S. cyber activities aimed at stymieing North Korea's
ballistic missile program will likely serve to increase the likelihood
of additional North Korean cyber attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Charlie Campbell, ``The World Can Expect More Cybercrime from
North Korea Now that China has Banned its Coal,'' Time, February 19,
2017. http://time.com/4676204/north-korea-cyber-crime-hacking-china-
coal/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
North Korea has long turned to illicit activity such as
counterfeiting (of bills, pharmaceuticals, and cigarettes) to fill its
coffers. More recently the country has turned to cyber crime and is the
prime suspect in a string of bank heists. The latest round of U.N.
economic sanctions aimed at North Korea, coupled with China's
suspension of coal imports to the country, suggest we ought to be
prepared for a spike in North Korean state-sponsored and/or state-
supported cyber crime.
Criminal Enterprises.--After nation-states, criminal organizations
are the next most capable threat actors. Increasingly, the capabilities
that used to be the exclusive preserve of nation-states are now in the
hands of criminal entities \6\--which outstrip the present abilities of
foreign terrorist organizations (FTOs) in this particular regard.
Criminal groups are motivated by profit rather than politics or
ideology, yet their pursuit of monetary gain often has broader impacts
on the integrity of the global economic system which in turn is closely
linked to international security. Cyber space allows criminals to take
their malicious activities to a global scale. Powerful organizations,
like the recently dismantled Avalanche criminal network can thus create
cyber crime tools and infrastructure that can bring malicious actors
together so that they may collectively pose a transnational threat to
the operations of governments and private entities.\7\ The cross-border
and interjurisdictional approach of Europol and its partners in the
United States and elsewhere to take down the Avalanche group is a
testament to the resources and coordination required to effectively
address such threats.\8\ It is important to note that while cyber
criminals are unlikely to ever have the ability to collect and use all-
source intelligence as governments can, the gap between the
capabilities of sophisticated cyber criminals and nation-states is
increasingly narrowing. Compounding this challenge is that fact that
criminal groups are working ever-more either with or for nation-states
such as Russia. The Yahoo hack (2014) that compromised 500 million
user-accounts and led to the recent indictment of four individuals--two
FSB (Russian domestic intelligence) officers and two cyber criminals--
is a case that demonstrates the willingness of states to utilize
criminals for hire as proxies.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Doug Olenick, ``Cybercriminal's skills now on par with nation
states: Mandiant,'' SC Magazine, March 14, 2017. https://
www.scmagazine.com/cybercriminals-skills-now-on-par-with-nation-states-
mandiant/article/644124/.
\7\ Brian Krebs, ``Avalanche Global Fraud Ring Dismantled,'' Krebs
on Security, December 16, 2016. https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/12/
avalanche-global-fraud-ring-dismantled/.
\8\ ``Avalanche Network Dismantled in International Cyber
Operation,'' Europol, December 1, 2016. https://www.europol.europa.eu/
newsroom/news/%E2%80%98avalanche%E2%80%99-network-dismantled-in-
international-cyber-operation.
\9\ Department of Justice, ``U.S. Charges Russian FSB Officers and
Their Criminal Conspirators for Hacking Yahoo and Millions of Email
Accounts,'' March 15, 2017. https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-charges-
russian-fsb-officers-and-their-criminal-conspirators-hacking-yahoo-and-
millions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This convergence of nation-state and criminal forces heightens the
dangers posed by both; and also makes it difficult to discern just who
is master and who is puppet. Traditionally it has been the forces of
crime that seek to penetrate the state; yet in the case of North Korea
for example, the opposite is true: The regime engages criminal proxies
and their cyber prowess to help achieve the ends that will perpetuate
the regime's survival. This tactic is easier than ever to pursue with
the emergence of the market model of ``Crime-as-a-Service,''\10\ which
facilitates cyber crime by making the tools and skills needed for it
more readily accessible to a wider variety of actors. Compounding the
challenge for law enforcement, nations such as Russia and China amount
to virtual safe havens for cyber criminals since the United States
lacks extradition treaties with these countries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ EUROPOL, European Union, Serious and Organised Crime Threat
Assessment, 2017: Crime in the age of technology. https://
www.europol.europa.eu/activities-services/main-reports/european-union-
serious-and-organised-crime-threat-assessment-2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Foreign Terrorist Organizations.--For Foreign Terrorist
Organizations (FTOs) there is no shortage of motivation or intent but
fortunately, FTOs have yet to fully develop a sustained cyber-attack
capability. While this is reassuring to a certain extent, it does not
mean that such actors pose no threat in the cyber domain. Even outside
of the cyber context, the most pressing threats from terrorist
organizations stem from their ability to execute asymmetric, ``no-
warning'' attacks, that do not rise to the level of impact associated
with persistent state-to-state competition or conflict. Nevertheless,
such operations can endanger the lives of civilians and interfere with
the integrity of critical infrastructure. Therefore, while FTOs are not
likely to pose a catastrophic risk to the homeland or America's economy
in the near future, it would be imprudent to ignore the efforts of
these actors to utilize the internet to their advantage and acquire
cyber capabilities that they can then integrate with kinetic force to
execute the equivalent of a cyber drive-by shooting.
Those FTOs that are currently most concerning from a cyber threat
standpoint are entities that benefit from state support or sponsorship
and those affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The
Western world has already seen the troublesome effects of ISIS' use of
the internet to spread propaganda and radicalize vulnerable
populations, but their efforts do not stop there. Members of ISIS have
repeatedly utilized a tactic known as ``doxing'' to target U.S.
military and law enforcement personnel through the strategic release of
their stolen personal information and social media intelligence
collection. Also of note, a group known as the United Cyber Caliphate
(UCC), which increasingly appears to be functioning as a cyber arm of
ISIS, has touted its accomplishments in the realms of hacking and DDoS
attacks, and has announced plans to launch a cyber attack against the
United States in the near future. America's efforts to target high-
value leaders of ISIS, including its most prolific cyber aggressors
Junaid Hussain and the UCC's Osed Agha, have demonstrated their
capacity to successfully set back ISIS' cyber capabilities. Such groups
deserve the continued attention of security officials, especially in
cases where they can leverage associations with other malicious actors
to augment their cyber capabilities.
Hacktivists.--Whether acting alone or loosely in tandem,
hacktivists may possess considerable skill and cause significant
disruption when they perceive their core interests to be at stake.
Oftentimes, hacking collectives such as Anonymous, can leverage their
sheer numbers to overwhelm servers and shut down websites or exploit
vulnerabilities to bring attention to their cause of the day. While
these movements lack the type of centralized command-and-control
infrastructures that would make their influence more troubling, their
sometimes populist appeal and dispersed manpower allow them to operate
in unique ways that undermine American security interests.
While hacktivists, including malicious insiders, vary in degree of
sophistication and tend to be leaderless, their ability to spread
discord on-line can augment existing digital vulnerabilities and
reinforce the efforts of other malicious cyber actors. Therefore, they
should not be discounted when assessing the wider cyber threat
spectrum. Even in the case of unsophisticated hacktivists, who may not
possess extensive ``in-house'' cyber expertise, we must consider the
increasing ease with which such malicious actors can simply buy or rent
the requisite tools or services on the Deep Web and Darknet(s). Only a
small percentage of the material available on the internet is indexed
and accessible from standard search engines. Beneath the surface web
that we all see is the unindexed Deep Web and its subcomponent, the
Darknet, which can only be accessed through password protected sites or
when using specific software such as TOR or I2P.\11\ It is in such
realms of the internet that malicious actors--including FTOs--buy and
sell hacking tools and expertise and fence stolen information. As the
ability to trade in malicious cyber expertise becomes more prevalent,
it is in fact necessary to consider the impacts of this trend in all
threat assessments, agnostic to the specific actor in question.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``Illuminating the Deep and Dark Web: The Next Frontier in
Comprehensive IT Security,'' Flashpoint Intel, 2015. https://
www.flashpoint-intel.com/book/illuminating-deep-dark-web.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
cyber domain: characteristics, evolution, and vulnerabilities
In the cyber domain, the advantage lies with the attacker. At the
same time, the surface of attack has expanded exponentially with the
advent of the Internet of Things. However, the dynamism of this
environment should not be underestimated and we must recognize that the
capabilities of both attackers and defenders in cyber space are
continually changing. Looking ahead, U.S. officials warn that simple
theft or disruption of data may give way to data manipulation.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Spencer Ackerman, ``Newest cyber threat will be data
manipulation, US intelligence chief says,'' The Guardian, September 10,
2015. https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/10/cyber-threat-
data-manipulation-us-intelligence-chief.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increasingly, threat actors are setting their sights on America's
critical infrastructure which cuts across the public and private
sectors. While the United States approach of designating 16 sectors
critical is sound, not all of these sectors are equally critical. What
are known as the ``lifeline'' sectors--in particular, the energy and
electric sectors, water, telecommunications, transportation, and
financial services--have an even greater impact on public safety and
security than the others.
The potential for cascading effects if any of these were rendered
inoperative or dysfunctional, especially for a significant length of
time, further magnifies their importance. From the standpoint of
prevention and response, it is these areas that should be treated as
top priority (while bearing in mind the adage that if everything is a
priority then nothing truly is). Section 9 of Executive Order 13636 on
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity provides the framework
for a ``risk-based approach'' of this type.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ February 12, 2013. https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-02-
19/pdf/2013-03915.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Examples of cyber incidents and intrusions are regrettably
plentiful, but a few cases merit mention here in order to bring into
sharper relief some of the concepts referenced above:
SWIFT Hacks.--The first case that rises above the noise and
warrants attention is the theft of $81 million from the Central Bank of
Bangladesh in February 2016 and similar yet less successful attempts at
other major banks in the developing world. In the case of Bangladesh
Bank, it would have been a $950 million heist had the request not set
off alarms due to a coincidental similarity between the address of a
bank in which hackers sought to deposit their stolen funds and the name
of a corporation sanctioned by the U.S. Government.\14\ Although $81
million is a significant sum, the loss of which doubtlessly had
significant, negative impacts on the bank and its clients, the global
economy can absorb relatively minor losses such as this one. From the
perspective of security officials, the real worry is how hackers
perpetrated this crime and the systemic vulnerabilities in the global
financial order that such a cyber heist publicly highlighted. The
hackers stole the credentials of target banks to gain access to SWIFT,
the interbank messaging system that connects 11,000 banks and financial
institutions globally and settles billions of dollars of transactions
daily. From there, hackers were able to place illegitimate requests for
transfers of funds that most banks fulfill automatically.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Krishna Das and Jonathan Spicer, ``How the New York Fed
Fumbled of the Bangladesh Bank Cyber-Heist,'' Reuters, July 21, 2016.
http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/cyber-heist-Federal/

\15\ Devlin Barrett and Katy Burne, ``Now It's Three: Ecuador Bank
Hacked via Swift,'' The Wall Street Journal, May 19, 2016. https://
www.wsj.com/articles/lawsuit-claims-another-global-banking-hack-
1463695820.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These attacks exposed a potential single-point-of-failure in a
system that modern economies depend upon every day. We still do not
know the full extent to which hackers have compromised SWIFT's member-
banks, but SWIFT recently disclosed that its members have suffered a
number of other hacking incidents through its messaging infrastructure
in the last year, in which about one in five resulted in stolen
funds.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\. Tom Bergen and Jim Finkle, ``Exclusive: SWIFT Confirms New
Cyber Thefts, Hacking Tactics,'' Reuters, December 12, 2016. http://
www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-cyber-swift-exclusive-idUSKBN1412NT.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Carbanak Gang.--In 2013, the so-called Carbanak gang
perpetrated a series of well-orchestrated assaults on eastern European
and Russian banks. Named after the malware used, the Carbanak gang
compromised internal bank systems and sent commands directly to ATMs (a
scheme known as ``ATM jackpotting'') throughout eastern Europe, causing
the machines to dispense cash. More than 100 banks spanning 11
countries were hit--with losses of hundreds of millions of dollars--
highlighting just how much damage cyber-criminals can do.\17\ The
activities of the Carbanak gang continue unabated with new techniques
at their disposal and new targets in their crosshairs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ David E. Sanger and Nicole Perlroth, ``Bank Hackers Steal
Millions via Malware,'' The New York Times, February 14, 2015. https://
www.nytimes.com/2015/02/15/world/bank-hackers-steal-millions-via-
malware.html?partner=socialflow&smid=tw-nytimes&_r=2; Brian Krebs,
``Carbanak Gang Tied to Russian Security Firm?'' Krebs on Security,
July 18, 2016. https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/07/carbanak-gang-tied-
to-russian-security-firm/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Energy Grid Attacks.--On December 24, 2015, western Ukraine
experienced a power outage that is believed to have been caused by
cyber attack perpetrated by Russia. Though just one power company
reported the incident, ``similar malware was found in the networks of
at least two other utilities.''\18\ More than 4 dozen substations were
affected, as were more than a quarter of a million customers for up to
6 hours. In addition, a simultaneous attack on call centers (a
telephony denial-of-service attack) hindered communication and customer
reporting of difficulties. The case is truly significant: It is
believed to represent the first time that a blackout was caused by
computer network attack. But it would not be the last: Again, in
December 2016, Ukraine witnessed a cyber attack on their power grid,
leaving part of Kiev without power. Once more, all the evidence points
to Russia (or its proxies) as perpetrator. These incidents represent a
crossing of the Rubicon: A cyber attack creating real-world, physical
implications. The attacks thus sent a message that was loud and clear.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Reuters, ``Experts: Ukraine Utility Cyberattack Wider than
Reported,'' Voice of America, January 5, 2016. http://www.voanews.com/
a/reu-experts-ukraine-utility-cyberattack-wider-than-reported/
3131554.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mirai Botnet.--Botnets, or networks of internet-connected devices
that unbeknownst to their legitimate users can be centrally controlled
to perpetrate malicious cyber activities on a grand scale, have been
around for a long time. However, this past fall, the Mirai botnet
demonstrated how the concept of distributed computing power and
centralized command-and-control can leverage the rampant insecurity
associated with the expanding Internet of Things environment. Malicious
actors used the botnet, which was primarily made up of vulnerable
webcams and internet routers, to execute the most powerful DDoS attack
in history against the computer security blogger Brian Krebs.\19\ More
alarmingly, the Mirai botnet later used a DDoS attack to target Dyn,
which supports much of the internet's infrastructure, and successfully
interrupted the services of Spotify, Twitter, and PayPal for millions
of users.\20\ The cases of the Mirai botnet's DDoS attacks are
significant because they are just the beginning of what security
officials can expect from malicious actors seeking to leverage the
digital vulnerabilities of IoT devices and the wide-spread ignorance or
apathy of IoT producers and consumers to these security concerns.
Society must begin to consider security over convenience and necessity
over luxury when connecting devices, even those that seem relatively
innocuous, to the internet. Otherwise, malicious actors will continue
to benefit from the bountiful harvest of vulnerable devices ready to be
recruited for criminal and other malicious purposes. Currently,
estimates show that around tens of billions of devices will be
connected to the internet by 2020, an exponential growth in
connectivity that runs parallel to a growth in the digital attack
surface.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Lily Hay Newman, ``The Botnet that Broke the Internet Isn't
Going Away,'' Wired, December 9, 2016. https://www.wired.com/2016/12/
botnet-broke-internet-isnt-going-away/.
\20\ Brian Krebs, ``Did the Mirai Botnet Really take Liberia
Offline?'' Krebs on Security, November 4, 2016. https://
krebsonsecurity.com/tag/mirai-botnet/.
\21\ BI Intelligence, ``Here's How the Internet of Things Will
Explode by 2020,'' Business Insider, August 31 2016.  http://
www.businessinsider.com/iot-ecosystem-internet-of-things-forecasts-and-
business-opportunities-2016-2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
u.s. response
The many and varied cyber threats that the United States faces
requires a multidimensional response. While the United States should
continue to invest in its offensive cyber capabilities to, as best as
possible, ensure its superiority and escalatory dominance, a powerful
defensive component is essential to America's cybersecurity and
underlies all the rest. Resources and funding should therefore be
balanced between offensive and defensive capacity building. A clearly
articulated deterrence strategy is also needed, but remains in its
infancy--although the recent Defense Science Board report on the
subject is a solid step in the right direction.\22\ An effective cyber
deterrence strategy should utilize various levers of state power to
affect the cost-benefit analysis of malicious actors by denying them
benefits by demonstrating America's capability and willingness to
impose costs on such malicious actors. Cyber deterrence requires more
than military underpinnings and the same is true of U.S. cyber response
more generally. Public-private partnerships are instrumental to
cybersecurity; and the public sector component of that equation
includes not only Federal entities but also their State and local
counterparts. Whether partnering with companies or State and Local
officials, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) plays an important
and meaningful role in terms of enabling U.S. responses to cyber
threats, distinct from the Department of Defense mandate in this area.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Department of Defense, Task Force on Cyber Deterrence,
February 2017. http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/2010's/DSB-
CyberDeterrenceReport_02-28-17_Final.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cybersecurity requires both a whole-of-Government and whole-of-
society approach. Government alone cannot get us to where we need to
be. Industry and even individuals must each do their part; and industry
sectors must collaborate within bounds (with competitor companies) as
well as across bounds (with other sectors and with government at all
levels). Developments such as the expansion of the Internet of Things
serve to reinforce these imperatives.
Private-sector initiatives of the type needed are already under
way. The financial services sector in particular is leading the way
with its Information Sharing and Analysis Center (FS-ISAC), a global
industry forum for cyber (and physical) threat intelligence analysis
and sharing; and with the Financial Systemic Analysis and Resilience
Center (FSARC), intended to deepen threat analysis and mitigate
systemic risk.\23\ To lead and respond effectively however, companies
require the tools to do so--which is why the FSARC works together with
Government partners including DHS, whose expertise complements that of
industry members.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Michael Chertoff and Frank Cilluffo, ``Trump Administration
Can Help Finance Sector Shift Cybersecurity Paradigm,'' Forbes, January
18, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/realspin/2017/01/18/trump-
administration-can-help-finance-sector-shift-cybersecurity-paradigm/
#72d07- df0645d.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More broadly, the private sector as a whole must be empowered to
respond proactively and robustly in the face of cyber threats.
Businesses never expected to find themselves on the front lines of
cyber battle, facing sophisticated adversaries with nation-state
capabilities. In such circumstances, companies must take steps (ahead
of time or in real-time) to protect their data and networks,
particularly their crown jewels. In turn, Government has a
responsibility to clarify the parameters of acceptable corporate action
so that businesses fully understand what they can and cannot do in this
regard. For those areas deemed outside corporate jurisdiction,
Government has a responsibility to step in and support/protect the
targeted entities and assets. Regrettably the discussion surrounding
these issues has been less than nuanced to date; yet there is much that
can be done in terms of active defense, apart from the two poles of
doing nothing at all or ``hacking back.''\24\ Public and private-sector
actors should work to jointly develop the private sector's capacity and
authorities to utilize active defenses, capabilities that when
developed and marshalled responsibly, can begin to flip the equation
and give cyber defenders a fighting chance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ For details, see ``Into the Gray Zone: The Private Sector and
Active Defense Against Cyber Threats,'' CCHS Project Report, October
2016. https://cchs.gwu.edu/sites/cchs.gwu.edu/files/downloads/CCHS-
ActiveDefenseReportFINAL.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The operating principles set out above (e.g., the need for a whole-
of-Government approach and public-private partnerships) is equally
important at the international level. Alliances between the U.S.
Department of Defense and other nation-states' military services--such
as NATO--are one crucial component of a solid response posture vis-a-
vis cyber domain; but so too are non-military alliances between the
United States and foreign governments and companies. While the Five
Eyes alliance has served us well over time and will continue to play an
integral role in our National security, it may be that a new and
broader grouping is needed in order to tackle cyber threats more
effectively. A transnational threat requires a transnational solution
and it may be constructive to bring together like-minded states with
substantial cyber assets in a new international forum with a mandate of
responding to international cyber threats.
Returning to DHS, from the standpoint of structure and
legislation--and in particular how best to organize the bureaucracy for
cybersecurity and infrastructure protection purposes--what matters most
at the end of the day is the effective execution of the mission. It is
important to emphasize that while the Department of Defense's role in
defending the Nation against foreign cyber threats is significant,
supporting its initiatives should not come at the cost of neglecting
the equally important role that DHS plays in protecting critical
infrastructure and civilian government networks. In this context, there
have been a number of efforts to legislatively address issues related
to DHS resourcing and organization. As this committee works to continue
these efforts--including progress on its own legislation, the following
principles (which are largely consistent with the committee's proposed
legislation) should be taken into account: The relevant entities and
officials within DHS must possess the necessary authorities and
resources to fulfill their cybersecurity missions; and they must be
held accountable for their actions through clear lines of
responsibility and the application of metrics and measurable goals.
Furthermore, as challenges related to the recruitment and retention of
necessary cyber talent persist, DHS should also be able to utilize
streamlined and flexible hiring authorities to fill cyber positions
with qualified individuals in a timely manner. These principles matter
more than the wiring diagram per se, if we can agree that
implementation is paramount.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on such a crucial
challenge to America's economic and National security. I look forward
to answering any questions you may have.

Chairman McCaul. Thanks, Frank.
Chair recognizes Mr. McConnell.

STATEMENT OF BRUCE W. MC CONNELL, GLOBAL VICE PRESIDENT,
EASTWEST INSTITUTE

Mr. McConnell. Morning, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee. Thank you
for inviting me.
I am Bruce McConnell, from the EastWest Institute, an
independent, nonpartisan nonprofit that works with all major
governments and the private sector to reduce security
conflicts. Before EastWest I served 4 years at DHS, departing
in 2013, as the acting deputy under secretary of cybersecurity.
I also served at the OMB under Presidents Reagan, George H.W.
Bush, and Clinton.
Let me tell you what keeps me awake at night, what got me
out of bed this morning to come see you. Last week I hosted a
meeting near my home in Oakland, California. Two hundred
government officials, industry geeks, professors, and activists
from 35 countries spent 3 days developing answers to Apple
versus FBI, how to make smart cities into safe cities,
improving capacity in cyber insurance, and, most important,
developing rules of behavior for governments and companies in
cyber space.
Have you ever seen your children or grandchildren swipe
away the 25 smartphone apps they have open? Each of these apps
enliven some aspect of their lives--of our lives. We are
grateful for this technology, and it makes--we are dependent on
it.
What is worrisome is that every one of those apps is an
open door to well-funded, persistent, state-sponsored attackers
to intrude on our business or deny us the benefits of cyber
space. When I think about this for myself it makes me mad.
However, when I multiply that by the 2 billion people and
millions of companies that are on the network today, I foresee
a--and the billions of young people who are coming on the
years--in the years ahead--I foresee a global economic and
political catastrophe unless we get those attackers under
control.
Today's situation reminds me of the Gold Rush out in
California 160 years ago. Some people made a lot of money and
it developed one of the great States of our union. It also took
us 30 years to establish law and order out there.
Mr. Chairman, we don't have 30 years to establish law and
order in cyber space. Military and intelligence agencies all
over the world are equipped with the latest computers,
communications, and cyber weaponry. These are good weapons.
They are cost-effective, they are generally non-lethal, and
they let us project force remotely and often stealthily.
But there are two problems.
First, there is a runaway cyber arms race led by the United
States, Russia, China, Iran, Israel, some European countries,
and North Korea. Over 30 countries have formed cyber offense
units. There is no deterrence, no incentive not to do so.
There is also an information war going on between East and
West. It involves the cyber burglary and publication of stolen
information, like during the U.S. elections. This is part of a
larger, damaging degradation of the information space by the
dissemination of fake news, political trolling, social media
bots, and the weaponization of intelligence.
We know that the Russians and their surrogates are not the
only attackers. There is always China, and earlier this month
we learned about Western actions taken against North Korean
missile systems and a variety of CIA practices.
Even with the best motivations, these continuing,
ungoverned state-on-state skirmishes in cyber space undermine
terrestrial security and stability. There is a growing risk of
miscalculation and escalation that could spill over into direct
physical harm to the United States and its citizens.
If the credibility of cyber space is further degraded it
will be useless as a medium for commerce and governance. People
are already leaving e-commerce because they are afraid they
will be victimized.
So what should the U.S. Government do to respond?
Fortunately, we have the answer to that question. In brief, we
need cyber deterrence governed by rules, and we need cyber
defense governed by roles.
Over the past two administrations the Executive branch
worked on a bipartisan basis with this committee and with the
rest of Congress to establish clear roles for cyber space
security. The resulting laws and directives cemented the
primary role of the Department of Homeland Security in
protecting the Nation's critical cyber infrastructure, and in
doing so they reflected two important values.
First, cyber space is fundamentally a civilian space. The
military and the NSA in particular must protect our most
valuable military and intelligence assets, but the military
must keep out of our civilian infrastructure. It is a long
National tradition, and they have their hands full already.
Second, securing cyber space is a team effort. Agencies
must work with each other and with the private sector in a
seamless manner.
In sum, the Government needs to buckle down, work with the
private sector and with other governments, and get it done. It
would be really great if you, on behalf of our kids and all the
kids, could hold the Federal agencies accountable for what you
have already told them to do.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McConnell follows:]
Prepared statement of Bruce W. McConnell
March 22, 2017
I am Bruce W. McConnell, global vice president of the EastWest
Institute, a 36-year-old, independent, non-partisan, non-profit
organization dedicated to preventing and reducing security conflicts
among nations on the ground and in cyber space. EWI works closely with
senior Government and private-sector officials in all the major powers
around the world to establish and support trustworthy dialog about some
of the most difficult security issues facing the planet.
Before joining EWI I served for 4 years at the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS), departing in 2013 as the acting deputy under
secretary for cybersecurity. I also served at the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget under Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush,
and William Clinton, with responsibility for information technology
policy and security.
This statement covers two topics: An assessment of the current
state of conflict in cyber space, and my views on how the U.S.
Government should address those conflicts.
how unstable is cyber space today?
Nearly 4 years ago U.S. national security advisor Susan Rice
observed that the world's ``most vexing security challenges are
transnational security threats that transcend borders: Climate change,
piracy, infectious disease, transnational crime, cyber theft, and the
modern-day slavery of human trafficking.'' Today, one would add
migration, violent extremism, and the safety of fissile nuclear
materials to that list.
These issues share at least two characteristics: First they are
accentuated in their severity by modern technology. The bad guys, both
state and non-state actors, are well-equipped with the latest
computers, communications equipment, and weaponry, and their ability to
use these tools is enhanced by their access to global networks.
Second, no international regimes or institutions have these
transborder issues well in hand. Rather, global bodies like the World
Health Organization or the International Telecommunication Union are
generally struggling to remain relevant. The post-war structures that
have kept peace for 70 years face a crisis of legitimacy as rising
powers that were not present at Bretton Woods scorn the old order and
create their own institutions and power centers.
Today we are focusing on security and cyber space. Cyber-enabled
attacks in the lead-up to the U.S. Presidential election roiled
relationships in Washington and globally. The term cyber-enabled
emphasizes a new characteristic of cyber space--it's no longer its own
thing. It's part of everything. There is very little actual ``cyber
crime.'' Instead, we see a plethora of ordinary crimes and attacks:
Theft, fraud, trespassing, and destruction of property that use cyber
means.
From a geopolitical standpoint, this cyber-enablement has produced
a runaway cyber arms race, led by the United States, Russia, China,
Iran, Israel, and some European countries, with many others, including
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), following close
behind. Over 30 countries have formed cyber offense units. Non-state
actors such as organized criminal gangs and the Islamic state are also
players.
The U.S. Democratic National Committee hacks and related incidents
consist of burglary and publication of the fruits on Wikileaks. From a
legal standpoint, while it is against U.S. law to enter a computer
without authorization, these incidents may fall more into the shadow
zone of espionage. As for the publication, the U.S. Supreme Court has
generally protected media publication of accurate, stolen materials of
public interest obtained by a third party.
What's new for Americans is the possibility that there is an
``information war'' between East and West. Indeed, some states do not
use the term cybersecurity, preferring the broader term ``information
security.'' The events around the U.S. election evoked a spirited
conversation last month at the Munich Security Conference around fake
news, political trolling, social media bots, and the weaponization of
intelligence.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Homeland Security Secretary John Kelly was on hand in
Munich to remind European participants that DHS had reaffirmed the
previous administration's designation of election systems as critical
infrastructure and that the Department continued its work with state
election officials to help them secure their systems on a voluntary
basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the other hand, earlier this month, we also saw additional
evidence regarding Western actions against North Korean missile systems
and the CIA's capabilities. Even assuming the most benign motivations
by all parties, these continuing, ungoverned state-on-state skirmishes
in cyber space increasingly undermine terrestrial security and
stability.
In contrast to cyber space, other international domains are
governed by norms of behavior and international law. In the airspace it
is illegal to shoot down a commercial aircraft. But in cyber space, the
way in which international law applies is still being debated.
In commercial aviation we have organizations like the private
sector International Air Transport Association and the governmental
International Commercial Aviation Organization that partner to maintain
safety and security on a global basis. There are no comparable
institutions for cyber space.
Everyone in this room is painfully familiar with the provisions
that keep that network secure: Identity proofing of everyone who gets
close to a passenger plane, licensing of pilots, filing of flight
plans, certification of aircraft, etc. We have none of these things in
cyber space. Yet the financial value of the commercial transactions
conducted over the internet (and here I'm not even counting SWIFT and
other special purpose networks) is actually 100 times greater on an
annual basis than the value of goods transported in the air cargo
system.
Progress is modest. A group of governmental cyber experts has
worked at the United Nations for over 10 years to come up with an
initial set of non-binding norms of behavior in cyber space.
These include:

Not allowing the use of information and communications
technology, or ICT, to intentionally damage another country's
critical infrastructure.

Not allowing international cyber attacks to emanate from
their territory.

Responding to requests for assistance from another country
that has been attacked by computers in the first country.

Preventing the proliferation of malicious tools and
techniques and the use of harmful hidden functions.

Encouraging responsible reporting of ICT vulnerabilities and
sharing associated information.

Not harming the information systems of the authorized
cybersecurity incident response teams.
In February 2017, the government of the Netherlands, with the
support of Microsoft, the Internet Society, the EastWest Institute, and
the Hague Centre for Strategic Studies, launched the Global Commission
on the Stability of Cyberspace. The GCSC is chaired by Marina
Kaljurand, former Estonian foreign minister, and co-chaired by Michael
Chertoff, former U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security and Latha Reddy,
India's former deputy National security adviser. This multi-stakeholder
commission will build on and extend existing efforts to develop and
advocate for norms and polices to enhance international security and
stability and guide responsible state and non-state behavior in cyber
space.
On the private-sector side, global ICT companies are beginning to
step up to the responsibility that comes with their great power in
cyber space. For example, Microsoft recently issued a set of norms of
industry behavior that global ICT companies should follow in their
business practices.
Examples of the kinds of norms that companies are considering
include:

Creating more secure products and services.

Not enabling states to weaken the security of commercial,
mass-market ICT products and services.

Practicing responsible vulnerability disclosure.

Collaborating to defend their customers against and recover
from serious cyber attacks.

Issuing updates to protect their customers no matter where
the customer is located.
Clearly, the industry is at an immature stage. Its rapid growth in
importance has outstripped systems of governance, including the first
line of defense--the market. As a general matter, until very recently
customers demanded two things from the firms that supply ICTs--price
and features. The market has responded, giving us all manner of
convenience and efficiency, in business and in our private lives.
Finally, however, buyers are starting to recognize the criticality of
ICT to their daily activities, and thus they demand, and may be willing
to pay for, security.
Yet there is a gap between what they need and what they are able to
command. To address this gap, we recently published a ``Buyers Guide
for Secure ICT.''\2\ This guide recommends questions that buyers can
ask ICT suppliers to help them evaluate the security of the products
and services that these suppliers deliver.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Purchasing Secure ICT Products and Services: A Buyers
Guide,'' EastWest Institute, September 2016, https://www.eastwest.ngo/
sites/default/files/EWI_BuyersGuide.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite best efforts, the reality of today's dynamic technological
environment--with product cycles of 18 months or less--continues to
challenge policy development. Two developments are dramatically
altering the security picture.
First, we are moving to the cloud. We store our information there
on virtual machines operated by major providers like Amazon Web
Services. While AWS and Microsoft's Azure provide much stronger
cybersecurity and resilience than any single enterprise can field, they
also create systemic risk, with large potential consequences from
technology failures or attacks.
A second emerging source of risk is the Internet of Everything
(IoE). In a few years there will be ten times as many devices--Fitbits,
heart monitors, automobiles, thermostats, machine tools, and
floodgates--connected to the internet than today's smartphones and
computers. These devices, when combined with 3-D printing, promise to
disruptively transform manufacturing and transportation. They will also
create a ubiquitous, global sensor network that will be communicating
what is going on everywhere. And these sensors are shockingly
insecure--built with easy to guess passwords, transmitting their data
unencrypted, and being essentially un-patchable.
The conventional wisdom is that the IoE represents a massive
increase in the attack surface. But at EWI, we are exploring two
questions. First, why do we assume the bad guys will own the sensor
network? Why not have the good guys own it and use the knowledge of
what is happening on the internet to increase security--for example, by
isolating problems and fixing them before they can spread? Second, we
ask, how will the IoE shift the balance between endpoint and network
security, and what are the societal implications of that shift?
One that is gaining currency in the United States is the
Cybersecurity Framework created by the National Institute of Standards
and Technology, or NIST, which is part of the U.S. Department of
Commerce. The framework lays out the basics of a cybersecurity program
that all firms should manage to. It also lays the foundation for future
cyber insurance underwriting standards.
For at least a decade, there has been a lot of hype that we will
all be left freezing in the dark, as was the case before the turn of
the 21st Century with the so-called millennium or Y2K bug. These
scenarios have not materialized, and in fact it is actually quite
difficult to create broad systemic damage today. But the capability to
attempt catastrophic attacks is increasing, and the generally
deteriorating international security situation does not help.
In sum, it is a dynamic risk environment, augmented by our
electronic connectedness and interdependence. We must continually adapt
risk management to rapidly changing technology. Agility rules.
how should the u.s. government move forward to meet these challenges?
Over the past 8 years, the previous administration working closely
with this committee and the rest of Congress, tested, revised, and
eventually established a clear set of roles and responsibilities for
cybersecurity among the relevant Federal agencies. One can trace the
progress of these efforts that took place on a bipartisan basis across
administrations and Congresses, including:

Homeland Security Presidential Directive 23/National
Security Presidential Directive 54, ``Cybersecurity Policy,''
January 8, 2008.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See, https://fas.org/irp/offdocs/nspd/nspd-54.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative, May
2009.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Currently archived after partial declassification in 2011 at:
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/node/233086.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The March 2013 ``Bubble Chart'' (See Attachment A).

Six statutes enacted in 2014 and 2015----

National Cybersecurity Protection Act of 2014 (S. 2519),
which codifies DHS's cybersecurity center.

Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 (S. 1353), which
codifies the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's (NIST's) role in cybersecurity.

Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act (H.R. 2952), which
requires the DHS to develop a cyber-workforce strategy.

Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of 2014 (S. 1691),
which gives DHS new authorities for cybersecurity hiring.

Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (S.
2521), which reforms Federal IT security management.

Cybersecurity Act of 2015 (within H.R. 2029), December 15,
2015, which enhances protections for information sharing
and further strengthen's DHS viila [sic] coordination role.

Presidential Policy Directive 41, ``U.S. Cyber Incident
Coordination.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See, ``Presidential Policy Directive--United States Cyber
Incident Coordination,'' July 26, 2016, https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2016/07/26/Presidential-
policy-directive-united-states-cyber-incident.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These documents firmly cement the primary role of the Department of
Homeland Security in securing the Nation's critical cyber
infrastructure. In doing so, these documents are broadly consistent
with each other and reflect two important assumptions:

First, cyber space is fundamentally a civilian space. As
former Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Jane Holl Lute and
I wrote in Wired in 2011, cyber space is ``a neighborhood, a
library, a marketplace, a school yard, a workshop--and a new,
exciting age in human experience, exploration, and development.
Portions of it are part of America's defense infrastructure,
and these are properly protected by soldiers.''\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See, ``A Civil Perspective on Cybersecurity,'' https://
www.wired.com/2011/02/dhs-op-ed/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is an important assumption for two reasons. First and
foremost, it is fundamentally consistent with American values. As a
Nation, we have long recognized the importance of the military in
providing the common defense, within limitations in tradition and law
that respect the historical lessons learned when the Crown quartered
soldiers in civilian homes without consent, after the actions taken to
suppress the Whiskey Rebellion of 1794 with the authorization of
Justice James Wilson, and, post-Reconstruction in the Posse Comitatus
Act of 1878. This tradition is reflected in Department of Defense
Directive 3025.18, ``Defense Support of Civilian Authorities.''
The appropriate role of the military in cyber space is also
important from a practical standpoint. The military must protect its
own assets and its ability to project force globally. It relies on a
safe and secure cyber space to do both of those things. But simply as a
practical matter, the Defense Department cannot secure all of cyber
space. Indeed, as we have seen over the past 10 years, it is challenged
to protect its own electronic assets and those of critical defense
contractors from internal and external attacks. These jobs are too
important to our National security to permit DoD to be distracted by
other tasks that are in the end not part of its core mission.

The second assumption reflected in current law and policy is
that securing cyber space is a team effort. No single agency,
and no single company or group of companies, can handle this
challenge by itself. There must be cooperation and
coordination. Agencies must work with each other and with the
private sector, applying their capabilities and authorities in
a seamless manner.
Seamlessness is not easy. In fact, in order to achieve it and avoid
key problems falling through the cracks, there needs to be some overlap
in responsibilities. While overlap can generate confusion, it is
essential for full coverage.
These policy documents are explicit about the overlap, laying out
joint responsibilities for tasks where appropriate. Such joint
activities have become the norm in today's U.S. Government. Every
morning, the Departments of Homeland Security, Justice, and Defense
coordinate on a ``First Look'' video conference, sharing the latest
developments and coordinating action plans. Conflicts can arise, for
example, between the DHS mission to mitigate problems in critical
infrastructure and the FBI's mission to preserve evidence for
prosecution. These operational problems get worked out on the ground
when these agencies work together with the victim of a cyber attack.
And, when chronic or policy differences arise, a well-organized
National Security Council will do its job and resolve those differences
satisfactorily among the agencies for the good of the Nation.
conclusion
Cyber space is a dynamic and dangerous environment. It is also the
global endoskeleton of commerce, trade, and all manner of human
interaction. Securing it, an essential task, is a global, multi-
stakeholder effort that must bring all capabilities to bear in a
cooperative manner. Agility rules. The United States is a world leader
in having clearly established roles and responsibilities within
Government so that it can play its critical role. The new
administration and the Congress should focus on getting the
implementation right.\7\ Time is too short to do otherwise.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ As co-panelist Frank Cilluffo stated, ``PPD-41 is a good
initiative, but the real test will lie in the manner and nature of its
implementation.'' See, ``Overview and Analysis of PPD-41: US Cyber
Incident Coordination,'' July 27, 2016, https://www.lawfareblog.com/
overview-and-analysis-ppd-41-us-cyber-incident-coordination.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. McConnell.
I will recognize myself for questions.
You know, I kind-of went through the litany of attacks, and
they are--they have been very numerous. You know, North Korea
on Sony Pictures, very destructive; Iran hitting the financial
sector; to China stealing 20 million security clearances; to
Russia interfering with our elections--and whether you are a
Democrat or a Republican, that is an American issue, and the
next time it could happen to the Republicans; and most
recently, this--that alleged attack on the CIA, with some of
the most sensitive cyber tools in the U.S. Government.
Yet, there never seems to be any consequences to this bad
behavior. I have five children. If there aren't bad--if there
aren't consequences to bad behavior, bad behavior continues.
The Chinese--I think we had a meeting with them after they
stole the 20 million security clearances.
So my first question is to General Alexander. I mean, there
are no rules of the game, as you mentioned. There are no
consequences.
How do you see that? But also, importantly, how do you see
the role between the military and the civilian counterpart,
DHS, in terms of defending the Nation and also offensively
responding?
General Alexander. Thank you, Chairman.
I think the role is, first--I will start with the military
side. The military's responsibility is to defend this country,
in terms of offensive capabilities outside the country. If you
think about an attack in cyber space, I look at that as FEMA
and the military working together.
Do you have--whose responsibility would it be to work with
State, local government, and industry to build back up damaged
infrastructure? DHS has the lead.
DOD and the intelligence community should be going after
the perpetrators of that or the country that is attacking us,
because DOD's responsibilities would most logically go from
cyber into the physical domain.
One of the reasons that we couldn't have Sony attack North
Korea--while I think Sony could win, it could start a war on
the Korean Peninsula, and that is a Government responsibility.
But here is where it gets tricky. I think there are several
things that you need to put in place.
First, I agree with the organization around DHS of
organizing NPPD and others into an agency. I think that makes
sense.
I think you need to go further. I think you need to look at
the civilian part of Government, look at the information
technology and cyber. It is not sufficient. They don't have the
resources; they will never get the people. Consolidate that in
a disalike organization and put that under somebody.
That organization would be responsible for protecting
Government. DHS would be responsible for protecting DHS and
working with the rest of that, and could be responsible for
protecting the rest of that Government.
When the Nation is being attacked like Sony, DHS, DOD, and
DOJ should be notified through the same portal at the same
time, and they should practice the rules of engagement. What is
DHS going to do to help ensure Sony doesn't collapse, or the
financial sector, or energy sector doesn't collapse? What is
the Defense Department, the intel community, and law
enforcement going to do to stop that attack?
My experience from being on the offense: The offense always
wins because the defense is terrible.
We can fix the defense by getting Government and industry
to work together. I think DHS should have the lead. I think we
should bring in parts of the intelligence community and the
military into those meetings to talk with industry so they know
that this is an all-of-Government approach.
DHS could have the lead. We would call them the public
face.
That is before Bruce came in. We would have changed the
public face a little bit.
Just kidding, Bruce.
But if you think about it, we wanted DHS to be the public
face for just the reasons that you said.
But industry wants to know: When I am being attacked by
Iran is the military and the Government going to stop that
attack while you help me fix this part?
That is where we have failed, in my opinion, and where we
can take these next steps.
Chairman McCaul. I completely agree.
Last question to the remaining three witnesses--my time is
very limited--is we passed the Cybersecurity Act. We will be
providing oversight. This committee also intends to pass
legislation to prioritize cyber within DHS to create a
cybersecurity agency, taking the NPPD and making that a more
prioritized, streamlined agency within the Department.
Do the three of you--and I think General Alexander has
already answered that question--but do the three of you agree
with this idea in principle?
Mr. Daniel. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I think that taking NPPD out
of being a headquarters function, which it is clearly not, and
making it into a line agency within DHS, along with the other
functions that DHS has, and prioritizing that makes a great
deal of sense.
I think that continuing that holistic focus on our critical
infrastructure and the Federal civilian agencies also makes a
great deal of sense, and that would, I think, put DHS on an
even more solid foundation to partner with the Defense
Department and the Justice Department in doing their mission.
Chairman McCaul. Right.
Mr. Cilluffo. Mr. Chairman, I would echo that. Not to be
ingratiating, but I think this committee deserves a lot of
credit for moving legislation in this space, and I think most
notably some of your cyber bills.
I see three primary criteria. I mean, first DHS needs to
get its own house in order, lead by example. Then it needs to
administer with NIST and OMB and others, obviously the Federal
civilian agencies, because the initiative, as General Alexander
said, clearly does remain with the attacker, but some of these
civilian agencies are even--are woefully behind some of the
military capabilities are to defend.
Then I think it is really about enabling the most critical
of our critical infrastructures. To me, I think if everything
is critical nothing is critical. I am not taking away from 16
sectors, but I think we need to start really zeroing in on the
four life-line sectors and the so-called Section 9 companies.
So I do feel you also need to streamline capability that
the Department has for cyber crime efforts outside of NPPD. So
I think there is a lot more that can be done, and I think an
agency is a way to do it.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
Finally, Mr. McConnell.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So yes, I agree with--it is always great to be on a panel
where I can agree with Keith, so this is good for me.
I would say that we spent a lot of time while I was at
Homeland Security debating what the name of this new
organization should be. I think it is a low bar. Any name is
going to be better than National Protection and Programs
Administration, or whatever it is. So I think you should just
get it done, sir.
Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Thanks so much.
Chair recognizes the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much.
I am glad to see the agreement on the role for DHS in this
great challenge that we have.
One of the things that we are grappling with is some of the
things that we are dealing with go to the basic threat of our
democracy. My opening comments talked a little bit about
Russia's involvement, and that involvement is very concerning
because they have somehow looked at this as a vulnerability and
have decided to take full advantage of it.
So--and I will start with you, General--have you given
thought to what we should do to shore our vulnerability as a
country, to defend our democracy and how we select our leaders?
General Alexander. Yes. Ranking Member Thompson, I have
talked to some of the States and I am going to meet with some
of the States on just that issue to give them my thoughts and
advice.
I think it is important to recognize we have got to fix our
defense, and you sit in a key position that can help get our
Nation on its feet, from a Government perspective, so that DHS,
DOD, DOJ work together in that common cause, each with their
roles and responsibilities, and ensure that they are well
understood.
Then we need to educate the American people on
cybersecurity, and we need to help build the bar--raise the bar
for industry with the NIST Framework, incentives, and liability
protection.
If we were to do those we would significantly improve the
cybersecurity posture of this country.
Mr. Thompson. Well, and part of, I guess, my direction--and
I will go to the other witnesses--if I hear you correctly, are
you talking about some National system of election protection
initiated by Congress?
General Alexander. Not necessarily. It may be run by the
States. I think the States have a responsibility here.
I think what Congress--what you can do here with this
committee, and you have already done in part, is get things
like the National Institute of Standards and Technology--they
have a cyber framework. We recommend in the commission that you
take that framework, make it metrics-based so it is something
you can measure, and get people to apply that as a way of
getting liability protection and a way of incentivizing.
Now, if you did that the States could do the same to the
election process. That would significantly improve----
Mr. Thompson. Yes. But at some point somebody is going to
say we can't afford it, you know, for whatever reason. I think
what I am trying to get to is where our role as Members of
Congress fall within--in this framework to guarantee that it
occurs.
Would any of the other witnesses like to address that?
Mr. McConnell.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
I would say two things about the election situation. First,
if it is true that defense is lousy--which I agree, and there
are some things we can do about that--we also need to start
figuring out how to manage the offense and try to cut the
supply down, both through consequences and through self-
measures of restraint.
On the election systems in the States, I think the
underappreciated vulnerability here is with the companies who
manufacture and support these election systems. They are not
accountable at all. They do not make their machines available
for inspection by security experts.
The DHS has designated election systems as critical
infrastructure, but that does not necessarily apply in any way
to the companies that support this.
In several Midwestern States the same company that prints
the ``I Voted'' stickers also runs the so-called election
management system for those States. So I think we need to take
a look and bring the private sector into those, as well, sir.
Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Cilluffo.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Thompson, I would like to
actually look at the question a little different. Very valid
question, but I think it actually stems from a point that the
Chairman brought up in his first question, and that is we
ultimately don't deter cyber; we deter actors from engaging in
certain behavior.
Whereas the interference in the elections, rightfully so,
generated headline after headline, the reality is is Russia's
fingerprints have been on the mouse for a long time. This is
not the first incident. It is a repeated pattern of behavior,
including the first state-on-state cyber attack followed up by
cyber weapons being used in concert of the battlefield in
Georgia, as well as cyber and kinetic means in Crimea and the
Ukraine.
So what I am really getting at is we can defend our way out
of certain things, but ultimately we have got to start
articulating a strategy that is aimed at dissuading, deterring,
and, if need be, compelling bad behavior from occurring.
Russians are doing the same thing in France and Germany
right now as we speak. So at the end of the day, we can get our
systems secure; they are just going to find a new
vulnerability. It is a cat-and-mouse issue.
So I think what we really need to do is get to the point
where we are ready to impose cost on bad behavior.
We have been blaming the victim. We blame companies. We
build higher walls protected with bigger locks after we get
hit.
Imagine if all our homes were robbed and we called the
locksmith. That is doomed for failure.
We have got to start leaning a little forward and looking
at some proactive measures. I would argue that includes
private-sector actions that can be taken short of hacking back.
Long-winded way of saying I think we need to actually start
imposing costs on bad behavior.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chair recognizes Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Appreciate all the witnesses being here today.
You know, when we talk about cyber challenges that we face
today, clearly one of them is the cyber work force. All the
members on this panel, we talk about creating jobs to grow the
economy, but right now there are--estimates are somewhere in
the neighborhood of 200,000 cyber-related jobs that are
unfilled due to the lack of a qualified applicants to fill
them.
While we would all, I know, love to solve that macro issue,
I am going to focus specifically on what my subcommittee, the
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection on
this--on Homeland Security Committee, has jurisdiction and
oversight over, and that is specifically the cyber labor work
force issues at DHS.
So, General Alexander, let me start with you because at one
point you had to manage the cyber work force at the NSA. So if
instead of me sitting here this was Secretary Kelly, what
advice would you be able to offer him--and you are smiling, so
maybe you already have--about programs at the NSA or maybe even
out in the private sector that he might be able to leverage to
address that problem at the DHS?
General Alexander. Yes, I was smiling because you said
Secretary Kelly, and I was thinking, ``John, what the heck were
you thinking?''
[Laughter.]
General Alexander. Actually, that is a great point. I think
one of the things that we need to look at in DHS--there are so
many political appointees and you have such a rotation, the
stability of the work force at the management level is in
shambles. People come in, they are a political appointee, they
go for a while, and then they are out.
The difference at the National Security Agency and within
the military are people are professionals brought up through
that, and so the person who is running a cyber area has
tremendous depth and experience in that, is recognized by the
work force, has gone to school in it.
I think we need to look at that from a DHS--the number of
political appointees. We have, you know, thousands of those. I
just say for you that are working it, that is the first part.
The second, a good area that DHS and NSA actually work
together in is on the cyber education. We actually go out and
with universities we give them a curriculum and we certify it.
It is certified by both DHS and NSA as a cyber curriculum.
I think bringing in students from that and incentivizing
them to come into DHS--like NSA does; we get a tremendous
amount out of that--is a good thing to do and you know they are
already trained. That is a great population out there of kids
that want to come in and work in this area.
I think I would look at both, and that is what I would tell
Secretary Kelly.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. You know, I think this is an
important enough issue that I want to use my time to give all
of the witnesses here an opportunity to weigh in on this.
Mr. Daniel, you--obviously your role as the special
assistant to the President and cybersecurity coordinator for
4.5 years, I think I would appreciate your perspective on this,
as well.
Mr. Daniel. Certainly. Thank you.
I think to get at your question about the broader work
force issues and the economy as a whole, I think one of the
things that we are beginning to realize is that as we build
these curriculums we actually have to think about the problem
and break it down, that it is not just producing cybersecurity
professionals, it is that we actually need to produce a variety
of cybersecurity professionals and we actually need to start
making sure that our curriculum and our training, you know,
does provide a core for--that all professionals need, but then
allow some specialization in there.
Are you going to be a hands-on-keyboard, you know, firewall
defender? Are you going to be a hunter? Are you going to be,
you know, a policy integrator, one that looks holistically at
the problem?
Those are different skills sets, and we need to start
building people that come out with those different skill sets
because they are going to fulfill different roles in the
ecosystem.
Specifically with respect to DHS, I--to me I actually see
this as a broader problem of how we manage the tech work force
and other specialized skills in the Federal Government as a
whole. It is really about speed and flexibility.
One of the primary lessons that I learned from my time in
the White House is we can get people to come into the
Government for a while. They will take lower pay for a while.
They just won't do it for their entire career.
So this idea that we are going to recruit kids out of
college and bring them into one Federal agency, probably one
bureau, and keep them there for 40 years and have them retire
in their 60's, that is just ludicrous. That is not how any of
the work force operates.
So we need to enable our Federal agencies to both bring
people in faster and allow them to bring people in and out from
the private sector with greater degrees of flexibility over the
course of their career in order to allow for that rotation and
that rejuvenation of the work force. I think that is the key
factors of what we are going to need to get at in order to deal
with the work force problems.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you.
Frank.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Ratcliffe, I mean, I think
Michael nailed it. Speed and flexibility, certainly from a
civilian hiring perspective, and that is something some of the
Title 50 or intelligence community entities can actually move a
lot faster, and I think that is something perhaps DHS can look
to.
Another issue, though, that just dawned on me is I had
mentioned the attacks on Estonia, so I would bring my
students--as a--representing a place of higher education,
obviously I advocate the roles that universities play. But I
also think there is a huge K-12 opportunity here, and when I go
to Estonia you have first-graders and then you have got
students that are going into their high school gymnasium with a
STEM focus.
They are learning to speak Estonian, English, and code at
first grade. First grade. I fear that we are going to be behind
that work force power curve.
We know how to push all the buttons. We can make it look
nice. But I feel like we really do need to get to some of that
K-12 sets of issues.
And notably, women in STEM. It is not just--this is
something that I think we are lagging and we really need to do
more.
So work force generally, in terms of DHS it really is about
speed and flexibility. Don't expect people to stay forever.
The Estonians also have what is called the Cyber Defense
League. It is basically their active reserve component. They
can pull the top people from industry to serve the government
for a short period of time and then go back out, and they are
all patriotic so it is basically like the reserve corps with
a--active reserve corps with a focus on cyber. That is another
area I think we can be looking at.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Mr. McConnell, my time is expired, but if
you can quickly answer?
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So the NSA programs that Keith mentioned are very good.
Those authorities, hiring authorities are not always available
at DHS, so you could look at that: Does DHS have the
authorities to do what it needs to do?
It also has trouble with execution. NSA has a great program
of getting summer interns in from colleges. They get those
people a security clearance way before so they can come right
in. They do that way up front. They have a finely oiled machine
on that.
DHS is not so good at executing in that way. So I think you
should set targets for DHS in this area and hold them to it.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you all.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Mrs. Watson Coleman is recognized.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So it is clear that there is a consensus that China,
Russia, Iran represent--and North Korea--represent our greatest
threats. Do we have the capacity right now to prioritize who we
need to give our greatest attention to? If so, would that be
Russia?
Anyone.
General Alexander. I can give it to you from my
perspective. I think we can handle all--we can and have to
handle all four because it is not clear how the threat will
come back at us. We have to be prepared.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. During the 2016 election obviously
Russian government waged a campaign to undermine the U.S.
democracy using hacked e-mails, WikiLeaks, and false news
reports. President Trump has repeatedly praised Vladimir Putin
and spent months denying that the Putin government carried out
this campaign, accusing U.S. intelligence community of
spreading falsehoods instead and suggesting that he will undo
U.S. sanctions imposed against Russia.
Mr. McConnell, in your view, what message does the
President's borderline-dismissive attitude toward this
unprecedented attack on our democracy send to the Russian
government as well as to other nations?
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, ma'am.
You know, these attacks were predicted. A year ago General
Clapper, the director of national intelligence, said, ``Russia
is assuming a more assertive cyber posture based on its
willingness to target critical infrastructure systems and
conduct espionage operations even when detected and under
increased public scrutiny. Russian cyber operations are likely
to target U.S. interests to support several strategic
objectives, including influence operations to support military
and political objectives.''
These highly visible information and influence operations
are new to Americans--except for one thing: Americans are also
contributing to the degradation of the information space,
usually for commercial or domestic political reasons. At the
same time----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Mr. McConnell----
Mr. McConnell [continuing]. We do have to keep talking to
the Russians. The planet is getting too small to do otherwise.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So not disagreeing with anything that
you have said, what message does this President's dismissive
attitude communicate? Does it communicate a weakness? A
coziness? A fearsomeness? Is it bold? Is it acceptable? Is it
responsive? And is it proactive? What is it?
Mr. McConnell. Well, ma'am, I never try to impute motives
to other people. I think there are a couple different things
here.
One is there is an on-going investigation, so I wouldn't
want to comment on that.
I think it is important to remember that it doesn't do us
any good to just vilify the Russians and push them into a
corner. They don't respond well to that.
We have to figure out how to talk to them and engage with
them, but at the same time, as you say, take them very
seriously. It is a very serious threat to our country.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. It doesn't seem like, according to
what FBI Director Comey testified to, about they will be back
and they really didn't care that we knew what they were doing,
it doesn't seem that we are talking about having discussions
with rational players here. It seems that we have a situation
with an equally if not more arrogant regime that chooses to
undermine our very democracy.
So my question to you, General Alexander: What are your
thoughts on this?
General Alexander. I think two sets of thoughts: First, we
have to have consequences for somebody coming after our
country, and I think the Chairman put that right. There have to
be consequences and people have to know it.
We need to give the President and the Secretary of Defense
latitude, though, in their strategy and their approach. I think
this is where President Trump can actually be very good for us
because he is negotiating how we deal with Russia in the
future.
I think what Mr. McConnell said is right. If we vilify them
and we keep them pushed out we are going to fight them. We
agree that a war--and you would agree a war is not where we
want to go. We have got to figure out how to set this right.
So I think there has to be consequences. I think we have to
have that discussion and we have to be open to it.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
General Alexander. We don't have to like them.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, General. I think that this
attack that we have experienced is a form of war, is a--was a
form of war on our fundamental democratic principles.
One last question if I might, Mr. Chairman. That is to Mr.
McConnell, because he speaks to the fact that the international
laws are behind on these issues in addressing issues of this
nature.
My question to him: In this climate, how do you think--do
you think it is possible that we could have those kinds of,
``conversations'' and move into some agreement as to what is
and what would not be allowed on the National stage--
international stage? Thank you.
After that I yield back.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, ma'am.
As I note in my written statement, there is some progress
at the United Nations and in some companies in developing these
rules of the road, but it is very slow.
One bright spot is a new global commission on the stability
of cyber space, which is co-chaired by Secretary Michael
Chertoff, and it has the mission to accelerate that work on
rules of the road. It is nongovernmental, represents all the
interests in all the countries, and is working on a fast track
to propose rules that governments can agree to. The governments
don't always follow the rules, but if there are no rules then
there is nothing for them to follow.
Chairman McCaul. That is well put.
Chair recognizes Mr. Donovan.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for attending here, and thank you for
the work that you do in this very important area for our
Nation's security.
Our Chairman laid out some of the things that this
committee has done, some of the great work in this area. We are
lawmakers, and every time we have a hearing I ask the experts--
because we deal with scores of issues every day; you deal with
this issue--what could we do as lawmakers that could help you
and help DHS and help the people who are responsible for
protecting our networks more so than we have done so far?
The Chairman laid out some of the great work we have
already done. What would you like to see this committee, this
legislative body, do to help protect our data, our information
from our enemies even further than we are able to do now?
I just leave it open to each one of you to comment. Thank
you.
General Alexander. If I could just start, based on the
commission, what we saw there, I think there are a few things
that this committee has already started on but could reinforce.
First, getting industry and the Government to look at the NIST
standard for cybersecurity framework--add metrics in, but get
that as a standard across Government and industry. There are so
many out there right now you are hard-pressed to figure out
which standard and how you are applying it.
The second is liability protection. How do we protect these
companies that meet a certain standard from all the lawsuits
that they get?
Third--it was brought up by the Ranking Member--this is--
could be expensive, so how do we incentivize industry and
individuals to actually take the next step?
In those three areas this committee and Congress could
help. We could set that up and get this going.
You know more about tax incentives and stuff than I do, but
that is where I think my discussions with the financial,
energy, health care, and the rest of government--where I think
this would really help.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, General.
Mr. Daniel. Congressman Donovan, I think the--I would agree
with--well, first of all I would say that this committee has
done tremendous work in moving the ball forward in the
legislation that you have already done, and that--it has made a
tremendous difference.
I would say that, for example, CTA couldn't really exist
without the--some of the legislation that you have already put
in place and the liability protections for information sharing,
for example, that are already there.
I do agree with Keith that the--sort-of continuing to work
on--we see a standard of care emerging in industry, but it is
basically emerging via the courts and sort-of in a very ad hoc
fashion, and I think getting--asking industry to step up and
sort of proactively define what that standard of care is going
to be would actually be very helpful to accelerate that
process.
Then also, I think to Frank's point, continuing to refine
the--and get the analysis done of what are the points where
we--that we really care about in this country? Because yes, we
can call an entire sector critical infrastructure, but that
doesn't actually tell you where you need to prioritize within
that sector.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you very much, Mr. Daniel.
Frank.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Donovan, let me echo everything
that General Alexander and Michael Daniel said, and also thank
you, because we hosted you for a talk on state and local
cybersecurity, which I think is an area in particular to
remember. The pointy end of the spear, it is always going to
be--is always going to--it is not always going to be Federal.
We need to ensure that our law enforcement and first responders
writ large have some of the capabilities.
I think in addition to liability protection and in addition
to allowing some of the information sharing, one thing I would
like this committee to take a look at is defining some of the
rules of the road for enabling active defense measures. I am
not talking hack-back.
There is a lot of space between hacking back and building
higher walls, and I think that there is some anxiety--in fact,
I know there is--from the industry to be able to lean a little
more forward until they felt like it was codified in some sort
of way. So I think that would be a very valuable set of issues.
Then finally, this is more the appropriators, but policy
without resources can be rhetoric. Let's make sure that we are
funding the most critical of our critical infrastructure
entities first and foremost.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Frank.
Mr. McConnell.
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, Mr. Donovan.
Three things: First, fix the DHS organization. Second,
conduct oversight over DHS to make sure it does what it is
supposed to do. Third, you might consider taking a look at the
cyber insurance industry because it is now helping set the
standards for what companies are going to do in their
cybersecurity protection activity, and they are setting those
standards, and they can be helpful to you, I think, and to the
country in moving that forward.
Mr. Donovan. I thank you.
I thank all the witnesses for your input.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
Chair recognizes Miss Rice.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to thank
you for your opening statement about how this is not a
Republican or a Democratic issue; it is an American issue.
Because there was some questioning at the hearing the other day
that I thought was, quite frankly, disgraceful--focusing on
leaks instead of the--how important it is for us to make sure
this doesn't happen again in the future.
Mr. Cilluffo, Russian cyber attacks on NATO targets rose by
60 percent in the last--in the past year, and cyber attacks
against E.U. institutions rose by 20 percent. Members of NATO
and the European Union are some of our closest allies,
obviously, in the world, and those relationships are absolutely
vital to our own security.
In your opinion, how do you think these allies will react
to news that the Secretary of State will not be meeting with
NATO foreign ministers next month but will instead be going to
Russia later in April?
Mr. Cilluffo. Yes. I don't know precisely how they will
respond, but clearly it is important to recognize not only that
NATO is a critical alliance to our trans-Atlantic relationship,
but that our leadership visibly recognizes that, as well. So, I
mean, Secretary Mattis has been very strong in terms of
enhancing the--NATO's capabilities, and I hope we follow
through on that.
One note to underscore, though, is we need to rethink our
alliances. So we need NATO, of course. Five Eyes relationship
is the strongest intelligence cooperative relationship in the
world; we need that.
But we have other allies that aren't included in either of
those. Where does Israel fit in? Where does Japan fit in? They
have been on the front end of massive cyber attacks from North
Korea of late as well as China, of course.
So I do think we need to rethink that a little bit.
Miss Rice. That is a good point.
Well, you also made the comment before that Russia is
actually in France and Germany now, obviously, with these
upcoming elections. What more should we be doing to aid our
allies within NATO, the European Union, and even beyond, as you
pointed out, to protect themselves from Russian cyber attacks?
Mr. Cilluffo. That is a great point, and Admiral Rogers in
those hearings earlier this week underscored that he is working
directly with his signals intelligence counterparts in France
and Germany. I think we need to continue to do that and move
beyond, because quite honestly, we are only going to see bits
and pieces.
We need the full snapshot of the activity we are seeing
here, so this is something where intelligence relationships are
dicey. They are--take forever to build and they could easily
disappear based on relationships and what have you.
But I think in this particular case it would actually be
pretty cool to pool all of that to see what other countries are
seeing and then have a full snapshot of the activity we are
seeing. Because history may not repeat itself, but it tends to
rhyme, according to Mark Twain, and I think that is really
right from a cyber perspective, too.
Miss Rice. I think you, in your opening statement or in one
of the answers to one of your--one of the questions you kind-of
put China and Russia together, and North Korea and Iran
together. If you had to rank these four nation-states in terms
of who would be the most dangerous in that order from most to
least, and what are we doing to make sure that we are not--by
focusing on whomever is the most, we are not allowing the least
to kind-of get up the ladder?
Mr. Cilluffo. That is a great question, and I am actually
afraid that we chase shiny objects anyway, so--and then we
get--our eyes are off the ball in other areas.
But here is the reality: Russia is the most capable. No
question about that.
China, very active, mostly in computer network exploit, or
espionage activity. Also building out their space and other
sorts of computer network attack capabilities.
North Korea and Iran I am actually in some cases more
concerned about because they are more likely to turn to
computer network attack--massively disruptive attack. So
capabilities differ, and intentions all matter. We have a
responsibility to keep our eyes on the ball.
But North Korea in particular, I mean, it really is
completely isolated. They have not only built out some of their
cyber capabilities, they have got an army that includes
officers operating in northeast China, southeast Asia, abroad,
because they don't have a very connected country themselves.
But they are also turning to cyber crime. Normally
criminals try to penetrate the state through corruption. Here
you have a state penetrating organized crime to ensure the
survival of the regime.
Miss Rice. This is my last question, with the Chair's
indulgence, to all four of you--and this is just taking on--off
on what you were just saying, Mr. Cilluffo. What more needs to
be done in each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors to
ensure that the sectors remain operable even when they are
under a successful attack?
Mr. Daniel. So I can at least take a stab at that.
It is going to differ from sector to sector because the
sectors are at different levels of maturity. Even within a
sector, the difference between the very large players and the
very small players is pretty radical.
But I think in many cases it is continuing to make cyber a
priority within those companies and organizations at the
Executive level; have them actually employ a risk-based
approach; develop and test a response and recovery plan, so
don't just have one on the shelf that the first time you open
is when you have actually already had a problem, but actually
develop it and test it ahead of time and make sure you have
those relationships with law enforcement, with DHS going in
ahead of time.
General Alexander. If I could, I think what you need to do
is--and you could help facilitate--you need to bring in the key
executives from financial sector, five or six of those, with
the energy sector, with health care, with the Government, and
walk through exactly how we are going to do this: What they
have to do, what they could do with incentives, how you could
help, and what the Government response is going to be.
Because what you are asking is if Iran, who has attacked
Saudi Arabia several times in the last 3 months, were to attack
this country, we are not ready. So we need to get ready and we
need to put that in place.
By having the industry players who are the most likely
target walk through with Government how that is going to work
and what you need to put in place, we would start down that
road. We need to do that.
Mr. McConnell. I can't disagree with those points. They are
very good.
If I might go back briefly to your concern about NATO, I
travel quite a bit in other countries, both to U.S. allies and
adversaries. There is a lot of confusion across the board about
what Americans' foreign policy is, and in particular in this
area of information warfare.
I was recently at the Munich Security Conference with
Chancellor Merkel and other foreign leaders, and there was much
concern about where America is going on NATO. The Trump
administration was there and said all the right things; there
was a full-court press by the vice president, along with
Secretary Mattis and Secretary Kelly, so that was very good.
But there is a lot of skepticism still, a lot of concern, and I
think the proof will be in the pudding.
Miss Rice. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
Chair recognizes Mr. Rutherford.
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank the panel for being here today.
You know, it seems some of that confusion and
disjointedness that we see in response to cyber attacks goes to
exactly what Mr. McConnell said we really need to do earlier,
and that is define the roles and response.
The bubble chart was an attempt at that maybe, but failed.
I think, you know, when you say, ``OK, DOJ is going to do the
prosecution; DHS is going to do the protection; and then DOD is
going to do the defense,'' it reminded me--you know, I am a 41-
year law enforcement officer so I go back to the environment
that I know well, and I know that that is kind-of the way it
works in civil law in protection is, you know, law enforcement
is the Government response to protect the public from the bad
actors--whether they are criminal actors or even state actors,
bad actors.
So I also understand this, though: Law enforcement are
priority one response time. If you are the victim of an
aggravated battery and an aggravated assault, we understand
that there is like a 7-minute priority response time. So for 7
minutes that citizen better be able to deal with whatever it is
on their own.
Our founding fathers understood that. That is why they gave
individuals the 2d Amendment right to protect themselves.
There is a self-defense interest here, and it really
concerns me when I hear people say, ``Limit the ability to hack
back.'' You are taking away the self-defense capability, I
think.
Also, the general mentioned, you know, Sony could take them
if you unleashed them. So I want to get back to this concept
that we have to define the roles and response, because I think
that is going to drive everything that we do from that point
on.
Because I am really concerned about this idea that we are
not going to allow Sony or some other corporation to defend
themselves for that 7 minutes that we are waiting on law
enforcement to show up. So how do you address that 7-minute
response time the Government has to be able to protect our
corporations from cyber attack?
General Alexander. If I could start, light speed, in which
the network operates, to go around the whole world once is----
Mr. Rutherford. Oh, I understand that, but, I mean, there
is a response time.
General Alexander. Right. Now, so that is the problem that
I see.
I agree with where you have taken this, but I would take it
one step further, and that is we could be responding at network
speed and should be, but we don't because we aren't organized
to do that. We haven't looked at this as the common defense.
You hit the Constitution, and I think if our forefathers
were here they would say the intent is when I am being attacked
the Government is supposed to help me in certain things and I
have to meet certain standards. My standard, let's call it the
NIST; your standard is if Iran is attacking my you go kick
their--and we will take it from here.
We don't have the ability today to do that. You have the
organizational construct, and I think the bubble chart was a
start. That is if you are--if a sector is being attacked the
DHS has roles and responsibility to keep the Nation operating,
DOD to go after these guys with cyber or any other element of
National power.
So I would be concerned about a civilian corporation
attacking back into North Korea and they assume it was our
Government and it is an act of war and they lob missiles into
Seoul. That could and would likely happen.
So you have to determine who is going to take the steps to
do that. Now you are into the Defense Department and the
President's roles.
So I would just offer that as consideration.
Mr. Daniel. I think from--Congressman, I think from my
perspective I think, you know, we worked very hard at the end
of the previous administration to shape out the bubble chart
into policy with respect to particular incidents, and that
became Presidential Policy Directive 41, which I think actually
helps clarify a lot of that--the roles and responsibilities and
provides a very solid framework for enabling the Government to
get its act together in terms of how we do response.
I would also hit on what Frank was saying, though, that
there is a big--I agree with Keith that enabling a private
corporation to go all the way back, there is also other
problems, which is since the bad guys don't typically use, you
know, computers and equipment labeled ``bad guy stuff''----
Mr. Rutherford. Right.
Mr. Daniel [continuing]. They are, you know,
commandeering--yes, they are commandeering, you know, third-
party innocent people's machines and things like that. So we
need to be very careful about, you know, how we go back at
somebody.
But as Frank said, there is a big difference between simply
building the wall higher and, you know hack-back. There is some
space in there for companies to actually defend themselves.
But I think ultimately sort-of working out how we are going
to do this and how we are going to divide up the roles and
responsibilities between the private sector and the
government--and governments; not just the U.S. Government but
all governments around the world--and doing defense of their
critical infrastructure is one of the fundamental policy
challenges that we have right now. And how we are going to lay
that out in some coherent framework that we can all live with I
think is the policy issue that we are all struggling with.
I don't have a clear answer to that question right now, but
I know that it is one that we have got to continue struggling
our way through.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Rutherford, if I could just build
on a couple of quick points: Seven minutes? It can be 7 years
before the Government responds or it can follow up on some of
the events that are occurring, so there is no 9-1-1 where you
call and you get the Government to respond. So I think
companies--I think it is an unfair playing field.
How many companies went into business thinking they had to
defend themselves against Chinese intelligence services, or the
SBR--Russian intelligence services, or North Korea, or Iran?
Even the biggest companies in the world--for example, JPMorgan
Chase, they spend $650 million a year on cybersecurity. They
have well over 1,000 people focused on this particular issue.
These are big numbers.
But no company--if you are throwing all-source
intelligence, you see--cyber crime is getting so sophisticated
that the lines between nation-state and criminal are narrowing
dramatically, and they are blurring if they are using proxies.
But here is the difference: Nation-states can use other forms
of collection--signals intelligence, human intelligence, you
name it. So that is an unfair playing field if you are a
company.
So I am not asking to hack back, but I do think we should
have suppressive fire. So there is one thing firing, there is
another defending your own system from a suppressive fire
perspective, if you want to use a military analogy in that
respect.
So there is a lot more that can be done there. But don't--
--
Mr. Rutherford. OK. I didn't catch that in your first
comment about not hacking back, so that--I like that.
Mr. Cilluffo. That is what I am for, so thank you.
Mr. Rutherford. Good. Good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chair recognizes Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentleman, a few weeks ago I asked a question from another
panel and I am going to ask the same one here. I think I am
beginning to get some responses or clarification.
My question then was how do you get private sector, public
sector all to coordinate, and how do you get everybody to be
accountable?
Let me explain. You just talked about JPMorgan. We know
they are a hard target. But there are other players in the
private sector, financially related, that are not spending
millions of dollars to get hardened.
Same thing in the Federal Government--all levels of
government, State governments. You mentioned--alluded to the
fact that maybe there are some States out there that maybe
aren't up to snuff on their election system. Probably there are
some Federal agencies that are not as hardened as the CIA.
So the question is, how do you get everybody to coordinate?
Let me paraphrase what I am hearing from all of you, which
is you gotta have standards--standards that address liability,
which indirectly address cost, because everybody has got to
share the costs if you are not--if you are going to protect
yourselves. If you are going to get insurance of some sort here
to protect yourselves you have gotta have some oversight,
meaning some coordination.
Maybe that is the role of DHS, in terms of making sure
everybody is talking to each other.
Mr. Rutherford talked about retaliation. Well--and response
times. As you said, this is speed of light, so maybe that is
where DHS assures that the government and others are there to
maybe lay down fire suppression.
So this is a map here that maybe the role of DHS is really
to coordinate private and public sector, not in the sense of
managing it but to make sure everybody is talking to each
other, to make sure that we have the response, to make sure we
protect everybody in our critical areas, and maybe also look at
working with our allies overseas, NATO and some of the others.
Open it up for comment.
General Alexander. I will give you a first one, Congressman
Correa, and that is I think when you look at this that we do
have to walk through the roles, responsibilities, and the
standards that we are going to have people at. We pushed to
have the NIST framework as the standard, and I think we should
look at that.
I think when you think about the relationship of DHS and
DOD, the idea of having this done as an exercise here in
Congress, where you could bring in first the Government and
then other civilian agencies, would really pay dividends
because we talk by each other. Words matter.
For example, if you look at missiles coming into the United
States, you are going to want NORAD to shoot down those
missiles. NORAD has to have the authority and the ability to do
that in time to block the missile.
Now, they may not be 100 percent effective. A missile may
come in and hit somebody.
DHS has now a role to help build that back up. It has
protection and certain standards.
In cyber it is very much the same. I see a role and
responsibility for DHS working with industry on these
standards, but not being the portal for saying what DOD would
do, but rather that is going to be a Presidential decision on
the roles of, when do you respond and how do you respond? I
think they should establish those and make that clear, and then
show how you are going to have DHS, DOD----
Mr. Correa. But to a certain level you have to have those
rules up front----
General Alexander. That is right.
Mr. Correa [continuing]. Because you have got to respond in
a nanosecond.
General Alexander. That is right. We don't. We should. We
don't have the rules and we should have them.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Mr. Daniel. So, Congressman, I think that--to build out a
little bit of what you were saying, I think part of this is
that one of the things that we are struggling with is that we
operate at a scale that is very difficult to comprehend.
This was actually driven home to me when we did a joint
exercise with the United Kingdom and their financial sector,
and I realized that the entire United Kingdom financial
sector--representatives of that could fit in this room, that
you could literally get all of them together around the table.
We have 13,000 financial sector companies, roughly. So
there is no way to, you know, sort-of do it by traditional
sort-of organizational means.
That means to my mind sort-of two things. One is that we
actually need to set up the structures to enable us to sort-of,
if you will, use trees and other ways to get at that
organizational problem so it is not DHS trying to talk to--or
even NSA or anybody in the government--trying to talk to 13,000
institutions, Treasury talking to 13,000 institutions
simultaneously. So we need some intermediate structures in
there to help with that.
But then we also need to use the networks and the power----
Mr. Correa. Standards?
Mr. Daniel [continuing]. Power--yes.
Mr. Correa. DHS-generated or standards of private sector?
Mr. Daniel. I think private-sector standards, but I think
when I----
Mr. Correa. OK. Be like accounting rules.
Mr. Daniel. Yes. Like Keith says, I am a big fan of the
NIST Cybersecurity Framework. I also agree it needs metrics
behind it to help organizations figure out how to actually
apply the framework.
But clearly we need to be using network technology and I.T.
technology to actually work for us in this space rather than
just only against us in this area and allow us to use the
network to communicate defenses at network speed. That is a
large part of what we are trying to build toward right now, but
I think that is going to be the only way that we get at these
questions.
Mr. Cilluffo. Just to build on some of those quick points,
I do think standards are important, and I think that many of
those can be driven by the private sector since they know their
systems' vulnerabilities and capabilities better.
But let me just say two things. First--and it is not to go
back to an old point, but if everything is critical nothing is.
I think we have got to get--at least get to a grade B on the
most critical of our critical infrastructures. These are our
lifeline sectors. Think electric power and energy; think
telecommunications; think financial services; and think
transportation.
Let's start there because they are--a disruptive or
destructive attack to any of those, the impact upon our
economy, on our public safety, our National security could be
incredibly damaging. So let's start it with those very initial
points.
Then I think there are some systemic risks that we need to
ameliorate or backfill some of those vulnerabilities. So, for
example, I didn't bring it up in my remarks but in my written
testimony I mentioned the SWIFT hack, which, by the way, North
Korea is seen as a prime perpetrator.
But what made the SWIFT hack of last year--February of last
year, and this was against the Central Bank of Bangladesh--
unique was not that $81 million was stolen. That is bad. Bad
day for the bank; bad day for its customers and clients. But
the economy could absorb it.
What was important about that is it identified a systemic
risk. The whole global financial institutions all are based
upon that SWIFT. It clears billions--hundreds of billions of
dollars daily. So to me that is a systemic risk. That rises
above the noise.
If you look at the Russian attacks on the energy grid in
the Ukraine, these are the sorts of--it was the first time a
cyber attack had a physical consequence in a real-world
environment. That is a big deal.
We are talking about the interference in the elections.
Yes, big deal. I am actually worried about safety. That is a
bigger deal, that you are taking off--if you don't have power I
don't care what other critical infrastructure is up and
running, we are not moving.
One in particular that is critical but so far behind in its
security are water. So water is truly critical, but they are
nowhere near the gold standard of the financial services
sector.
My last word, enable organizations like the Cyber Threat
Alliance. I highlighted the FSR, which are all the big banks
that are coming together. These are the groups and
organizations that are going to drive change, and I think
historically there has been a little bit of arrogance that the
Government thinks, ``Government lead, private sector follow.''
I take an opposite approach. I think private sector is
going to lead and Government need to lead by example by doing--
getting its own houses in order.
Chairman McCaul. Gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Fitzpatrick.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just a segue from Mr. Correa's question, focusing first on
the Federal agencies. So there are two agencies, DHS and the
FBI, that have concurrent jurisdiction over cyber crime
investigations.
My first question is: Have you encountered any issues with
that as far as overlapping jurisdiction, redundancy?--would be
my first question, because that is an issue in the law
enforcement community.
Second, the relationship between--since this is the
Homeland Security Committee--DHS and the private sector,
because I think most of us know that typically the private
sector is far ahead of the curve over the Government when it
comes to, typically, matters of I.T. and technology.
Is there any proactive outreach steps that DHS has done for
any of your organizations to reach out and try to learn from
what you all know?
Mr. McConnell. If I could just start on that, sir, on the
private-sector part, one of the reasons that we all agreed on
the bubble chart when we were serving in the Government was
because DHS does have a good interaction with the private
sector of exchange of information and coordination. So they can
improve on that, but it is a good--as General Alexander said, a
good public face in that area.
The larger point that you made also makes a lot of sense,
and I leave that to my other colleagues.
Mr. Daniel. So I think that the--Congressman, I think the
question of, you know, the proactive steps that DHS has taken,
you know, certainly, yes, you can see the programs that they
are trying to put in place, like the Automated Indicator
Sharing Program, the teams that they have developed to go out
and assist upon request, the critical infrastructure protection
efforts that they have to engage proactively--all of those are
good elements and I think they need to continue to be resourced
and expanded and prioritized, as Frank says, to focus on the
most critical areas.
I think that those are critical to continue.
I certainly think that your question on the concurrent
jurisdiction is one that clearly warrants some further
discussions. My personal view is that DOJ and DHS, in the form
of FBI and Secret Service, have worked out a way to handle that
in most cases, and it is--they actually cooperate better than
sort-of some of the public perception would lead you to believe
sometimes.
But that is still something that should probably be
reevaluated every so often as we look at what the
responsibilities of all of those agencies are.
General Alexander. I can give you my experience working
with the FBI and Secret Service on this. The FBI was great to
work with for us, and we had an assumption between Director
Mueller and myself, and that was any cyber action would be a
law enforcement because most of the things that we are seeing
are criminal in nature, and he would have the lead. If it
turned out to be a nation-state then those would turn and we
would support him, in terms of the law enforcement.
I think between Secretary Napolitano, Secretary Gates,
Mueller, myself, and the bubble chart, we actually had pretty
good agreement across how we were going to do each of those.
I do think that we should look at how we organize our
Government, and is this what industry would do for organizing
cyber, and having it in three pillars and separated all out the
way we do. We do that in part because of all the issues with
civil liberties and privacy and the public faces and that, but
if we were running our Government like a company would we run
it this way?
I just ask that because you have asked and you gave some
great points, and the answer is, ``Nope, we wouldn't do that.''
Here is part of the reason. We have talked about people. If
you were in charge of all three and you put them together would
you share more of those people amongst them to make sure we
could each do our job? Yes. Would we work together better? Yes.
How could we get there and what should we do?
Secretary Gates and Napolitano had some great discussions
on that. It might be good for you, Chairman, to bring those in
because I think it actually answers some of the questions you
are asking, Congressman, and they are better at that than I
was.
Mr. Fitzpatrick. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Just for the record, are you saying that
it should be more integrated and less siloed--those three?
General Alexander. Yes, Chairman, I am. I think it should
be more integrated.
Chairman McCaul. I think that is a----
General Alexander. I agree with civilian control. I think
you can look at--Secretary Gates came up with this approach to
say, why don't we work to have some strategy to bring those
together so that we all benefit from the talent?
Chairman McCaul. Yes. I tend to agree.
Chair recognizes Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chair and the Ranking
Member for again being at really the cutting edge of securing
this Nation, and that is the issue of cybersecurity, which a
decade ago I--the most we might have been saying, General, is
that 85, 87 percent of the cyber world was in the private
sector. That was the mantra or the conversation, and it was
considered infrastructure, and we looked at it in those
terminologies.
But I am glad that we are looking now to prioritize
cybersecurity, protecting the cyber system. But more
importantly, I want to thank all of the witnesses for their
focus on the importance of the Department of Homeland Security.
I am excited about a potential reserve corps--vetted
individuals that move in and out of the corporate community on
the basis of public service. I might make the point that
because of Mr. Snowden I would prefer those individuals who--
forgive me--are not contract, you don't know where they are;
they are sitting right at DHS working with us.
I applaud the zero to 12--I guess I am already on the
birth, but let's go from K to 12. I don't mind doing zero to
12, start talking early about STEM, but the--that is OK. The K
to 12 I think is an excellent idea, and I also think it is
important to develop that base of informed professionals ready
to be on task to be on the offense.
So let me ask questions related to some of the public
incidences that we have been seeing. I want to start with
General Alexander and Dr. Cilluffo, if I can.
Last week's Justice Department indictment of two Russian
government agents in the Kremlin's cyber division is a
watershed moment in our efforts to counter state-directed cyber
hacking campaigns. What does last week's unsealed indictment
regarding the 2014 Yahoo breach tell us about the Russian
government's 2016 election interference, and does this give us
a better understanding of the importance of attribution?
Because you all had talked previously about getting right to
it, not being shy about who has done it, and if you would
answer that.
Let me add to that, to General Alexander, very quickly,
your exit memo indicated--and I have other questions but I am
going to yield for you all to answer--indicated your work with
the NSA and Cyber Command the greatest privilege and honor of
your life. You also described NIST and Cyber Command employees
as people who dedicated their lives to protecting the Nation--
not for money, but for the mission.
What do you think about how troubling it is to have seen
the President compare the I.C. to Nazi Germany and denigrate
the contributions of your former colleagues? What, if any,
effects could any President's attacks on the intelligence
community have on our analysts, our relationships with the
allies, and the work of the I.C. in recruitment?
But, General Alexander and Doctor, if you could go to the
first question that I asked, please?
General Alexander. Could you say that first question again?
I was thinking about that second one. Could you just quickly
say the first----
Ms. Jackson Lee. No problem at all. It is to comment on the
indictments of the Russian agents regarding Yahoo and to--what
does the breach tell us about Russian government's interference
in 2016? Then the subset of that: Does this give us a better
understanding of the importance of attribution?
Then you could go into the other one, and then I will yield
to the doctor.
General Alexander. Yes. So on attribution--I will start
there--absolutely vital. It is something that we jointly worked
about 12 years ago starting getting attribution and have gotten
much better at it.
What this shows me--from what we are seeing on Russia, on
Yahoo, on our elections, on China--is our defense is terrible,
and we don't have any consequences. I agree with the way the
Chairman said that. We have to have consequences.
I think we need a two--at least a two approaches to this.
Come up with the consequences--think of that as rules of
engagement; and then go fix the defense by getting industry and
the Government to work together.
I agree with Frank saying the Government should be the
standard. We should set the standard for the rest of the
Nation.
With respect to working at NSA and the comments about the
employees of the intelligence community and others, I would go
back to my time in NSA. You know who really did a great job
coming up there was President Bush.
He came up and talked to the people about what they were
doing and he made this comment to us, and it was the most
important leadership thing that I saw in 40 years, and it was
to me he said, ``Look, you protect the Nation, I will take the
heat.'' He told the people of NSA, ``You are here to protect
the country,'' and they--he made them feel good.
We need leaders to make people in Government feel good
about what they are doing.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Jackson Lee, I--you know, I think
that the indictment was quite startling. To actually see what
we have all kind-of known, that you have a nation-state and
that you have FSB officers turning to well-known--including
someone who is on the world's most-wanted list, from a U.S.
perspective, for cyber criminals--to do their bidding.
So we have know that any country worth their salt is going
to work through a proxy because they don't want the muddy
footprints coming back to them, or the cyber footprints. So I
do think that it is a pretty big deal.
I think that the bigger takeaway, though, is it is just
reflective of what they have been doing for a long time. The
interference in the election, that is not new. This is what
Russia has been engaged in for quite some time.
The one thing I would just caution everyone with is it is
not just Russia. I mean, the perpetrators are vast. So what I
don't want to do is focus all of our efforts on one actor when
all the other actors are going to take advantage of that
situation.
So I do find the indictments important. In the past we
indicted PLA officers from the Russian--I mean from the Chinese
army. People said, ``What is the likelihood of them ever seeing
a courtroom?''
Nil. But it sent a message. It signaled we mean business.
Oh, by the way, these officers can't travel anywhere that has
extradition treaties with the United States.
So it has some effect, and I am happy the indictments just
did what they are supposed to do. Just the facts, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. Gentlelady's time has expired.
Mrs. Demings, from Florida, is recognized.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member.
To all of our witnesses, thank you so much.
Mr. McConnell. after the 2015 attack on Ukraine's
electrical grid DHS and NCCIC was able to help the Ukrainian
government respond to the incident. In your perspective, how
well-positioned is the U.S. Government or the U.S. Government
continue to be to help our European allies, including France
and Germany, whose elections are being targeted by regimes like
the Putin regime?
Mr. McConnell. Thank you, ma'am.
Yes, I think that is still a work in progress. There is
good coordination at the operational level between the NCCIC
and their counterparts in most European countries, but the
coordination at the policy level has a lot left to be done, and
I think that is a really good question for you all to be asking
about.
On the NATO side there is also very good collaboration in
this area, so I think that the--in general that we are in a
pretty good position to help them from lessons learned, and
there has been quite a bit of conversation between the
Europeans and the Americans post election and sharing some of
the lessons learned.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you.
The next question is for any of the witnesses. What
concepts or principles are you hoping to see reflected in
President Trump's Executive Order on cybersecurity, and are
there specific policies or relationships that you would like to
advise the President not to disturb?
Mr. Daniel. Congresswoman, I can certainly start with that.
I think that the principles that I would hope to see and the
approach are actually what you--what we have certainly seen in
some of the--in some of the versions that have made their way
out into the public in the sense of continuing to emphasize the
risk-based approach to cybersecurity, that you are not going to
be able to protect everything all of the time, to continue the
focus on moving a lot of the cybersecurity mission out of the
hands of the--all of the Federal civilian agencies but leaving
them--retaining accountability for protecting their
information. But indicating that they don't have to be doing
all of the protecting themselves and, you know, finding ways to
do shared services across the Federal civilian side. That is
incredibly important.
I think continuing to emphasize this--the fact that all of
this has to be done, as we have all been talking about this
morning, in partnership, that no one element within the Federal
Government, no--the Federal Government by itself, and indeed,
the United States by itself cannot tackle this problem, but we
have to do it in partnership both, you know, within the
Government, between State and local governments and the Federal
Government, internationally, and with the private sector.
General Alexander. I think three things that need to come
out: One, we talked about fixing Government--I.T. and
cybersecurity--and make that a standard, because right now when
you look at it compared to industry it is way behind.
The second is we have got to have Government-industry
collaboration and we have got to encourage that collaboration.
I think we have got to also--a third point is figure out how we
are going to protect critical infrastructure and where do you
start?
I agree with what Frank said in terms of picking your
starting points, but I think as a Nation we have got to go
beyond. I think it is got to be: How do we educate the people?
How do we take the next steps in terms of getting this
collaboration? What can other sectors do while we focus on the
lifeline, as Frank put it?
So we have got to cover that, and I would hope that is in
there.
Mr. Cilluffo. Just a couple of very quick points, and I
think they have been raised here in different sorts of ways.
First thing I would do is to Mr. Rutherford's comment
earlier: Clarify roles and missions of various agencies and
entities and recognize that as much as we have been talking on
the defensive side here, the reality is we are never going to
firewall our way out of this problem. We have to be comfortable
discussing some of our offensive capabilities because that
leads to a cyber deterrence strategy.
We can't deter if the enemy doesn't know what capabilities
we have. As the old movie, ``What good is having the doomsday
machine if no one knows you got it?''
So the reality is is I feel we need to look at it in a much
more strategic kind of way, where we start clarifying roles and
missions; we are comfortable about some of our capabilities; we
articulate and, more importantly, demonstrate a deterrent
capability; we manage what we can from a risk-based
perspective.
I think that based on what I have seen I am pleased to see
that the Trump administration is building on the continuity of
what worked well in the previous administration, and then
recognizing a couple of areas where they want to go a little
further.
So I think for starters it is that roles and missions
piece.
The one thing I would just caution is--I mean, an Executive
Order is basically a statement of intent. That is where you
guys come in is when do you codify some of those intentions and
align that from a legislative perspective? I think you guys
have honestly done a terrific job, and this committee, I think,
more than any other committee is moving legislation.
Those are my quick thoughts.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you very much. I am out of time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
Chair recognizes Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the Ranking Member for organizing this hearing.
I certainly want to thank our distinguished panel of
witnesses here, your testimony today and the many contributions
you have made in moving the Nation's cybersecurity defenses
forward and putting us in a much stronger place.
I have been at this cybersecurity issue, like the Chairman,
now for the better part of a decade, and I certainly always
feel as much as I have learned I still have so much more to
learn. I certainly do when I have the caliber of a panel like
you all here before us. So thank you for that.
General, I will start with you, and I thank you for your
many years of service to the Nation and appreciate the work
that you and I have done over the years on cyber. But in your
written testimony you State, ``However, the reality is that
commercial private-sector entities cannot practically be
expected to defend themselves against nation-state attacks in
cyber space.'' I certainly completely agree with that.
However, most breaches--and I have heard numbers anywhere
from 85 percent upwards of 95 percent--are not sophisticated
but rely on unpatched systems, poor--a poor understanding of
network topography, or other examples of poor cyber hygiene. So
how can we increase the signal-to-noise ratio so that the
Government can focus on protecting against nation-state
attacks?
For the panel, I would certainly be interested in your
perspectives on why so many breaches continue to be the result
of failures and--forgive me for using the term--cyber hygiene?
My second question--and I certainly would welcome the panel
on this, as well--is for Mr. Daniel. Thank you for your work at
the White House. Certainly in my time there--your time there
when General Alexander was there you both were incredibly
accessible to me and very helpful.
So to Mr. Daniel, I know you spoke at the Cybersecurity for
a New America conference on Monday, and I had the chance to
review some of your remarks. One thing that really leapt out at
me was your discussion of where an organization should spend
their marginal dollar on defense.
So this ties in with my interest on cybersecurity metrics.
You know, how can we tell whether our controls are working?
Same thing that goes with just adopting the NIST standards. You
know, what organizations are adopting them, and to what degree
are those standards even effective?
So what suggestions do you have--and I would, again, invite
the panel to chime in--to allow us to better understand where
that marginal dollar should be spent?
So, General Alexander, if we could start with you?
General Alexander. Congressman, good to see you again.
I would say first we have got to have standards. In order
to set those standards we have talked about the NIST and the
NIST framework, but I think we have to take a couple more
steps.
When you look at what goes on, the big companies can afford
to throw money and resources at it. Your small and mid-sized
don't have the resources, don't have the money, can't afford
it, and so they are in a risk calculus: Can I absorb a hit?
They are in the feeder tank, so think about what happened to
Target and the air-conditioning company.
So when you look at those things, how do we set up and
incentivize this? That is where Congress can come in.
I think we need to set the standards. I think we need to
incentivize them for having those standards.
You can look at it by sectors and you see the SEC and the
New York Department of Financial Services are already setting
standards in cybersecurity.
I think Congress has a role in that. What is the initial
standard and how do we do that?
I think we have got to incentivize and therefore push the
cybersecurity industry to come up with practical solutions for
small, mid-sized, and large companies. I think the cloud and
where this is going is going to play a large part in it. That
is something we could talk about after.
Thank you.
Mr. Daniel. Thank you, Congressman Langevin. It was always
a great partnership that we had, and I always appreciated our
conversations in this area.
I think from my perspective what I was alluding to there is
that we have tended to focus on the cybersecurity industry on a
very narrow slice of the problem and sort-of that ``protect,''
maybe into the ``detect'' portion of the NIST Cybersecurity
Framework.
But in many cases you now have chief information security
officers and others buying new appliances and equipment and
they don't really understand how it all fits together and they
don't have a holistic view of what that ``nth'' device in their
stack actually gets them, in terms of additional cybersecurity
protection.
It may well be the case that for many organizations rather
than buying the new shiny object or the newest technology, what
they actually need to invest in is very solid recovery
capability, and that might actually provide them more benefit
down the road.
But I think part of this is that, again, you have to come
at this from a holistic standpoint--not just the mechanics of
the cybersecurity and the technology, but understanding how
your work force interacts with it, how it interacts with your
business processes, what are the impacts on your business
economics, and come at it from that much more holistic
standpoint.
Until we get to that point where we are actually making
security the easier path--being cyber-secure the easier path to
do rather than the harder path, people just aren't going to do
it, or at least not enough people are going to do it at the
scale that we need them to.
So I do think that there is a burden on the cybersecurity
industry to step up to that, but also organizations to think
more holistically about their cybersecurity and manage it as a
risk, just like the manage their legal risk and their customer
risk and other reputational risk and all the risks that they
face as an organization.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Other panel members?
Mr. McConnell. It is great to see you, sir, and thank you
for all your work in this area for so long.
I would just make one point on your comment about cyber
hygiene and why it is still the biggest source of attacks and
vulnerabilities. I think this approach we have today of telling
people to patch their devices and get that latest patch in and
don't click on attachments--bad attachments--doesn't work.
It is certainly not going to work when we 10 times as many
devices attached to the network, and now I forgot to patch that
lightbulb and it is now a--connected to the internet and is a
vulnerability.
So I think there is going to be a shift in the industry
moving away from the devices and the end-points more to the
network layer and that the enterprise network operators and the
tier one ISPs are going to have to take more responsibility for
the security of the traffic that is coming over, and we can't
leave it to the--to local cyber hygiene.
That is still important. We still have to secure those
devices, but there has got to be a shift of responsibility if
we are going to do this at scale.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Mr. Cilluffo. Congressman Langevin, let me also thank you
for all your terrific work in this space, and I have had the
privilege of working with you for a number of years now.
Two things, though, that I would just build on. I agree
with everything, although I would say to Bruce's point, still
make sure you update all your patches and you don't click on
bad links.
But yes, the vast majority of breaches are due to social
engineering, including the most sophisticated. That is where
human--other means, from an all-source collection standpoint,
can be thrown at you.
Two things though: One, technology will continue to change;
human nature is pretty consistent. So if you start looking at
it from a behavioral standpoint there are certain things you
can put in place. None of us discussed on this--on the panel
here today the insider threat, which I still think is probably
at the very top of the threat, agnostic to their ideological
motivations or intentions.
Two things that I think will be--machine learning and A.I.
There is a lot of buzz. There is a lot of gobbledygook, but
there are some very real initiatives here, and I think the
Department of Homeland Security deserves some credit here in
terms of leaning forward with some of the STIX-TAXII
opportunities, which enable more real-time cyber intelligence
sharing.
I also think that, given your work on the Armed Services
Committee, maybe we ought to be looking at some of the DOD
acquisition cybersecurity components for the most critical of
our critical infrastructure. In other words, it is looking from
a supply chain perspective.
So Bruce brought up the point, I mean, small--even small
banks, they don't have the resources the big financial
institutions have. They have to collect that.
So they are either going to go through their providers,
whether it is ISP or otherwise, but maybe there is another way
to be looking at it where we start baking security on the front
end and we have acquisition processes for some of these
entities that ask, at least, the cyber question.
Mr. Langevin. All great points, yes.
Thank you all.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Let me thank the panel. What an excellent
discussion. Very insightful, educational.
I do want to mention during the course of this hearing it
has been reported there is a terrorist attack in London at
the--both the parliament and Westminster Bridge. One confirmed
dead and possibly 10 injured, and so we pray for those victims
and Godspeed.
With that, other committee Members may have questions. This
will remain open for 10 days.
This hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:17 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Keith B. Alexander *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Gen. (Ret.) Keith B. Alexander is the former Director, National
Security Agency and the Founding Commander, United States Cyber
Command. Currently, he is the President and CEO of IronNet
Cybersecurity and recently completed service as a member of the
President's Commission on Enhancing National Cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 1a. While the goal, for combatting cyber crime, is to make
it financially untenable to conduct illegal activities, what would the
corollary of this goal be for nation-state actors?
Answer. The goal for combatting nation-state actors is to deter
them from engaging in activities that are particularly harmful to our
National security, including destructive cyber attacks, massive theft
of private-sector intellectual property, and access to critical
infrastructure systems.
Question 1b. How do we tip the scales so that it isn't worth it for
nation-state actors to break into our systems both in the private
sector and in the Government?
Answer. Though some level of espionage is unavoidable, we must
significantly improve our defense and the public-private partnership.
Nation-states have long sought access to one another's secrets and will
almost certainly continue to do so. Our company and Government networks
are too easy a target for both nation-state and non-nation-state
actors, especially when they stand alone. We need to significantly
raise the bar and have an integrated ``common'' defense.
We need to treat the cyber realm more like the physical world when
it comes to deterrence and having nation-states recognize that there
are very real costs to acting against the United States in cyber space.
Question 2a. At the hearing, we heard that we need to rethink how
the Government and private sector relate to one another on cyber
issues.
What are your recommendations for rethinking the relationship
between public and private sectors?
Answer. The key to rethinking the relationship between the public
and private sectors on cyber issues is recognizing that for too long,
we assumed that the private sector can largely protect itself on its
own. Unlike in any other domain, we expect companies to protect
themselves against nation-states, criminals, and script kiddies alike
when it comes to cyber space; in the physical world, we certainly do
not expect corporate America to deploy surface-to-air missiles to
defend against nation-state bomber threats. Recognizing this dichotomy
and taking steps to address by sharing much more detailed threat
information in both directions, building interoperable defensive
systems, exercising how the Government and the private sector would
respond to a real, on-going threat, and establishing clear roles,
responsibilities, and rules of engagement would be a strong first step
in the right direction.
Question 2b. How do we ensure the private and public sectors can
work together harmoniously, without overstepping the Government's role
or creating a new regulatory regime?
Answer. It is critical that the Government and the private sector
recognize their respective roles and responsibilities, and perhaps most
importantly, their own capabilities when it comes to working together
in cyber space. The Government must have a clear understanding of the
roles and responsibilities of each department. Further, putting in
place specific laws and stringent regulations are not particularly
useful when it comes to a fast-moving technology area like
cybersecurity because they are not very flexible and adaptive. The
Government should set broad goals and encourage behaviors through
positive incentives rather than through regulations and penalties. At
the same time, both the public and private sectors need to rebuild the
trust and confidence with one another.
Finally, we need to train how we are going to defend, first within
the Government, and then between the Government and private sector. We
should have routine drills to practice and build up our competence in
responding to threats.
Question 2c. How can we ensure this much-needed and strengthened
collaboration is nimble enough to consider the evolving nature of cyber
threats and organizational needs?
Answer. Many of the regulatory and legal tools available to the
Government are not particularly nimble. Positive incentives are most
likely to achieve successful results in a dynamic threat and defensive
environment. Similarly, flexibility on key policy issues and seeking to
find the reasonable middle ground, rather than taking extreme positions
on both sides of the debate on Capitol Hill and in Silicon Valley, are
likely to reach the best outcomes when it comes to increasing
collaboration between the Government and the private sector.
Question 3a. A number of witnesses at the hearing mentioned the
shift to more disruptive and destructive cyber attacks. Over the last
several years concern has been raised about the threat of nation-state
cyber actors, criminals or others, causing physical damage through a
cyber attack.
How difficult of an operation would this be, to cause physical
damage, does it require a higher degree of sophistication?
Answer. Causing physical damage can, at times, require a higher
degree of sophistication than simply obtaining access, but it depends
on how well-defended a particular system may be. For example, an
extremely well-defended system may be extremely difficult to access,
but once accessed, it may be relatively easy to conduct actions upon;
and the counter is also be true. The most important thing to note about
this new trend towards cyber attacks that cause physical damage is that
it is now happening. The capability to undertake such attacks is
becoming more common and perhaps may end up in the hands of nation-
states and other entities that are perhaps less subject to deterrence
than typical, highly-capable cyber actors.
Question 3b. Can you speak to this threat and how concerned should
we be about it?
Answer. This trend is one of the most troubling trends in
cybersecurity because it represents a fundamental shift in the way
cyber access to systems may be used, both as a tool for covert action,
but also in a time of real conflict. Given the spread of these
capabilities to less ``deterrable'' actors, we need to demonstrate that
the United States takes such attacks seriously and will respond swiftly
and with the application of all elements of National power, including
military force, as needed in a particular circumstance.
Question 4a. As we look at evolving threats, ransomware attacks are
on the rise. In your testimony, you noted that ransomware has been used
by organized criminal groups and small actors alike.
Do you see the use of this tool growing?
Answer. As Microsoft recently noted, while the overall ``volume of
ransomware encounters is on a downward trend . . . a look at the attack
vectors, the number of unique families released into the wild, and the
improvements in malware code reveals otherwise.''\1\ As the Microsoft
report points out, there was no decline in the volume of emails
carrying ransomware downloaders; rather, systems operators were simply
getting better at blocking the email entry point for such infections.
Similarly, Microsoft notes that attackers continue to innovate and
evolve the tools and tactics they use to deploy and exploit ransomware.
As such, while numbers of successful attacks may be down, we have not
seen the end of this trend.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Microsoft Malware Protection Center (MMPC) Ransomware: a
Declining Nuisance or an Evolving Menace? (Feb. 14, 2017), available
on-line at https://blogs.technet.microsoft.com/mmpc/2017/02/14/
ransomware-2016-threat-landscape-review/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 4b. Do you see ransomware being utilized by larger actors
for more nefarious purposes?
Answer. Yes. There is possibility that we will see ransomware be
put to larger-scale strategic use than the extraction of small amounts
of wealth. It is important that governments and large corporations
prepare for such incidents by establishing policies and procedures to
prevent such attacks and the ability to recover if and when it happens.
Question 4c. How do we prepare and respond to ransomware attacks?
Answer. As with most cyber threats, the best offense is good
preparation in advance and placing strong defensive measures in our
networks. This includes basic hygiene at the outset: Consistent
patching, use of strong passwords, two-factor authentication, strong
anti-social engineering training of staff, as well as the deployment of
strong capabilities using a defense-in-depth approach, from network and
end-point detection tools, to file security applications, use of strong
encryption for sensitive data, and consistent, capable, and resilient
back-up and recovery plans.
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Keith B. Alexander
Question 1. General Alexander, at a cybersecurity panel in December
2016, in regards to problems with retention in the Federal cyber
workforce, you were quoted as saying, ``I do hear that people are
increasingly leaving in large numbers and it is a combination of things
that start with morale and there's now much more money on the outside .
. . I am honestly surprised that some of these people in cyber
companies make up to seven figures. That's five times what the chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff makes. Right? And these are people that
are 32 years old . . . Do the math. [The NSA] has great competition.''
Several reasons have been cited for NSA and other cyber-related
employees leaving the Government sector. These include: Higher pay in
the private sector, low morale due to negative press coverage from
leaked information regarding Government surveillance and data-
collection capabilities, an overworked labor force which was described
by an unnamed former U.S. cyber official as ``20% of the workforce
doing 80% of the actual work,'' to name just a few of the issues. What
do you think are the biggest challenges facing the cybersecurity work
force at present?
Answer. I think you identified a number of the challenges facing
our Federal cybersecurity workforce, from higher pay on the outside,
morale challenges as a result of recent disclosures and debates in the
political arena, and a relatively severe lack of alignment in the
number of positions and actual work being done. These negative factors
are compounded when public officials ``attack'' the Government agencies
and its personnel who are protecting the country for political gain.
We need to do a better job of encouraging cross-training between
the public and private sectors by creating opportunities for people to
move in and out of Government, maintaining their security clearances,
and working to enhance both public and private-sector cybersecurity.
Likewise, the Government needs to learn how to work better, more
rapidly, and more flexibly with the most innovative companies in our
Nation today, including those in various innovation hubs around the
country.
This will not be easy, as the Government has real, legitimate
concerns about protecting National security information, particularly
as our companies become increasingly globalized. Until the Government
harnesses the knowledge and capabilities of our Nation's most
innovative thinkers, both by bringing them into the Government for
short periods, as well as by working with the companies they start (and
encouraging Government employees to do the same in the opposite
direction), I fear that we will remain slow to innovate and adapt.
Finally, we need to recognize those protecting our Nation are doing
what we asked them to do. We need to support them when the going gets
tough. We should hold them accountable when they make mistakes, but we
should clearly help them accomplish those missions we have asked them
to accomplish.
Question 2. Russia's cyber attack in December 2015 against
Ukraine's power grid is a concerning example of exposing weaknesses in
physical systems that are comnected to networks. What is in greater
danger of offensive cyber operations by our adversaries: Our cyber
networks themselves and the data stored in those networks, or physical
systems that are connected to and dependent upon those networks to
successfully operate?
Answer. Both the data stored in our computer systems and the
physical systems they are connected to are subject to major threat from
offensive cyber operations by our adversaries. American innovation
economy, information and intellectual property is often as (or more)
valuable than physical assets even though we do not often treat it as
such. We cannot deny the troubling trend of physical damage being
caused by cyber attacks. We need to act now to deter attacks that
target core American National security interests, including,
destructive cyber attacks, the massive theft of private-sector
intellectual property, and efforts to obtain long-term access to
critical infrastructure systems that might be exploited down the road.
Question 3a. In June 2015, I, along with millions of other Federal
employees, became the victim of a cyber attack, as my personal data was
hacked through the Office of Personnel Management. Putting this many
Government employees' personal information at risk should have never
happened.
What actions can we take to improve data encryption across all
Federal networks?
Answer. Certainly, encrypting such data provides a certain amount
of protection and there is no reason we ought not do so at scale.
Encouraging broad adoption requires highly capable tools and a well-
trained workforce with leadership willing to commit resources to the
effort. We have challenges in these areas across the Government.
Encryption is only one type of protection that we should employ.
When it comes to cybersecurity, Federal Government must become better
and faster. There are pockets of excellence when it comes to both cyber
offense and defense in the Federal Government and we should take
advantage of that knowledge, capability, and skill set when it comes to
protecting Federal systems.
In addition, the Government should leverage the best and brightest
in the private sector and be able to work with them rapidly to innovate
better defensive systems. The Government remains stuck in old paradigms
of how security clearances are utilized and old contracting and
requirements constructs when it comes to working with the private
sector. If we are ever going to be able to innovate rapidly enough to
keep up with the threats, we need to evolve to a much more modern
mentality in the Government.
Question 3b. Are we simply lacking encryption in certain areas or
is what we currently employ not good enough?
Answer. I do not think the issue is the lack of encryption
strength, but rather a lack of capable tools and willingness and
leadership to deploy such tools where they do exist. Moreover, though,
I am concerned that the lack of a strong working relationship day in
and day out between our most innovative Government agencies and our
most innovative private-sector entities is hampering the success of our
overall defensive effort as a Nation. We can and must do more here and
I stand ready to work with this committee to achieve this critical goal
for our Nation.
Also, we should consider outsourcing the IT infrastructure and
consolidating cybersecurity for the civilian side of Government.
Question 4. My colleague, Congressman Hurd, has proposed the
creation of a Cyber Defense National Guard. In August 2016, Congressman
Hurd suggested, ``The Federal Government could forgive the student loan
debt of STEM graduates who agreed to work for a specified number of
years in the Federal Government in cybersecurity jobs at places like
SSA or Department of the Interior. Furthermore, when those individuals
moved on to private-sector jobs they would commit 1 weekend a month and
2 weeks a year to continued Federal service. This would help ensure a
cross-pollination of experience between the private and public
sectors.'' What do you think of Congressman Hurd's proposal?
Answer. I think that the type of cross-pollination that Congressman
Hurd proposes is a sensible approach to consider, as the incentive in
this proposal would also provide more students to train in critical
STEM areas that would also be helpful to our National security
(including our economic security) in the long run. This would also
ensure a steady stream of exceptional personnel into the Government,
even if it is for a few years.
While there are important questions we must examine when it comes
to our fiscal situation, from a cybersecurity and National security
perspective, I am supportive of new and innovative ideas like those
proposed by Congressman Hurd and wish to continue to work with you,
Congressman Hurd, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and others
on this committee and across Congress to support and move forward such
good ideas.
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Michael Daniel
Question 1a. While the goal, for combatting cyber crime, is to make
it financially untenable to conduct illegal activities, what would the
corollary of this goal be for nation state actors?
Answer. Deterrence for all cyber criminals, including nation-state
actors, must start with increasing the cost to conduct an attack and
associated likelihood of success. This can only be accomplished by
disrupting the adversaries' business models. Although re-engineering
malware requires some time and effort, it is relatively easy to make
small tweaks so that it can evade detection. However, an adversaries'
total suite of indicators (including tactics, techniques, and
procedures, and typical operational approach) is much more difficult to
change and update. By exposing adversaries' predictable malicious
activity and enabling infrastructure, we can force adversaries, both
nation-state and other actors, to adapt their business model. Business
reengineering is a much more time-consuming and resource-intensive task
that more effective disrupts malicious activity better than any
technological solution.
Question 1b. How do we tip the scales so that it isn't worth it for
nation-state actors to break into our systems both in the private
sector and in the Government?
Answer. As stated above, deterring nation-state actors starts with
increasing their overall costs by upending their business model. We
need to start by removing known, low-level actors from the ecosystem by
disrupting known, preventable attacks. Removing low-level actors also
makes it harder for less sophisticated nation-states to enter into the
criminal arena. By lowering the noise, we can focus on the more
sophisticated nation-states and actors. The Cyber Threat Alliance has a
critical role to play in this disruption through their creation of
Playbooks that give visibility into adversaries' infrastructure, TTPs,
and business processes. By sharing information, CTA members can better
protect customers across the globe in all economic sectors.
However, I strongly believe that governments build on these private
sector-led technical disruption efforts with diplomacy, economic tools
(such as sanctions), law enforcement actions, intelligence activity,
and if necessary, military action in order for technical actions to be
effective.
Question 2a. At the hearing, we heard that we need to rethink how
the Government and private sector relate to one another on cyber
issues.
What are your recommendations for rethinking the relationship
between public and private sectors?
Answer. Public-private partnerships are necessary to tackle the
cyber challenge. While governments have unique tools to combat cyber
crime in the form of diplomacy and law enforcement, the development and
deployment of technological tools primarily fall to the private sector.
Therefore, the focus must be on public-private collaboration and
partnership, not just regulation or contracting. Effective
collaboration requires us to be more realistic about what governments
can and should be doing. Governments have a unique responsibility and
authority to take action beyond the technological defense of networks.
Defining roles and responsibilities for both private and public
stakeholders empowers both groups to be most effective in combatting
cyber adversaries.
Question 2b. How do we ensure the private and public sectors can
work together harmoniously, without overstepping the Government's role
or creating a new regulatory regime?
Answer. As discussed above, the Government can bring to bear
authorities and capabilities in diplomacy, law enforcement, and
intelligence, as well as technical defensive capabilities. These
capabilities should be used in conjunction with the capabilities for
rapid defensive action that the private sector can bring to bear. Given
its position in society, the Government must also play a role in
convening and promoting best practices that reduce cyber risk. An
example of such an initiative is the NIST-led process to build the
Cyber Security Framework. This example shows how the Government can
work with industry to identify best practices that are not mandatory.
Best practices developed in public-private collaboration will have
cross-sector applicability to achieve risk reduction across all
critical infrastructure sectors. Cybersecurity-related regulations also
have a place in certain industries, but such approaches should be used
sparingly and with maximum flexibility. Such regulations should be
risk-based and not compliance-focused. Compliance-based regulation has
the potential to divert an organization's resources from driving down
risk.
Question 2c. How can we ensure this much-needed and strengthened
collaboration is nimble enough to consider the evolving nature of cyber
threats and organizational needs?
Answer. Taking a risk-based approach is the solution to ensuring
that the public and private collaboration remain nimble and effective.
The NIST Framework development process and end result should serve as a
model for future efforts. The risk-based approach in the NIST Framework
ensures that all organizations, regardless of industry, size, maturity,
can adequately baseline, benchmark, and strengthen their cyber posture.
The flexibility of this approach empowers organizations to align
resources to drive down risk, versus spending resources to demonstrate
compliance.
Question 3a. How is the Federal Government engaging its
international partners and allies regarding cyber norms?
What should the Government do to more clearly define cyber norms?
Answer. The NIST development approach is not only a proven model
for domestic public-private collaboration, but also for broader
international engagement. In addition to this collaborative model,
muti-lateral efforts also have demonstrated success. This includes the
G7 increasingly promoting common values around internet freedom and
cybersecurity. Furthermore, bi-lateral agreements, such as President
Obama and President Xi defining appropriate and inappropriate use of
assets in the cyber space, are effective for working closely with key
individual nation.
Question 3b. How can the private sector engage in this work?
Answer. The private sector absolutely has a role in these efforts
to define cyber norms. The perspective of cybersecurity operators is
essential to ensuring that international cyber norms are appropriately
actionable, scalable, and applicable across the globe. To date, we've
seen private-sector input incorporated in a range of Track 1.5 and
Track 2 dialogues. These various efforts must be continued to ensure
harmonious collaboration between the public and private sectors.
Question 4a. You stated in your testimony that hacktivists,
criminals, and nation-states are moving to more destructive and
disruptive activities.
Why do you think this is happening?
Answer. In the simplest terms, because they can. Motivations differ
among groups, however. For criminal actors, money forms the prime
motivation, while hacktivists want to make a point publicly, and
nation-states want to either conduct espionage or hold other nations at
risk to achieve their foreign policy or national security goals. Each
of these groups are learning that more disruptive and destructive
activities have a higher likelihood of achieving their goal, and little
downside exists for moving to the more destructive techniques. In
addition, destruction and disruption is increasingly happening in mass
due to adversaries having increased access to open-source or low-cost
tools at their disposal. Finally, neither the public or private sector
is adequately deterring adversaries at a technical level. As discussed
in an above question, there must be a concerted effort to lower the
noise in the system by taking out low-level actors.
Question 4b. Where does this trend move in the future and do we
continue to see even more destructive and disruptive attacks?
Answer. Continued interconnectivity will continue to increase cyber
threats. We live in a digital age that promises incredible efficiencies
and productivity, but it also brings new challenges and potential
vulnerabilities that--left unchecked--threaten to undermine these very
benefits. As connectivity continues to increase, the cyber threat will
become broader, more frequent, and more dangerous. The growth in volume
of connective devices will make effective cyber defense even harder
from a sheer numbers perspective. This fact, paired with the fact that
the barriers to entry are low and the potential return on investment is
fairly high, means that malicious cyber activity is increasing
dramatically and will continue to grow for the foreseeable future.
Question 4c. How do we prepare for and defend against this trend?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Michael Daniel
Question 1. Russia's cyber attack in December 2015 against
Ukraine's power grid is a concerning example of exposing weaknesses in
physical systems that are connected to networks. What is in greater
danger of offensive cyber operations by our adversaries: Our cyber
networks themselves and the data stored in those networks, or physical
systems that are connected to and dependent upon those networks to
successfully operate?
Answer. A blanket statement cannot be made about whether network or
physical system assets are most vulnerable. Instead, we must conduct
risk assessments across all critical infrastructure assets by
evaluating potential cyber threats, vulnerabilities, and consequences.
This process will enable the Government and private sector to
prioritize resources in order to most efficiently and effectively
reduce risk. The risk assessment must consider and prioritize the need
to build trust where money is serviced and where critical services are
deployed.
Question 2a. In June 2015, I, along with millions of other Federal
employees, became the victim of a cyber attack, as my personal data was
hacked through the Office of Personnel Management. Putting this many
Government employees' personal information at risk should have never
happened.
What actions can we take to improve data encryption across all
Federal networks?
Answer. Improving the security of antiquated networks must be a
priority for the Government. However, encryption alone is not an
adequate solution to enhance network security. In fact, stronger
encryption would not have necessarily prevented the OPM breach, as the
hackers were able to obtain administrative privileges. Because they had
those credentials, they could operate as trusted insiders and by-pass
or turn off the encryption. Once intruders have access to legitimate
credentials, encryption is not usually a barrier.
Question 2b. Are we simply lacking encryption in certain areas or
is what we currently employ not good enough?
Answer. Strengthening encryption is only aspect of improved
security. Organizations need to employ a risk-based, holistic approach
to managing their cybersecurity that involves multiple methods for
frustrating the malicious actors. For example, organizations should
manage privileged access carefully, enable appropriate network
segmentation, and employ sophisticated detection capabilities to
protect their highest-value assets.
Question 3. My colleague, Congressman Hurd, has proposed the
creation of a Cyber Defense National Guard. In August 2016, Congressman
Hurd suggested, ``The Federal Government could forgive the student loan
debt of STEM graduates who agreed to work for a specified number of
years in the Federal Government in cybersecurity jobs at places like
SSA or Department of the Interior. Furthermore, when those individuals
moved on to private-sector jobs they would commit 1 weekend a month and
2 weeks a year to continued Federal service. This would help ensure a
cross-pollination of experience between the private and public
sectors.'' What do you think of Congressman Hurd's proposal?
Answer. There is certainly a need to encourage people to pursue
fields related to cybersecurity. Without reviewing the Congressman's
proposal in detail, this program sounds like an innovative idea to
strengthen and grow the cyber workforce. However, efforts to close the
cyber talent gap must be broader than just focused on attracting talent
to the Government. In additional to considering this specific proposal,
we should also review existing initiatives to determine how we can best
expand on programs already in place. Furthermore, neither the
Government nor private sector can ``hire out'' of this problem.
Instead, we must focus on evolving the workforce and enabling greater
automation. Energy should be focused on developing workforce strategies
that harness human intelligence, sophistication, and action.
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Frank J. Cilluffo
Question 1. While the goal, for combatting cyber crime, is to make
it financially untenable to conduct illegal activities, what would the
corollary of this goal be for nation-state actors?
How do we tip the scales so that it isn't worth it for nation-state
actors to break into our systems both in the private sector and in the
Government?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. At the hearing, we heard that we need to rethink how
the Government and private sector relate to one another on cyber
issues.
What are your recommendations for rethinking the relationship
between public and private sectors?
Question 2b. How do we ensure the private and public sectors can
work together harmoniously, without overstepping the Government's role
or creating a new regulatory regime?
Question 2c. How can we ensure this much-needed and strengthened
collaboration is nimble enough to consider the evolving nature of cyber
threats and organizational needs?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3a. In your testimony you noted that ``In Russia, the
forces of crime, business, and politics have long converged in a toxic
blend; and there is evidence of complicity between the Russian
government and cyber criminals and hackers.'' The recent DOJ indictment
of two Russian FSB officers also alluded to this government/security
service collaboration with cyber criminals. This blurring of the lines
makes attribution a much taller task.
Can you expand on why this is such a dangerous problem?
Question 3b. Are we seeing this in other countries?
Question 3c. What can the United States do to combat this?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. When discussing criminal enterprises you noted that the
gap between the capabilities of sophisticated cyber criminals and
nation-states is increasingly narrowing. You also noted the cross-
border interjurisdictional approach needed to take down Avalanche
criminal network. It seems like in light of the growth in the criminal
enterprise we should expect more threats in this area. How do we ensure
and support international collaboration to address these criminal
entities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Frank J. Cilluffo
Question 1. Russia's cyber attack in December 2015 against
Ukraine's power grid is a concerning example of exposing weaknesses in
physical systems that are connected to networks. What is in greater
danger of offensive cyber operations by our adversaries: Our cyber
networks themselves and the data stored in those networks, or physical
systems that are connected to and dependent upon those networks to
successfully operate?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. In June 2015, I, along with millions of other Federal
employees, became the victim of a cyber attack, as my personal data was
hacked through the Office of Personnel Management. Putting this many
Government employees' personal information at risk should have never
happened.
What actions can we take to improve data encryption across all
Federal networks?
Question 2b. Are we simply lacking encryption in certain areas or
is what we currently employ not good enough?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. My colleague, Congressman Hurd, has proposed the
creation of a Cyber Defense National Guard. In August 2016, Congressman
Hurd suggested, ``The Federal Government could forgive the student loan
debt of STEM graduates who agreed to work for a specified number of
years in the Federal Government in cybersecurity jobs at places like
SSA or Department of the Interior. Furthermore, when those individuals
moved on to private-sector jobs they would commit 1 weekend a month and
2 weeks a year to continued Federal service. This would help ensure a
cross-pollination of experience between the private and public
sectors.'' What do you think of Congressman Hurd's proposal?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman Michael T. McCaul for Bruce W. McConnell
Question 1. While the goal, for combatting cyber crime, is to make
it financially untenable to conduct illegal activities, what would the
corollary of this goal be for nation-state actors?
How do we tip the scales so that it isn't worth it for the nation-
state actors to break into our systems both in the private sector and
in the Government?
Answer. The conventional wisdom as articulated by the Department of
State and the White House is that we should employ all instruments of
National power to deter cyber attacks from nation-states. These
instruments include the traditional ``DIME'' four-some--diplomatic,
intelligence, military, and economic-- to which law enforcement is
usually added in the cyber context. We have seen that approach used
with some success to lead up to the agreement between Presidents Xi and
Obama regarding economic espionage conducted by cyber means.
However, we also know that deterrence in cyber space is quite
challenging, particularly for an advanced, connected economy like the
United States. We have much more to lose in a degraded cyber
environment than almost anyone else. Further, as the witnesses
testified, while cyber defense is important, today, and for the
foreseeable future, ``Offense Wins.'' For these reasons I advocated
that the United States begin to propose measures of restraint in the
development and use of cyber weapons. There is an emerging
international consensus that, for example, attacks on international
infrastructure such as core internet routers or key financial exchanges
and clearing houses, is detrimental to all nations and should be off-
limits. The United States, by virtue of its position as the world's
strongest cyber power, is in the best position to lead by example and
drive public advocacy for the adoption of such cyber norms of behavior.
Question 2a. At the hearing, we heard that we need to rethink how
the Government and private sector relate to one another on cyber
issues.
What are your recommendations for rethinking the relationship
between public and private sectors?
Question 2b. How do we ensure the private and public sectors can
work together harmoniously, without overstepping the Government's role
or creating a new regulatory regime?
Question 2c. How can we ensure this much-needed and strengthened
collaboration is nimble enough to consider the evolving nature of cyber
threats and organizational needs?
Answer. Strengthening agile public-private collaboration is a
continuing challenge. Recently-enacted laws, sponsored by this
committee, have created improved incentives for such collaboration. But
there is no silver bullet. The potential for conflicts of interest,
litigation and liability risk, and unintended consequences remains
large. Perhaps the best way forward is to increase the exchange of
people between Government and the private sector. With shared
experience, many seemingly intractable differences can be addressed
with creative, informal solutions that respect the policy and economic
environments of both sides.
As far as a new regulatory regime, in my view some additional
regulation will be needed, as illustrated recently by the State of New
York for financial services companies. This approach--having regulation
proposed and adopted by the expert regulatory agency, is preferable to
any across-the-board approach. Given the variable risks and business
models of different critical infrastructure sectors, one size will not
fit all.
Question 3. In your testimony you posed an interesting set of
questions related to the Internet of Things (IoT) or the Internet of
Everything (IoE), specifically: ``Why do we assume the bad guys will
own the sensor network? Why not have the good guys own it and use the
knowledge of what is happening on the internet to increase security?''
So, I have to ask you and our other witnesses, what are the key
elements of ensuring the good guys own the network and the data and
information derived?
Answer. Thank you. I believe there are three elements that would
increase the likelihood that the good guys own the network. First, the
endpoints need to be smarter and more secure, including the ability to
be modified or turned off remotely with appropriate authorization. The
technical standards community is working on this, but it could use a
push from Government. Second, the network service providers, such as
the Tier 1 Carriers, need the authority to see the network status
information that the devices provide and the authority to stop bad
traffic (as they do now with spam). There would need to be liability
protection and business model changes for this to be practical.
Finally, there need to be strong and enforceable privacy provisions in
statute so that any bad actors who may work for the good guy
organizations don't abuse the capabilities that the first two items
require.
Questions From Honorable Mike Gallagher for Bruce W. McConnell
Question 1. Russia's cyber attack in December 2015 against
Ukraine's power grid is a concerning example of exposing weaknesses in
physical systems that are connected to networks. What is in greater
danger of offensive cyber operations by our adversaries: Our networks
themselves and the data stored in those networks, or physical systems
that are connected to and dependent upon those networks to successfully
operate?
Answer. If one equates ``danger'' and ``risk,'' then one can
consider the three elements of risk: Threat, vulnerability, and
consequence. Threat, in turn, is comprised of capability and intent. So
the question is, which exhibits the larger combination of these risk
elements: The networks themselves or the physical systems connected to
them?
The table below reflects my current thinking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Risk Element                 Networks        Physical Systems
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Threat: Intent..................  Malicious actors    Malicious actors
may be less         may find the
interested in       possible visible
attacking the       consequences of
core networks       successful
because they        physical attacks
depend on them      more attractive
also.               than the less
visible results
of network
attacks.
Threat: Capability..............  Widespread          Knowledge of how
availability of     to attack
attack tools        physical systems
means that a well-  is not wide-
funded and          spread. The
persistent actor    systems are
can inflict         diverse and often
significant         peculiar.
damage, at least
for brief periods.
Vulnerability...................  Most critical       Physical systems
networks are        rely on older
highly defended,    software and
continually         hardware, and the
updated and         long replacement
patched, and        cycles mean these
monitored with a    systems are
24x7 dedicated      softer targets,
security culture.   at least once an
attacker has
learned how the
systems work.
Consequences....................  Since both the      Physical systems
networks            tend to be
themselves and      loosely
the physical        interconnected
systems depend on   and in some ways
the networks, the   locally managed.
consequences of     Thus a system-
major network       wide failure is
failures could be   less likely, at
catastrophic.       least in some
sectors. Regional
effects are more
likely. However,
service
restoration time
could be longer
as some scarce
components may
not be easily
replaceable.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Question 2a. In June 2015, I, along with millions of other Federal
employees became the victim of a cyber attack, as my personal data was
hacked through the Office of Personnel Management. Putting this many
Government employees' personal information at risk should have never
happened.
What actions can we take to improve data encryption across all
Federal networks?
Question 2b. Are we simply lacking encryption in certain areas or
is what we currently employ not good enough?
Answer. Strong encryption and strong (multi-factor) authentication
should be mandatory for systems as critical as the one you refer to.
One must select strong encryption and implement it uniformly and well.
The current Federal encryption standards provide strong enough
encryption for Unclassified systems. However, agency implementation is
likely to be non-uniform and, in some cases, technically incorrect. It
is by no means obvious that line agencies whose missions are not
cybersecurity could successfully implement such a policy, were it in
place. Recent proposals to centralize some aspects of cybersecurity
responsibility in a civilian agency have merit in this context.
Question 3. My colleague, Congressman Hurd, has proposed the
creation of a Cyber Defense National Guard. In August 2016, Congressman
Hurd suggested, ``The Federal Government could forgive the student loan
debt of STEM graduates who agreed to work for a specified number of
years in the Federal Government in cybersecurity jobs at places like
SSA or Department of the Interior. Furthermore, when those individuals
moved on to private-sector jobs they would commit 1 weekend a month or
2 weeks a year to continued Federal service. This would help ensure a
cross-pollination of experience between the private and public
sectors.'' What do you think of Congressman Hurd's proposal?
Answer. While serving at the Department of Homeland Security, I was
engaged in lengthy discussions along with the Department of Defense
about the possibilities of a cyber National Guard, a cyber reserves,
and a cyber volunteer corps of some sort. Each of these ideas has
advantages and disadvantages based on existing law and policy regarding
the use of civilian citizens to perform security duties, potential for
conflicts of interest, costs, etc. Perhaps this is an area that the
Congressional Research Service could be helpful in investigating.

[all]
