- MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF CYBER THREAT INFORMATION SHARING

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF CYBER THREAT INFORMATION SHARING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

29-472 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York                 Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas                     Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona              Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin            Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
John H. Rutherford, Florida
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Vacancy
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, Deputy Chief Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
John Katko, New York                 Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin            James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia     Val Butler Demings, Florida
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Kristen M. Duncan, Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable James R. Langevin, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Rhode Island:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     9

Witnesses

Mr. Robert K. Knake, Whitney Shepardson Senior Fellow, Council on
Foreign Relations, On Behalf of The Global Resilience
Institute:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Ms. Ann Barron-Dicamillo, Vice President, Cyber Intel & Incident
Response, American Express:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Ms. Patricia Cagliostro, Federal Solutions Architect Manager,
Anomali:
Oral Statement.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    24
Mr. Robert H. Mayer, Senior Vice President for Cybersecurity,
USTelecom Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    27
Prepared Statement.............................................    29

For the Record

The Honorable James R. Langevin, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Rhode Island:
Letter.........................................................     6

Appendix

Questions From Congressman James R. Langevin for Robert K. Knake.    47
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Ann Barron-
Dicamillo......................................................    48
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Patricia Cagliostro    49
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Robert H. Mayer...    50

MAXIMIZING THE VALUE OF CYBER THREAT INFORMATION SHARING

----------

Wednesday, November 15, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:47 p.m., in
room HVC-210, Capitol Visitor Center, Hon. John Ratcliffe
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Garrett, Fitzpatrick,
Donovan, Katko, Langevin, and Jackson Lee.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Committee on Homeland Security's
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order. The subcommittee is meeting today to
receive testimony regarding how to maximize the value of cyber
threat information sharing. I now recognize myself for an
opening statement.
The severity of the threats we face in cyber space can't be
overstated. Seemingly, every week there's a new headline about
a new breach, a new hack, or a new trove of sensitive
information that's been compromised. Or there's a new report
highlighting the vulnerabilities of our Government, the private
sector, and the American people face from malicious actors.
Those on the operational front of cybersecurity know the
threat landscape is evolving at every second. In cyber space,
it's nearly impossible to concisely declare who the threat
actor is, what they're going to do next, and what the cascading
effects may be.
The industry method is to prioritize, assess the risks that
networks face and prioritize actions to address those risks,
and then keep moving down the list. We in the Government must
learn from the private sector, assess risks, prioritize
mitigation, and keep moving.
As I've said before, whether we rise up to the challenges
in cyber space will play a large part in determining whether
America remains the world's superpower.
To effectively address these threats, I couldn't agree more
with the consensus opinion that the private sector and the
Government need to collaborate. I see a big part of our
collective responsibility being to ensure that this
collaboration results in not just rhetoric, but in a tangible
improvement in our country's cybersecurity posture.
What we're here today to examine is perhaps one of the most
readily visible and promising forms of this collaboration: The
sharing of cyber threat indicators between the private sector
and the Federal Government.
In an ecosystem where there is no silver bullet, it's
incumbent upon us to conduct rigorous oversight of our
information-sharing programs to help increase the participation
in and volume of cyber threat information shared with the
private sector.
The private sector is the front line for action in cyber
space. In supplying the private sector with an increasing
amount of actionable information, we enable our partners to
tilt the scales away from our cyber adversaries.
As a committee, we are continually seeking to learn about
possible ways that the Department can help to increase the
resilience of private-sector networks and fine-tune their own
efforts for the response, analysis, and mitigation of cyber
threats.
According to DHS, the Automated Indicator Sharing program
has shared over 1.3 million unique indicators, more than
264,000 shared in September alone. There are currently 135 non-
Federal entities participating in AIS, 22 of which are sector-
specific organizations comprised of groups of companies. DHS
estimates the actual reach of AIS indicators to be greater than
10,000 organizations.
As encouraging as it is to see these programs take shape
and fill the very important role of convening partners and
bridging information sharing from the Government to the private
sector, we can do better. A recent report from the DHS Office
of Inspector General reinforces this notion that there's more
work to be done.
Today I look forward to hearing insights and
recommendations from our witnesses that we can take back to DHS
to continue to strengthen its work sharing cyber threat
information. We are tasked with overseeing the crucial DHS
programs, knowing that improvements are always possible.
Each of you has a unique perspective that will provide
invaluable knowledge that we can build on as DHS continues to
refine its programs. We will need creative and possibly
significant changes to the way that we do things if we expect
to gain ground in this fight.
In a space this transformative and this disruptive, the
best option is continued partnership. As disparate as the
opinion of the private sector and the Government can be on many
issues, when it comes to security, we are all looking for able,
willing, and effective partners. The information technology
landscape is central to every sector of the economy and every
consumer and individual who depend on these systems.
The automation of cyber threat information and the
incorporation of Classified and Unclassified information are
areas the Government can work on in order to increase the
effectiveness of the information being provided to the private
sector.
It is for this reason that we have gathered this panel of
experts to talk to the efficacy of cyber threat information
sharing and improvements that can be made with it. We look
forward to hearing from the witnesses, their perspectives and
understanding of the current state of cyber threat information
sharing, and their vision and their recommendations for a safer
future.
Again, thanks to our witnesses for your willingness to
share your expertise with us today.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
November 15, 2017
The severity of the threats we face in cyber space cannot be
overstated. Seemingly every week there's a new headline about a new
breach, a new hack, or a new trove of sensitive information that's been
compromised. Or there's a new report highlighting the vulnerabilities
our Government, the private sector, and the American people face from
malicious actors.
Those on the operational front of cybersecurity know the threat
landscape is evolving at every second. In cyber space it is nearly
impossible to concisely declare who the threat actor is, what they are
going to do next, and what the cascading effects may be.
The industry method is to prioritize; assess the risks that
networks face and prioritize actions to address those risks, and then,
keep moving down the list. We in the Government must learn from the
private sector, assess risks, prioritize mitigation, and keep moving.
As I've said before--whether we rise up to our challenges in cyber
space will play a large part in determining whether America remains the
world's superpower.
To effectively address these threats, I couldn't agree more with
the consensus opinion that the private sector and Government need to
collaborate. I see a big part of our collective responsibility being to
ensure that this collaboration results in, not just rhetoric, but, in a
tangible improvement to our country's cybersecurity posture.
What we're here today to examine is perhaps one of the most readily
visible and promising forms of this collaboration--the sharing of cyber
threat indicators between the private sector and Federal Government.
In an ecosystem where there is no silver bullet, it's incumbent
upon us to conduct rigorous oversight of our information-sharing
programs to help increase the participation in and volume of cyber
threat information shared with the private sector.
The private sector is the front line for action in cyber space. In
supplying the private sector with an increasing amount of actionable
information, we enable our partners to tilt the scales away from our
cyber adversaries.
As a committee, we are continually seeking to learn about possible
ways that the Department can help to increase the resilience of
private-sector networks and fine-tune their own efforts for the
response, analysis, and mitigation of cyber threats. According to DHS,
the Automated Indicator Sharing program has shared over 1,335,036
unique indicators, 264,234 shared in September alone, and there are
currently 135 non-Federal entities participating in AIS, 22 of which
are sector-specific organizations comprised of groups of companies. DHS
estimates the actual reach of AIS indicators to be greater than 10,000
organizations.
As encouraging as it is to see these programs take shape and fill
the very important role of convening partners and bridging information
sharing from the Government to the private sector, we can do better. A
recent report from the DHS Office of Inspector General reinforces this
notion that there is more work to be done.
Today I look forward to hearing insights and recommendations from
our witnesses that we can take back to DHS to continue to strengthen
its work sharing cyber threat information. We are tasked with
overseeing the crucial DHS programs, knowing that improvements are
always possible. Each of you has a unique perspective that will provide
invaluable knowledge that we can build on as DHS continues to refine
its programs. We will need creative and possibly significant changes to
the way that we do things if we expect to gain ground in this fight.
In a space this transformative and this disruptive, the best option
is continued partnership. As disparate as the opinion of the private
sector and the Government can be on many issues, when it comes to
security, we are all looking for able, willing, and effective partners.
The information technology landscape is central to every sector of the
economy and every consumer and individual who depend on these systems.
The automation of cyber threat information and the incorporation of
Classified and Unclassified information are areas the Government can
work on in order to increase the effectiveness of the information being
provided to the private sector. It is for that reason that we have
gathered this panel of experts to talk to the efficacy of cyber threat
information sharing and improvements that can be made.
We look forward to hearing from the witnesses their perspective and
understanding of the current state of cyber threat information sharing
and their vision and recommendations for a safer future. Again, thank
you to our witnesses for your willingness to share your expertise.

Mr. Ratcliffe. I now recognize the Ranking Member, my
colleague and friend from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, for any
opening statement that he may have.
Mr. Langevin. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon to our witnesses.
I want to begin by thanking Chairman Ratcliffe for holding
today's hearing on cyber threat information sharing and his
leadership on this issue more broadly.
Two years ago, Congress passed the Cybersecurity Act of
2015 to remove barriers to fuller and faster cybersecurity
threat indicator sharing, both between Government and the
private sector and among private entities. This legislation was
the result of years of negotiation between experts from
industry, academia, private advocates, and security
professionals. At the time, there was broad consensus that we
were not sharing, analyzing, and integrating data around cyber
threats as well as we could be.
To answer this gap in our cybersecurity posture,
representatives from both sides of the aisle came together as
partners to deliver legislation that removed the legal hurdles
that prevented the free flow of threat indicators and to
provide liability protections to encourage sharing.
Today those barriers are gone. There are ironclad
authorizations for companies to share indicators within
industry and back and forth with the Federal Government. There
are liability protections to ensure that these actions do not
inadvertently put companies at risk. There are even protections
on the data themselves to ensure that they are not used for any
regulatory action by the Government.
The Cybersecurity Act of 2015 also created a channel for
the Government to better disseminate information that would
otherwise be Classified. By placing these signals amongst the
contributions from all participants, DHS can basically disguise
the original sources. During the period of October 2015 to
April 2017, the Department shared some 2,290 formerly
Classified cyber threat indicators through the Automated
Indicator Sharing program, or AIS.
However, despite these advancements, we have a long way to
go in operationalizing the law and policy that has been
developed. AIS is a good example--is a great example, I should
say. Barely more than 100 companies right now have elected to
join the program and contribute to the common threat picture, a
level of participation that is simply, quite frankly,
unacceptable.
Part of this is on the Department, as we have heard
numerous times before this committee that the indicators shared
by the Government are often late and lack important context.
But part of this also falls on industry. After all, with only
roughly 100 private-sector participants, it seems many people
knocking the data being shared by AIS haven't applied much
effort to analyzing the data. 2,290 formerly Classified threat
indicators, I believe, certainly count for something.
So that's why I'm grateful to Chairman Ratcliffe and
Ranking Member Richmond for continuing to study this issue. We
need to know what is and isn't working with the law and with
the Department's efforts. We also need to know what activities
are being enabled that weren't happening before passage of the
law and the iron-clad authorizations that I mentioned.
I've said many times that information sharing is not a
silver bullet. In fact, there is no such thing in
cybersecurity. But I do believe in its promise to help better
our cybersecurity posture, and we in Congress owe it to the
American people to ensure that we are meeting that potential.
So I will be interested in hearing from the witnesses what
we in Congress can do to improve the Department's efforts and
to improve uptake among private-sector participants.
Personally, I think that we may need some more assistance
from the Department in building a robust ecosystem around the
feed rather than just relying on it being out there. I hope the
Department looks to the financial sector's expertise, with
Soltra Edge for guidance. But I also hope that the private
sector, innovative as it is, applies some of the creativity to
the data coming out of DHS rather than waiting.
Finally, there are two related issues that I want to
mention briefly.
First, I believe that it will be extremely difficult for
the Department to make any lasting changes in its policies
without permanent political leadership in place. I hope the
administration moves swiftly to fill critical vacancies at the
National Protection and Programs Directorate. Cybersecurity is
a National priority, and the personnel decisions made by the
White House need to reflect that.
Second, a brief comment on the new Vulnerabilities Equities
Process, or the VEP charter that's released today. Now, I'm
grateful that the document continues the presumption of
disclosure and ensures a broad array of Government
stakeholders, including DHS, have a seat at the table when
discussing vulnerabilities.
I'm also pleased by the increased level of transparency
indicated by the publication of the charter in Unclassified
form and by the annual reports, including to Congress, that it
requires.
We owe the selfless Americans who serve their Nation as
members of the intelligence community an enormous debt of
gratitude, a debt that is far too infrequently acknowledged. As
Members of Congress, we also owe them rigorous oversight to
ensure that the tools they develop remain secure.
I believe that the VEP is an appropriate process for
selecting the very few vulnerabilities where disclosure will be
delayed. However, that process falls apart if the exploits
cannot be kept in Government hands, and Congress must do more
to ensure those safeguards are in place.
So, with that, I'd like to thank the witnesses for being
here today. I certainly look forward to discussing ways to
improve our collective cybersecurity with all of them.
Before I yield back, Mr. Chairman, I have a letter that I'd
like to submit for the record from the Electronic Privacy
Information Center on some of these topics as well.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Without objection, it will be admitted into
the record.
[The information follows:]
Letter Submitted For the Record From Honorable James R. Langevin
November 15, 2017.
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, Chairman,
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, Ranking Member,
U.S. House Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection, H2-176 Ford House
Office Building, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Richmond: We write to
you regarding the hearing on ``Maximizing the Value of Cyber Threat
Information Sharing.''\1\ EPIC is a public interest research center
established in 1994 to focus public attention on emerging privacy and
civil liberties issues.\2\ We are particularly interested in the
privacy issues raised by the government's cybersecurity policies that
implicate the collection and use of personal data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Maximizing the Value of Cyber Threat Information Sharing, 115th
Cong. (2017), H. Comm. on Homeland Security, Subcomm. on Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Protection (Nov. 15, 2017), https://
homeland.house.gov/hearing/maximizing-value-cyber-threat-information-
sharing/.
\2\ See About EPIC, EPIC.org, https://epic.org/epic/about.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the end of 2015, the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 was signed into
law.\3\ Title of I of that act, known as the Cybersecurity Information
Sharing Act of 2015 (CISA), created a mechanism for the Federal
Government to disseminate cyber threat information to the private
sector and for the private sector to provide cyber threat information
to the Federal Government.\4\ Much of that information concerns the
activities of individual Internet users.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016, Public Law 114-113,
December 18, 2015, 129 Stat 2242, 6 U.S.C. 1501-1510.
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA and earlier bills, such as the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and
Protection Act (CISPA), were criticized for the potential to compromise
American's privacy.\5\ With passage of the Cybersecurity Act of 2015,
the risk to privacy still remains.\6\ The bill relies on a complex
procedure to ``scrub'' identifying information from the computer logs
that are turned over by private firms to the Federal Government. This
information is explicitly acquired without the privacy safeguards that
would otherwise apply under the Federal wiretap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Jeramie D. Scott, Cybersecurity: the view from Washington,
Daily Journal (Jan. 28, 2015), available at https://epic.org/epic/
jeramie-scott-cybersecurity-oped.pdf; Wired staff, CISA Security Bill
Passes Senate With Privacy Flaws Unfixed, Wired (Oct. 27, 2015),
https://www.wired.com/2015/10/cisa-cybersecurity-information-sharing-
act-passes-senate-vote-with-privacy-flaws/; Danny Weitzner, The New US
Cybersecurity Bill Will Invade Your Privacy, But It Won't Keep You
Safe, Quartz (Nov. 8, 2015), https://qz.com/543692/americans-should-
probably be-more-freaked-out-about-that-new-cybersecurity-bill/.
\6\ See Taylor Armerding, Information Sharing Bill Passes, But
Privacy Debate Goes On, CSO (Jan. 14, 2016), https://www.csoonline.com/
article/3021907/security/information-sharing-bill-passes-but-privacy-
debate-goes-on.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effective oversight of the government's collection and use of
personal data is particularly important in the realm of cybersecurity
where it is easy to obtain vast troves of personal information with
little accountability. The history of the U.S. government's
surveillance of domestic communications in collaboration with private
companies \7\ makes it imperative that Congress ensure that CISA
safeguards Americans' privacy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ EPIC, EPIC v. Hemisphere, https://epic.org/foia/dea/
hemisphere/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We urge you to ask detailed questions about the dissemination of
information from companies to the government, including:
1. What personal information is disseminated to the government in
the context of providing cyber threat information?
2. What processes do you use to mitigate the privacy risks before
providing cyber threat information to the government?
3. What are the privacy risks with the current mechanism to provide
cyber threat information to the government?
4. What more could be done to safeguard the personal data of
Americans?
We ask that this letter be entered in the hearing record. EPIC
looks forward to working with the Subcommittee on these issues of vital
importance to the American public.
Sincerely,
Marc Rotenberg,
EPIC President.
Caitriona Fitzgerald,
EPIC Policy Director.
Jeramie Scott,
EPIC National Security Counsel.

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The statement of Hon. Langevin follows:]
Statement of Honorable James R. Langevin
November 15, 2017
Two years ago, Congress passed the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 to
remove barriers to fuller and faster cybersecurity threat indicator
sharing both between Government and the private sector and among
private entities.
This legislation was the result of years of negotiation between
experts from industry, academia, privacy advocates, and security
professionals. At the time, there was broad consensus that we were not
sharing, analyzing, and integrating data around cyber threats as well
as we could be.
To answer this gap in our cybersecurity posture, Representatives
from both sides of the aisle came together as partners to deliver
legislation that removed the legal hurdles that prevented the free flow
of threat indicators and to provide liability protections to encourage
sharing.
Today, those barriers are gone. There are iron-clad authorizations
for companies to share indicators within industry and back and forth
with the Federal Government. There are liability protections to ensure
that these actions do not inadvertently put companies at risk. There
are even protections on the data themselves to ensure that they are not
used for any regulatory action by the Government.
The Cybersecurity Act of 2015 also created a channel for the
Government to better disseminate information that would otherwise be
Classified. By placing these signals amongst the contributions from all
participants, DHS can disguise the original sources. During the period
of October 2015 to April 2017, the Department has shared 2,290 formerly
Classified cyber threat indicators through the Automated Indicator
Sharing program, or AIS.
However, despite these advancements, we have a long way to go in
operationalizing the law and policy that has been developed.
Barely more than 100 companies have elected to join the program and
contribute to the common threat picture, a level of participation that
is simply unacceptable.
Part of this is on the Department, as we have heard numerous times
before this committee that the indicators shared by the Government are
often late and lack important context.
But part of this also falls to industry--after all, with only
roughly 100 private-sector participants, it seems many people knocking
the data being shared by AIS haven't applied much effort to analyzing
the data. Two-thousand two hundred formerly Classified threat
indicators certainly count for something.
That is why I am grateful to Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member
Richmond for continuing to study this issue. We need to know what is
and isn't working with the law and with the Department's efforts. We
also need to know what activities are being enabled that weren't
happening before passage of the law and the iron-clad authorizations I
mentioned.
I have said many times that information sharing is not a silver
bullet--in fact, there is no such thing in cybersecurity. But I do
believe in its promise to help better our cybersecurity posture, and we
in Congress owe it to the American people to ensure we are meeting that
potential.
So I will be interested in hearing from the witnesses what we in
Congress can do to improve the Department's efforts and to improve
uptake among private-sector participants.
Personally, I think that we may need some more assistance from the
Department in building a robust ecosystem around the feed--rather than
just relying on it being out there--and I hope the Department looks to
the Financial Sector's experience with Soltra Edge for guidance.
But I also hope that the private sector, innovative as it is,
applies some of the creativity to the data coming out of DHS rather
than waiting.
Finally, there are two related issues that I want to mention
briefly.
First, I believe it will be extremely difficult for the Department
to make any lasting changes in its policies without permanent political
leadership in place, and I hope the administration moves swiftly to
fill critical vacancies at the National Protection and Programs
Directorate. Cybersecurity is a National priority, and the personnel
decisions made by the White House need to reflect that.
Second, a brief comment on the new Vulnerabilities Equities Process
(VEP) Charter released today. I am grateful that the document continues
the presumption of disclosure and ensures a broad array of Government
stakeholders, including DHS, have a seat at the table when discussing
vulnerabilities. I am also pleased by the increased level of
transparency indicated by the publication of the Charter in
Unclassified form and by the annual reports, including to Congress, it
requires.
We owe the selfless Americans who serve their Nation as members of
the intelligence community an enormous debt of gratitude, a debt that
is far too infrequently acknowledged. As Members of Congress, we also
owe them rigorous oversight to ensure the tools they develop remain
secure. I believe that the VEP is an appropriate process for selecting
the very few vulnerabilities where disclosure will be delayed. However,
that process falls apart if the exploits cannot be kept in Government
hands, and Congress must do more to ensure those safeguards are in
place.
With that, I would like to thank the witnesses for being here
today, and I look forward to discussing way to improve our collective
cybersecurity with them.

Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statements of Ranking Member Thompson and Honorable
Jackson Lee follow:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
November 15, 2017
When this committee was formed, the Nation was still reeling from
the September 11, 2001, attacks, and the difficult reality that there
were significant information-sharing gaps between our intelligence
services and law enforcement.
In the months the followed 9/11, the Bush White House warned of
``invisible enemies that can strike with a wide variety of weapons''
and urged the Congress to stand up a consolidated Department of
Homeland Security to protect against the known threats of the day and
the unknown threats of the future.
Fifteen years later, the threat landscape has changed dramatically.
The ``invisible enemies'' we face are hackers hiding in plain sight,
casing our networks to figure out how to penetrate deeper, steal data,
and manipulate networked systems. Fortunately, we do not need to
relearn the lessons that 9/11 taught us.
We know that information sharing--in this case, among the public
and private sector--can help mitigate or even prevent cyber intrusions.
And the Cybersecurity Act of 2015 put in place the mechanisms necessary
to facilitate and incentivize robust information sharing. That said,
the more things change, the more they stay the same.
After 9/11, we had to overcome an initial reluctance among the
intelligence community and law enforcement to liberally share threat
information with other agencies that needed to know.
Among other things, information sharing struggled to overcome
challenges related to turf wars, fear of reputational damage, and
balancing the need to protect information and the need to share it so
law enforcement would be able to act.
Similarly, today DHS is struggling to incentivize private-sector
participation in its cyber threat information-sharing platforms,
despite Congress acquiescing to demands for strong liability
protections.
We hear from stakeholders that the information shared is not
actionable, that too much of the information necessary to make
indicators actionable is Classified, and that there is a lack of
confidence in the validity of some indicators because of a lack of
adequate vetting.
These are all issues that Federal, State, and local law enforcement
had to overcome in the years following 9/11, and, with the help of
Congress and DHS, they have made tremendous progress.
I have every confidence that the same will be true for cyber threat
information sharing.
That said, I am concerned that we continue to hear the same pattern
of criticisms over DHS cyber threat information products, and I will be
interested to know how DHS solicits and incorporates feedback into its
programs, from Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) to the Cyber
Information Sharing and Collaboration Program.
I also look forward to hearing from witnesses how DHS can attract
better participation non-Federal network owners and operators, who
control 80 percent of our Nation's networks.
I have heard some concerns that potential participants are holding
out until DHS's programs prove greater value, but I would caution that
DHS's voluntary programs are only as good as the participants make
them. If the private sector refuses to participate in two-way
information sharing, DHS's are doomed to fail.
______

Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
November 15, 2017
Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Richmond, thank you for
convening today's hearing of the Homeland Security Committee
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Protection on the topic
of ``Maximizing the Value of Cyber Threat Information Sharing.''
Today's hearing will give Members an opportunity to hear from
stakeholders to learn their perspectives on the Department of Homeland
Security's (DHS) execution of its cyber threat information-sharing
responsibilities as established by the Cybersecurity Act of 2015.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses:

Anne Barron-DiCamillo, vice president, cyber threat
intelligence and incident response, American Express;

Trish Cagliostro, Federal solutions architect manager,
Anomali;

Robert Knake, senior research scientist, Northeastern
University Global Resilience Institute; and

Robert Mayer, senior vice president, cybersecurity, US
Telecom Association (Democratic witness).
Today presents an important opportunity to engage stakeholders on
private-sector reluctance to participate in DHS's Automated Indicator
Sharing (AIS), and how DHS can improve confidence in its cyber threat
information work that is being shared with private industry.
The information shared is only as good as the level of trust that
is put on it by the intended audience.
We need to understand how the cybersecurity work of DHS is
perceived.
Over the past year, Russian actors targeted U.S. election
infrastructure, hackers escalated efforts to breach the domestic energy
sector, and WannaCry and NotPetya ransomware wreaked havoc on public
and private infrastructure around the world.
According to Symantec, ``The world of cyber espionage experienced a
notable shift toward more overt activity, designed to destabilize and
disrupt targeted organizations and countries.''
Protecting against these growing cyber threats will require public
and private-sector entities to share cyber threat and incident
information that is timely and actionable.
dhs cyber assets
The NPPD Office of Cybersecurity & Communications (CS&C),
specifically the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center (NCCIC), carries out the bulk of the DHS responsibility of
facilitating the sharing of cyber threat information.
Although DHS is authorized to deploy a range of tools, resources,
and programs to carry out its cyber mission, it has limited authority
to regulate privately-owned networks and cannot require private
entities to adopt specific security measures, grant access to their
systems, or share information.
Instead, the success of DHS efforts relies on voluntary
participation from the private sector.
DHS voluntary cyber threat information-sharing programs include:

Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP);

Enhanced Cybersecurity Services (ECS); and

Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS).
DHS must be prepared to collect analysis and deliver actionable
information that is relevant to the industry or entity who is the
intended audience.
The bulk of our Nation's critical infrastructure is owned and
controlled by the private sector.
The partnership to protect the electric grid, water systems, mass
transit systems, and the telecommunication networks must be a
partnership that works well for the private and public sector.
Earlier this year, the full Homeland Security Committee marked up
H.R. 3202, the Cyber Vulnerability Disclosure Reporting Act.
This bill seeks a report on the Department of Homeland Security's
policies and procedures for coordinating cyber vulnerability
disclosures such as Zero Day Events with private-sector partners.
The Jackson Lee cybersecurity information-sharing bill requires the
Secretary of Homeland Security to submit a report on the policies and
procedures developed for coordinating cyber vulnerability disclosures.
The report will include an annex with information on instances in
which cybersecurity vulnerability disclosure policies and procedures
were used to disclose details on identified weaknesses in computing
systems or digital devices at risk.
The report also provides information on the degree to which the
information provided by DHS was used by industry and other
stakeholders.
The report may also contain a description of how the Secretary of
Homeland Security is working with other Federal entities and critical
infrastructure owners and operators to prevent, detect, and mitigate
cyber vulnerabilities.
The reason that I worked to bring this bill before the committee is
the problem often referred to as a ``Zero Day Event,'' that describes
the situation that network security professionals may find themselves
when a previously-unknown error in computing code is exploited by a
cyber criminal or terrorist.
The term ``Zero Day Event'' simply means that there is zero time to
prepare a defense against a cyber attack.
Cyber attacks that target computer networks or computing devices
primarily focus upon exploiting errors in computing code.
If the defect in software is discovered by network engineers and
software development companies can work to develop a ``patch'' to fix
the problem before it can be exploited by those who may seek to do
harm.
Because vulnerabilities can be used by adversaries it is important
that this sensitive information be managed securely so details are not
routinely made available neither to the public nor to Congress.
This bill will provide the committee with the opportunity to
understand the process and procedures used by the Department of
Homeland Security and the benefit these disclosures may have for
private-sector entities participating in programs in support of
cybersecurity.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses.
Thank you.

Mr. Ratcliffe. We are very pleased to have a very
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
important topic.
Mr. Robert Knake is the Whitney Shepardson senior fellow at
the Council on Foreign Relations and is testifying today on
behalf of the Global Resilience Institute.
Welcome to the committee, Mr. Knake.
Ms. Ann Barron-Dicamillo is the vice president of cyber
intel & incident response at American Express.
We're glad to have you with us today as well.
Ms. Patricia Cagliostro is the Federal solutions architect
manager at Anomali.
Thanks for agreeing to testify today.
Finally, Mr. Robert Mayer is the senior vice president for
cybersecurity at the USTelecom Association.
Mr. Mayer, welcome to you as well.
I'd now ask the witnesses to stand and raise your right
hand so I can swear you in to testify.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. The witnesses' full written statements will
appear in the record.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Knake for 5 minutes for his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT K. KNAKE, WHITNEY SHEPARDSON SENIOR FELLOW,
COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, ON BEHALF OF THE GLOBAL
RESILIENCE INSTITUTE

Mr. Knake. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe. Thank you,
Ranking Member Langevin, and distinguished Members of the
committee.
I want to start out by saying that I think we've made
tremendous progress on this issue over the last 5 years in
particular. I would recognize the Cyber Information Sharing Act
of 2015 as really having cleared the underbrush on
cybersecurity information sharing. There really should no
longer be any reason why a company says they cannot legally
share information.
So I think we've done that. I'm proud to have supported
that work when I was working in the Obama administration, and
had always a very good relationship with your committee and
your staff members.
Now I think the question is not how do we get rid of
disincentives, but how do we incentivize sharing and how do we
put in place the mechanisms we need to make information sharing
possible?
I'd focus on two areas. The first is I think that we've
already done almost everything we can to declassify information
for information sharing. I think Classified information exists
for a reason. It needs to be protected. Yet at the same time,
many private-sector companies that operate critical
infrastructure need that information.
So the only way that we can solve that problem is if we
extend Classified connectivity for information sharing to
critical infrastructure companies. That would, I think, be a
very significant move that also has strong precedent. The
Department of Defense has operated something called the Defense
Industrial Base Network now since 2008. They've shown that it
is possible to share Classified information with private
companies for their own defense.
I think what we need to do on this topic is to create
something that I'll call CInet, or Critical Information
Network, with a Classified component and share that with, I
would say, the section 9 companies under Executive Order 13636
to start. Those companies, I think, have been recognized as
facing a severe threat from our Nation's adversaries and they
need to be brought into that Classified network.
So I think we could do that under existing authorities that
Congress has granted to the Secretary of Homeland Security and
that the President has already extended to the Secretary. I
think that is entirely possible and achievable. I'd recommend
that we proceed with a pilot effort in that regard. I think it
could be done for a limited amount of money and under existing
authorities.
The second topic that I'll touch on just briefly is the
need for what people call a NTSB for cybersecurity, a National
Transportation Safety Board for cybersecurity. This is the idea
that when a plane crashes, investigators show up and they
immediately try and find, why did a plane go down, why did a
train derail?
In cybersecurity, we need that. When an incident happens,
what everybody wants to know is why did it happen and what can
they do to protect themselves, were they affected by the same
incident, were they targeted by the same adversaries? We have
no mechanism to do that now other than leaks and media reports
and rumor, innuendo, and surmise.
From my perspective, the appropriate way to do this is not
to take this NTSB analogy too far. That's a Government mandate.
That's a regulated program. Rather, what I'd like to see is a
voluntary effort that is possibly advocated for or created by
DHS, but led with the private sector, that I think is backed by
insurance, where you would get the equivalent of an insurance
discount if you agree to have investigators come in, figure out
what went wrong, and share that information, possibly
anonymously, with the rest of the sector.
I think if we had that kind of setup and that pre-
commitment to engaging in this way, we'd be able to get the
most valuable information out of a company that's been targeted
by these adversaries. If you were able to do that, I think you
would address one of the hardest problems in information
sharing, which is the fact that if you have been targeted,
sharing information about that doesn't help you, it helps
everybody else. It's a tragedy of the commons. I think a
program like that would overcome those hurdles.
So I'll stop there. Thank you for the invitation today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Knake follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert K. Knake
November 15, 2017
introduction
Thank you Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members
of the committee for the opportunity to testify on this important
matter. While much work remains to be done, I believe it is important
to start by noting that much has been accomplished. Information sharing
has been the focus of the cybersecurity community for the better part
of a decade and has enjoyed bipartisan support.
When I was director for cybersecurity policy at the National
Security Council from 2011 to 2015, I had a productive bipartisan
working relationship with Congress that resulted in several successful
pieces of legislation. Important with respect to the topic of today's
hearing, was the passage of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
of 2015 that succeeded in resolving many of the reasons private
companies believed they were unable to participate in cybersecurity
information sharing. By explicitly offering liability protections and
other safeguards, CISA has removed major barriers to information
sharing.
The primary challenges that remains are creating meaningful
incentives whereby the sharing of cyber threat information has real
value for network defenders and providing a secure operational
environment for allowing the most sensitive information to be shared.
In my testimony today, I will focus on two areas that I believe deserve
the committee's attention: (1) The need for a secure network for
Classified information sharing, collaboration, and operations for use
by critical infrastructure; and 2) the need for a mechanism to quickly
investigate and share information on the causes of cyber incidents.
developing a secure network for classified information sharing,
collaboration, and operations
Through programs like Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) and the
Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP), the
Department of Homeland Security is fulfilling its mandate to broadly
share information the Government has with private companies and State,
local, territorial, and Tribal governments that need it to protect
themselves. When combined with vendor products and private-sector
collaboration through Information Sharing and Analysis Centers,
Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations, and efforts such as the
Cyber Threat Alliance, these programs meet the needs of most companies.
Yet, Government policy recognizes that a small set of private
companies that operate the Nation's critical infrastructure are under
near-constant threat from sophisticated actors. These ``Section 9
list'' companies (those identified pursuant to Section 9 of Executive
Order 13636), require the ability to communicate with the Government
over Classified channels in order to protect the Nation's critical
infrastructure from our adversaries.
Solutions to the problem of Classified information sharing to date
have been partial at best. Federal agencies continue to try and
declassify or ``tearline'' more cyber threat information, separating
out actionable threat information from intelligence. Federal agencies
are also routinely providing Classified in-person briefings to cleared
individuals in the private sector.
These measures can never fully address the challenge of providing
detailed and timely information to key infrastructure owners and
operators. Given the clear and present on-going threat of cyber
attacks, Section 9 companies must be able to receive Classified threat
information in real time and to be able to coordinate securely with
Government and other private companies on network defense. What they
need is a Classified network for sharing critical infrastructure
information. In addition to information sharing on cyber threats, I
believe that such a network could address two other challenges.
President Eisenhower famously said, ``If a problem cannot be
solved, enlarge it.'' There is a tendency to view the idea of a
Classified network for critical infrastructure as too costly and
difficult to manage for the value it would provide. As one Government
leader who considered the topic asked, ``is the juice worth the
squeeze?'' My answer to that is an emphatic yes. The Government owes it
to its partners in the private sector to provide them the detailed and
timely intelligence that they need to protect themselves and this
cannot be done in Unclassified form; Providing a Classified network for
Section 9 companies would help to ensure a higher degree of assurance
for critical infrastructure operations and provide a necessary fall-
back communications system in the event that the public internet is
disrupted. Given the on-going threat and the significant economic and
security consequences associated with disrupting the Nation's critical
infrastructure, there is ample justification to develop a new network.
Sharing Classified Information and Threat Collaboration
When the Government has information that private companies need to
protect themselves, it has an obligation to provide that information. A
duty to warn exists as one of the rationales for the collection of
intelligence and is embedded in the authorities granted to the
Department of Homeland Security at its creation. To this end, the
intelligence community, the FBI, and DHS deserve credit for initiating
a program in 2013 to provide notification to private companies if they
were the victim or target of malicious cyber activities. Government
notification is now one of the leading ways that companies discover
cyber incidents.
Through this program and related efforts, the Government has
wrestled with the challenge of sharing Classified information with
private companies. De-classification remains a slow and cumbersome
process in large part because there is, in most cases, a good reason
that Classified information should not be put into the public realm.
When information cannot be declassified, Government agencies have
attempted to address the challenge in two ways. Through in-person
briefings, they convey information to cleared personnel at relevant
companies. These briefings are valuable for raising awareness but are
not useful for operational purposes. The Enhanced Cybersecurity
Services (ECS) program attempted to address the operational challenges
associated with Classified information by deploying Classified
signatures to managed security service providers that could be used to
block attacks. ECS, based on a successful pilot effort within the
Defense Industrial Base (DIB), is certainly part of an overall
solution.
What ECS does not provide is context and multi-party communication.
A signature alone is not sufficient to protect companies. Organizations
under threat from the Nation's adversaries need to understand who is
targeting them, why they are being targeted, how to protect themselves
against the threat, and what threat actors may do next.
The Department of Defense has largely solved this problem for DIB
companies. DoD successfully piloted and moved into production the
Defense Industrial Base Network (DIBnet), a Classified network for
communicating with DIB companies. The network is used both to share
Classified information on threats and to securely convene to coordinate
incident response. For DIB companies, DoD has shown the importance of
being able to deploy both Classified indicators and to communicate the
context around threats. The DIBnet concept should be extended by the
Department of Homeland Security to other critical infrastructure
sectors.
Several colleagues of mine and I worked with the Intelligence and
National Security Alliance (INSA) to develop a proposal for creating a
Classified network for sharing Classified information and threat
collaboration for the financial services industry based on DIBnet. I
have included the paper, ``FINnet: A Proposal to Enhance the Financial
Sector's Participation in Classified Cyber Threat Information Sharing''
for the record.
In the paper, we argue that the authority to establish a Classified
network for critical infrastructure is already vested in the President
and the Secretary of Homeland Security. Executive Order 13691 of
February 13, 2015 ``Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity Information
Sharing'' gave the Secretary of Homeland Security the necessary
authority to establish a Classified network for critical infrastructure
companies. That order also directed the updating of the National
Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (known as ``the NISPOM'')
to better accommodate the needs of private companies that are not part
of the Defense Industrial Base. Congress followed this action by
charging the Federal Government with developing mechanisms to allow for
``the timely sharing of Classified cyber threat indicators and
defensive measures in the possession of the Federal Government with
representatives of relevant Federal entities and non-Federal entities
that have appropriate security clearances . . . '' as part of CISA.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 6 USC 1502.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We believe that DHS, Treasury, FBI, and Secret Service should work
together to pilot the FINnet concept with a small number of financial
services firms that have mature security organizations and are willing
participants. Companies from other sectors could also be brought into
the pilot. This pilot should be launched right away and initially
operate at the Secret level, using secure phones, laptops, and
encryption cards to communicate securely over the public network
infrastructure. If the pilot is successful, it could be migrated to
dedicated network infrastructure that would provide higher degrees of
assurance.
Crucial to the success of the DIBnet is that it is backed by the
Defense Cyber Crime Center (DC3). DC3 provides companies connected
through the DIBnet with ``analytic support, incident response,
mitigation and remediation strategies, malware analysis, and other
cybersecurity best practices to participating companies.''\2\ In short,
DC3 takes a customer service approach to the DIB. It fosters
information sharing among participating companies by providing valuable
services when companies share information with it. Such an approach is
critical to replicating the success of the DIBNet for other sectors.
Each sector needs a Government partner with a deep understanding of its
sector, strong relationships with members of the sector, and the
ability to provide value back to participating companies when they
share information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Department of
Homeland Security, Department of Defense, and Department of Justice,
``Sharing of Cyber Threat Indicators and Defensive Measures by the
Federal Government Under the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of
2015,'' February 16, 2016, page 8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Protecting Critical Infrastructure Operations
The second challenge that such a network should address is the
protection of critical infrastructure operations. As critical
infrastructure grows more dependent on information technology,
particularly given the growth of the so-called ``Internet of Things'',
companies are connecting their operational technology to the public
internet. While it is economical to use the public internet for this
purpose, the risk that critical infrastructure could be disrupted
through a cyber attack highlights the need for higher levels of
assurance provided by a separate network. As the National
Infrastructure Advisory Council (NIAC) concluded in its latest report,
``Industrial control systems connected to business IT systems and the
Internet constitute a systemic cyber risk among critical
infrastructure.''\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/niac-
securing-cyber-assets-final-report-508.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NIAC report recommends the establishment of ``separate, secure
communications networks specifically designated for the most critical
cyber networks, including `dark fiber' networks for critical control
system . . . ''. The NIAC called for a pilot project to identify dark
fiber that could be used for the network and test whether critical
infrastructure could be operated if separated from the public network.
Some utilities have already begun to migrate their operations to
dedicated networks that they own instead of continuing to use the
public internet. Piloting this concept is well warranted given the
threats our connected infrastructure faces.
Coordinating Network Restoration
The third problem that such a network could address would be
coordinating network restoration in the event of an attack that
destabilizes the public internet. While the internet has grown
increasingly robust, it is not immune from disruptive cyber attacks.
Some botnets have grown so large that a distributed denial-of-service
attack could take down portions of the network. They have become so
sophisticated that it can be difficult for network operators to
separate the signal from the noise and filter out the attacks.
In the period after 9/11, the Bush administration recognized the
need to have a backup, redundant communications system to coordinate
network restoration in the event of an internet outage. The Critical
Infrastructure Warning Information Network (CIWIN) was created with two
purposes: It would serve on a daily basis to provide information on
threats to critical infrastructure and provide a back-up communications
capability in the event of an internet outage.
CIWIN ran over the internet's physical infrastructure but on
dedicated circuits that would allow users to continue to communicate as
long as the core routing infrastructure was still operational. In the
face of budget cuts, the Department of Homeland Security canceled the
program in 2013. The system had not been routinely exercised and no
information was flowing over it.
The need for such a system remains. The problem with CIWIN was that
the information that was shared over it was Unclassified and could also
be shared over the public internet so it was essentially a redundant
network that would only be used if the public internet was compromised.
However, the need to routinely share Classified information would mean
the network would be used on a daily basis as part of operations.
Business needs will dictate use of the most expedient medium for
sharing information. Absent the presence of Classified information that
cannot legally be shared on enterprise networks, operators will
routinely fall back to sharing over Unclassified email, phone, and
other systems.
Taken together, I believe that the need to share Classified threat
information, the need to provide higher levels of assurance for
critical infrastructure operations, and the need for a redundant
communications system in the event of an internet outage amply
justifies the development of a dedicated secure network.
creating a ``national transportation safety board'' for cyber incidents
Over the last decade, cybersecurity professionals have recognized
that, try as they might, incidents will still occur. The concept of
``cyber resilience'' is emerging to capture the idea that, while we may
not be able to stop all harms from occurring in cyber space, we can
rapidly respond, recover, and adapt, becoming stronger than we were
before. Achieving resilience, however, is not something any individual
organization can do alone. Instead, it requires a collective effort so
that the lessons learned from an individual incident at a company are
widely disseminated and countermeasures implemented.
While a small number of defense contractors and financial services
firms have recognized that sharing this kind of information is vital
and, if done in the proper context, does not introduce risk to the
firm, most companies fear the downside of sharing and see no potential
upside. Companies fear that sharing information about a breach, even if
it did not result in the loss of any data, will cause a public
relations nightmare and result in a loss of stock value. It could lead
to the firing of the CISO and even CEO. Even if these concerns were
addressed, that would simply mean that there is limited downside. It
would not mean that there is an upside or any kind of positive
incentive to share this information. After all, sharing this kind of
information does not directly help the company that has been breached;
it only helps other companies detect or prevent a breach. Simply put,
the challenge for information sharing is that the last thing a company
that has experienced a breach wants to do is tell anybody else that it
happened, let alone how it happened. Yet, it is in the National
security interest that they do so as soon as possible.
To address this problem, many in the security community have long
advocated for the equivalent of the National Transportation Safety
Board (NTSB). When a plane crashes or a train derails, NTSB shows up on
the scene to investigate. The goal of NTSB is not to assign blame but
to figure out what went wrong and to rapidly develop recommendations to
prevent an incident like that from ever happening again. This
information and those recommendations are rapidly shared with other
airlines who quickly work to implement them. Such a virtuous cycle is
what we need in cyber.
The challenge is that a plane crash is a public event and a cyber
incident is usually, at least initially, a private one. An NTSB for
cyber incidents requires a new system of notification and disclosure.
It also requires developing a rubric under which companies that are
busy trying to contain an incident are also willing to cooperate with
an investigation that is not about helping them but about helping
everyone else learn from their mistakes. Constructing such a system is
no simple task.
A straightforward approach, which I do not recommend, would require
disclosure of breaches to the Federal Government and would give a
Government agency the authority to investigate and disseminate lessons
learned. I do not believe such an approach I do not believe would be in
the spirit of the public-private partnership we have worked to
construct over the last two decades. It would create an adversarial
relationship to the detriment of the cooperative environment we need to
foster.
Instead, I believe what is necessary is a voluntary program under
which companies are incentivized to agree that in the event of incident
they will disclose it and cooperate with investigators that have a
mission to surface and share the causes of the incident with the rest
of the community.
One option that has worked well in a few incidents is to have US-
CERT accompany the FBI on the bureau's investigation to advise the firm
on ``asset response'' with a secondary purpose of collecting and
sharing information for dissemination. The challenge with this approach
is that companies may not cooperate with law enforcement investigations
and often have little interest in receiving assistance from the
Government.
In my view, a better approach is to use cyber insurance to
establish an obligation to disclose and to allow an independent
investigation into the causes of the incident to take place for the
purpose of disseminating that information to other companies. Such a
system need not require public disclosure of either the fact of the
breach or the findings. A Council on Foreign Relations paper that I
authored on, ``Creating a Federally-Sponsored Cyber Insurance
Program,''\4\ called for an NTSB-like program be established as a
requirement for participation in any Federally back-stopped cyber
insurance program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.cfr.org/report/creating-federally-sponsored-cyber-
insurance-program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While I support this recommendation, I do not believe that a
Government-backstopped program must be a prerequisite for advancing
this kind of information sharing. Insurance companies, if they banded
together, could set participation in this kind of disclosure and
investigation program as a requirement for their underwriting
commercially available insurance or in order to receive a discount on
policies. Doing so would be in the interest of insurance companies, as
it would help to reduce their aggregate risk by speeding the
containment of related breaches that may yet to be discovered.
Congress should work with the insurance industry to identify
whether there are any legal impediments to establishing this sort of
program.
what we are doing at northeastern university
I recently joined the Global Resilience Institute (GRI) at
Northeastern University. GRI's mission is to is to lead a university-
wide interdisciplinary effort to advance resilience-related initiatives
that contribute to the security, sustainability, health, and well-being
of societies. As with all efforts to create and sustain global change,
they must start locally. Thus, we are working within the metro-Boston
area to bring together the stakeholders who are willing to develop,
test, and pilot the concept of a secure, redundant communications
system that could be used for information sharing, collaborating on
incident response, and restoring public networks should they become
inoperable or compromised.
Mapping Critical Infrastructure and Dark Fiber in the Boston Area
We are beginning this effort by developing a map of critical
infrastructure in the metro-Boston area. Initially, because of the
challenges associated with getting detailed infrastructure information,
this will not be a comprehensive model, but it will provide a
foundation for identifying critical assets that can potentially be
connecting to the available dark fiber in the Boston area. This will
allow us to identify the practical barriers for making these
connection, focusing in particular on the ``last mile'' challenge--how
much additional fiber would need to be strung to connect control
systems to the network. Our initial assessment suggests that the costs
are likely to be significantly lower than many expect.
Technical Design of a Secure Network
We have also begun work to design the architecture for this
network. As indicated elsewhere, a dark fiber network is the preferred
option at this stage; however, we are investigating other transmission
mediums for where fiber is either not practical or desirable. For
instance, long-distance transmissions in rural areas might suggest
microwave or other ``over the air'' technologies; likewise, in a
coastal area like Boston, an over-the-air system might prove more
resilient than fiber running underground or strung on telephone poles.
While it is tempting to think of a secure network as a closed loop,
such a network would have limited use. Data will need to be securely
moved on and off the network. For cybersecurity operations, incident
data will need to be pulled up from the public internet or enterprise
business networks to be analyzed. Indicators of compromise extracted
through analysis will need to be pushed down to be of use to network
defenders. For industrial control systems, while communications with
operations centers could take place on the closed network, signals from
devices (at homes for instance) will need to be pulled up. Thus, it
will be essential that the network allows, but strictly limit and
monitor, communications to and from untrusted sources on the internet.
The secure movement of data on and off the network can be
accomplished with a series of ``guards'' or ``cross domain solutions''
that are used in Government systems to move data from Unclassified
domains to Classified domains. We are exploring the commercial
application of these technologies and believe a viable system can be
developed.
Admittedly, a perimeter approach such as we are advocating here is
not a silver bullet. In fact, it has become popular in the
cybersecurity community to declare that ``the perimeter is dead''. We
think that such a notion is more marketing hype than reality for most
companies. In the critical infrastructure space, it would not be
responsible risk management to give up on limiting access to connected
devices. Yet, we recognize that a ``hard exterior'' and ``soft middle''
is not the right solution. Even a separate network with the most
advanced cross-domain solutions and best inspection technologies can be
breached. We are also painfully aware of the risk of insider threats,
particularly when dealing with industry. Thus, the design of the
network needs to account for both the threat from external actors as
well as malicious insiders.
To address insider threats or to detect external threats that have
compromised the security of the network, we believe that it is possible
to develop a viable approach that will take advantage of new
technologies that have been difficult or costly to implement in legacy
networks. On a basic level, advances in software-defined networking and
related technologies can allow the segmentation of traffic at multiple
classifications. The network could easily accommodate Sensitive But
Unclassified operational communications for critical infrastructure as
well as Classified communications on cyber threats for network
defenders. Traffic moving across the network can be inspected, not just
on exit and entry, and data accessed by users tracked to monitor for
potential malicious conduct. In short, advances in technology together
with the proper governance structure can limit access to data to those
who need to know. Objections to extending this connectivity to the
private sector based on concerns over security can be effectively
addressed.
Business Model
As we have begun to develop this concept, a persistent question has
been raised that should be familiar to all Members of the committee:
Who will pay for it? I generally tend to favor the view that the
necessary investment for cybersecurity is best treated as the cost of
doing business for modern enterprises; however, I believe it is
unlikely that the private sector will fund the development of a secure
network on its own. A model in which the Government selects an
independent network operator and pays the initial cost of a pilot
project that guides the development of the network is likely the most
viable path. After it is established, use of it by critical
infrastructure companies could incur a fee to cover its costs. The
process for selecting the Electric Reliability Organization established
by the Energy Policy Act of 2005 may be a model worth investigating.
Next Steps
As we continue to develop the concept of a Classified network for
critical infrastructure, we will look for opportunities to collaborate
with critical infrastructure companies in the metro-Boston area and
beyond. Our plan is to be able to present a feasibility study on this
topic within the next 6 months and to engage in a regional pilot within
a year.
conclusion
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on these important issues.
As I hope my testimony conveyed, I believe that the remaining
challenges in information sharing require identifying discrete problems
and working to collaboratively develop specific solutions. As we pursue
the development of these solutions and identify roadblocks, I look
forward to continuing to engage with you, your staff members, and with
my colleagues in the Executive branch to further develop these
important concepts.
I would be happy to answer any questions at this time.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Knake.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Barron-Dicamillo--did I say
that right?
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. Yes, you did, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. For her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANN BARRON-DICAMILLO, VICE PRESIDENT, CYBER INTEL
& INCIDENT RESPONSE, AMERICAN EXPRESS

Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Member Langevin, and Members of the subcommittee. My
name is Ann Barron-Dicamillo, and I am vice president of cyber
intelligence and incident response at American Express. Thank
you for this opportunity to be here today. I really look
forward to the discussion.
In my role at American Express, I'm responsible for
managing cybersecurity operations and directing cyber threat
intelligence globally for the company. Prior to my role at
American Express, I was director of US-CERT at Homeland
Security. My responsibilities there included leading
cybersecurity incident response activities, as well as sharing
relevant data from those events with both public and private-
sector companies on cyber threat information-sharing
initiatives.
While at DHS, I engaged in efforts to mature public-private
cyber threat intelligence information-sharing programs like
those encouraged by CISA. This legislation really helped
address many of the concerns that I experienced while I was
there around critical infrastructure sector partners, including
American Express, engaging in cyber threat information sharing
with the Government. It created the ability for DHS to
establish machine-speed sharing, while protecting enterprises
from associated liability concerns.
One program worth discussing today, which was already
mentioned by the Chairman, is AIS. AIS has had limited adoption
to date and early challenges in demonstrating its full
potential, as was mentioned by the Ranking Member.
While AIS may be a good program for new entrants into the
cyber information-sharing community, it would be more effective
for more mature organizations in the broader critical
infrastructure community if it offered three key things, and
two of them were also mentioned by the Ranking Member: Timelier
indicator sharing, richer context around indicator information,
and continual improvements to the program to ensure quality
information, quality over quantity.
The timeliness of cyber threat information sharing has been
negatively impacted, I believe, by the Government's
overclassification of threat data, which is really minimizing
the value that AIS can provide to the critical infrastructure
community.
The agency that is originating this information is sharing
that information with DHS, and they're in charge of the
classification or declassification of that information. When
DHS has to go back and get the originating source to go through
the process of declassifying it, it results in delays. That
information many times, the threats associated with that can
become obsolete, because of the shifting nature of attacks
within the internet.
Alternatively, if the information is scrubbed to remove the
Classified status, the resulting information is often so
cleansed or minimized that much of the relevant context that's
needed to properly action it in my organization is removed.
So some proponents have suggested the timeliness issue
could be resolved by increasing the number of cleared
individuals in critical infrastructure. However, increased
access to Classified information for these individuals provides
little actionable data that we can take back into our un-
Classified networks for implementation. Any shared data that is
still classified at that level can't be actioned on an un-
Classified fabric.
To speed up the timeliness of information sharing, we
encourage our partners in law enforcement and the intelligence
community to work to tear-line more of their reporting, so any
actionable information, IOCs, hashes, and other things can be
shared expeditiously with critical industry. If information is
found in open source, the Government should act quickly to
declassify the entire report as rapidly as possible.
Also, the equities review process continues to be a
stumbling block toward timely, broader, and more actionable
information sharing from the Government to private industry. I
fully understand the intelligence community must consider both
public benefit and operational risk when disclosing
confidential information about a threat. However, in light of
the public sector's caution when it comes to sharing
information about cyber incidents, private industry is instead
turning to cybersecurity firms for timelier and more
contextually complete information.
At American Express, we rely primarily on FS-ISAC and other
sources, both external as well as communities of interest, for
a lot of our threat data. We engage in outbound sharing,
primarily with FS-ISAC and other financial institution
partners, through auto sharing of IOCs and other freeform
communication.
Much of the threat information sharing is still being
primarily shared via email, as it allows for communication with
important context, which includes things of who saw it, what
was seen, when was it seen, where, which part of the network,
as well as how it was mitigated or contained. This relevant
information a lot of times can't be shared in some of these
machine-to-machine systems.
Today, the AIS program does not offer this type of valuable
context for the indicators that are being shared. Just as the
context is important for security analysts, the lack of the
context prevents users of the information from confirming that
these indicators have been properly vetted as well as received
from trustworthy sources.
Additionally, private-sector organizations have shared
feedback with DHS that they would like to see a higher volume
of contextually rich data versus just a larger volume of less
insightful information.
One way DHS can address some of these issues is through the
adoption of technology that automates the ability to apply
confidence levels by source to the indicator-sharing process.
DHS should also consider working more closely with information
recipients to learn what kinds of data and context are going to
be most useful and pertinent to private industry for our own
networks.
Since CISA's passage, public-private information sharing
has come a long way and many positive advancements have
occurred. We strongly believe that a timelier, more contextual,
higher-quality information-sharing program is the next step in
the evolution of cyber threat information for DHS.
I want to thank you for inviting me to be here today to
discuss this very important issue, and I look forward to
answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Barron-Dicamillo follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ann Barron-Dicamillo
November 15, 2017
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, Members of the
subcommittee, my name is Ann Barron-Dicamillo, and I am vice president
of cyber intelligence and incident response at American Express. Thank
you for the opportunity to be here with you today. In my role at
American Express, I'm responsible for managing cybersecurity operations
and directing cyber threat intelligence globally for the company. I
oversee an organization responsible for information security
monitoring, security incident response, advanced cyber analytics as
well as forensics and other applicable investigations. My organization
is on the front lines of defense against active cyber threats, and we
actively participate in information sharing with industry and
Government partners. As an experienced information security executive
with almost 20 years of extensive experience in operations and in the
delivery of information security services, I have gained a deep
knowledge of the cyber threat intelligence environment and a respected
track record of assisting organizations make balanced and informed risk
decisions.
From January 2013 to February 2016, I was director of the United
States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) at the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). My responsibilities included leading
cybersecurity incident-response activities and network analysis,
working to share relevant data with both the public and private sectors
on cyber threat information-sharing initiatives. At US-CERT, I
supported DHS's efforts to improve the Nation's cybersecurity posture,
and I directly coordinated cyber information sharing to proactively
manage cyber risks. My responsibilities also included driving the US-
CERT mission with CERTs around the world, overseeing the 24x7
operations center, analyzing and reducing cyber threats and
vulnerabilities, disseminating cyber-threat warning information and
supporting incident-response activities with Government and critical
industry partners.
I've been a vocal proponent of Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI)
information sharing throughout my career in both my public- and
private-sector roles. The fundamental importance of CTI information
sharing comes down to one simple concept: ``One entity's detection
could be another entity's prevention.'' As computer network defenders,
information sharing becomes the foundation upon which we can build a
robust cybersecurity program in the continual fight to thwart cyber
criminals and other adversaries. CTI information sharing happens even
before first-line defenders are engaged; it enables security operation
analysts and hunters to be proactive in the search for malicious
activities; and it gains us a broader perspective on the threat
environment as it perpetuates across the web.
While at DHS, I engaged in efforts to mature public/private CTI
information-sharing programs like those created by the Cybersecurity
Information Sharing Act of 2015 (CISA). This legislation addressed many
of the concerns that had been expressed by critical infrastructure
sector partners, including American Express, in engaging in CTI
information sharing with the Government. It created the ability for DHS
to establish machine-speed sharing while protecting enterprises from
associated liability concerns. American Express' support and position
on this issue is one of the many reasons I joined their cyber
operations team, as it was clear that American Express understood the
importance of cyber threat information sharing for the betterment of
our public and private partners, both domestically and abroad.
Since the passage of CISA, American Express has developed a more
formal standard for sharing cyber threat information. We have engaged
in more consistent sharing with the Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (FS-ISAC). We deployed and have matured a
Threat Intelligence Platform (TIP), which currently ingests, on-
average, hundreds of thousands of unique threat indicators per month.
Our TIP is used by my organization to proactively search for threats,
both emerging as well as trending, in the ``Wild West'' of the internet
for potential relevancy to our unique environment. The information we
receive from the TIP includes indicators from the FS-ISAC. These
indicators of compromise (IOCs) include those shared by the U.S.
Government through DHS's Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration
Platform (CISCP).
American Express is not a current participant in DHS's Automated
Indicator Sharing (AIS) program. I understand the AIS bi-directional
sharing program, to date, has had limited adoption and early challenges
in demonstrating its full potential value. While AIS may be a good
program for new entrants in cyber information sharing and a good start
down the path of private/public sector information sharing, the program
would be more effective at protecting organizations from cyber threats
if it offered timelier indicator sharing, richer context around the
indicator information, and continual improvements to ensure quality
information. The following goes into greater detail regarding these
points.
improve timeliness of information sharing
An issue that minimizes the potential value of the AIS portal
information is that the agency that originated the information or
indicator is in charge of the classification or declassification of
that information. If the information provided is categorized as
Classified, the need to go through the process of declassification
results in delays in DHS's information-sharing process, making the
details of threats quickly obsolete because of the quickly shifting
nature of attacks. Alternatively, if the information is scrubbed of its
Classified status, the resulting shared information is often so
cleansed or minimized that much of the relevant context needed to
properly action the information has been removed.
Some proponents have suggested that the timeliness issue can be
resolved by increasing the numbers of--and expediting the process to
clear--private-sector individuals at companies, so as to be able to get
access to Classified information. However, increased access to
Classified information by critical infrastructure personnel provides
little actionable data for those individuals to take back to their
Unclassified networks for implementation, as the data is still
Classified at a level that can't be removed or actioned on an
Unclassified fabric.
When I was at DHS, to try to help address the classification issue,
I encouraged my partners in law enforcement and intelligence to work to
``tear-line'' more of their reporting so any actionable information
could be shared more expeditiously with critical industry stakeholders.
(Tear-lining is the process of sanitizing Classified information below
the tear line to convey the substance of the information without any
identifying or sensitive sources or methods.) If relevant context is
getting lost through the tear-line process, then the Government should
act to declassify the entire report as rapidly as possible.
In addition, the equities review process continues to be a
stumbling block toward broader, more actionable information sharing
from the Government to private industry, and over-classification of
entire reports continues to be an issue across the board in the
intelligence community in all kinds of different contexts. In some
instances, the usefulness of the information is essentially eliminated
if the context is removed or if the limited information around the
threat is misleading, leaving the private sector with a clue of a
threat but not the ability to take meaningful, intentional steps to
protect its network against an existing threat.
Having worked in these circles responding to cyber events while in
the public sector, I fully understand the intelligence community must
consider both public benefit and operational risks when disclosing
confidential information about a threat. However, in light of the
public sector's caution when it comes to cyber incidents, private
industry turns to private cybersecurity firms for timelier and
contextually complete information.
DHS can best address timeliness of cyber information sharing by
working with the originating agency of the information to expedite the
equities review process. Alternatively, DHS could work toward tear-
lining the reporting, or better yet, if the information is found in an
open source, work toward declassifying the reporting.
provide context for effective threat mitigation
At American Express, we rely primarily on the FS-ISAC and other
sources of external threat data from vendors and other communities of
interest. We engage in outbound sharing primarily with the FS-ISAC and
other financial institution partners. Threat sharing within the FS-ISAC
occurs in two distinct ways: (1) The automated sharing of indicators
via STIX (Structured Threat Information eXpression) and TAXII (Trusted
Automated eXchange of Indicator Information); and (2) the sharing of
unstructured, free-form emails that describe threats and provide
context, including various indicators, and that are exchanged between
different trust communities vetted by existing members for operational
experience. The bulk of threat information sharing is still primarily
via email, since it allows for communication of important context,
including who saw it (e.g., sector-specific or wide-spread), what was
seen (e.g., specific exploit to a known vulnerability or software
version), when it was seen (e.g., when the activity began), where
(e.g., impact to specific operating system endpoints or servers or
hardware components) or on which part of the network it was seen (e.g.,
cloud-based, traditional network, or mobile), and how it was mitigated
or contained as relevant (e.g., whether there is a patch available or
known signatures or scripts to mitigate the exploit ahead of the
patch). These are the important details security analysts need in order
to identify which indicators are the most relevant and important in
their own networks, and how they relate to specific on-going attack
campaigns.
Today, the AIS program does not offer this type of valuable context
for the indicators that are being shared. Just as the context is
important to security analysts, the lack of context prevents users of
the information from confirming that the indicators have been properly
vetted and received from trustworthy sources. Providing mechanisms for
representing and encouraging the supply of additional context,
providing real-time feedback on data quality, and supporting different
communities of trust are ways to advance the program. Additionally,
private-sector organizations, like American Express, have shared
feedback with DHS that they would like to see a higher volume of
Unclassified sharing versus a larger volume of less insightful
information.
There are on-going collaborative developments in information
sharing, both in the formation and evolution of information-sharing
groups (ISACs, ISAOs, and other formal and informal threat-sharing
communities) and in mechanisms for describing and sharing threat
information. There are also efforts to make that threat information
actionable by defensive measures, such as STIX and TAXII, the MITRE
CAPEC (Common Attack Pattern and Classification) and ATT&CK
(Adversarial Tactics, Techniques, and Common Knowledge), and the newly-
developing OpenC2 (Open Command and Control) standard. The
implementation of STIX 2.0, which allows for representation of greater
context and the identification of relationships between shared data,
would be a beneficial step for AIS.
continually improve to ensure quality and trustworthiness of
information
DHS should focus on ways to continually assess and improve the
quality of the information-sharing process through adoption of
technology that automates the ability to apply confidence levels by
source to the indicator-sharing process. DHS should consider working
more closely with information recipients to learn what data and context
are useful and pertinent to private industry so that private industry
can easily ingest relevant information in real time. In addition, DHS
should work with the private sector to gain confidence in the validity
and credibility of the information (through the context sharing
described above) while ensuring that the voluntary reporting of threats
to the AIS program does not lead to attribution of any particular
industry or entity.
Since CISA's passage, private- and public-sector sharing has come a
long way and has made many positive advancements, but we believe there
is more work to be done to overcome our adversaries. We strongly
believe that timelier, more contextual and higher-quality information
sharing is the next step in the evolution of cyber threat information
sharing that will lead to increased private-sector participation in
DHS's information-sharing programs.
I want to thank you again for inviting me to be here today to
discuss this very important issue, and I look forward to answering any
questions you may have.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Barron-Dicamillo.
I would now like to recognize Ms. Cagliostro.
Am I saying that right?
Ms. Cagliostro. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Ratcliffe. You're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF PATRICIA CAGLIOSTRO, FEDERAL SOLUTIONS ARCHITECT
MANAGER, ANOMALI

Ms. Cagliostro. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe,
Ranking Member Langevin, and distinguished Members. I'm honored
to appear before the committee today to discuss how we can
improve the partnership between public and private sector to
strengthen our Nation's security with cyber threat information
sharing.
I work for a leader in the cyber threat intelligence space
called Anomali. We were the first company to automatically
share intelligence back to AIS. We also integrate AIS with our
technology and provide access to our customer base.
Our deep integration with AIS and experience with
facilitating sharing with ISACs and ISAOs provide unique
insights into the critical factors for successful sharing
programs and opportunities for improvement in the AIS program.
In 2017, the Ponemon Institute commissioned a report that
represented over 1,000 organizations from North America and the
United Kingdom. This report provides critical insights about
the threat intelligence industry that impact the adoption and
participation in AIS.
One of the biggest challenges identified by 70 percent of
respondents was the volume of data available. To put this in
perspective, there are hundreds of millions of indicators from
hundreds of sources in the Anomali platform, and we've
continued to see the volume of threat data grow exponentially
since our inception. AIS is one of many sources that
organizations have access to.
The biggest value of threat intelligence is the ability to
integrate with an organization's security controls to detect
and prevent malicious activity on the network. Think of threat
intelligence like the no-fly list that airlines use to prevent
threats from flying. If the data wasn't integrated with airline
systems, the value of the list would be diminished because it
couldn't prevent high-risk passengers from flying.
Threat intelligence is the cyber no-fly list, and when
organizations integrate with their security controls, they can
actively detect and prevent threats on the network.
Once an organization can consume and integrate threat
intelligence, they've reached a maturity level where they're
ready to actually share intelligence. Sixty-two percent of
organizations reported that they share intelligence today.
About 50 percent of those said they share with just the
security vendors, while only 30 percent actually share with the
Government.
When we think about maximizing the value of information
sharing in the context of AIS, we need to keep in mind the
state of threat intelligence. Organizations in both the public
and private sector need tools to manage and integrate the
overwhelming amount of threat intelligence before they're ready
to share. When they are ready to share, trust and ease of use
are critical for success.
DHS should be commended for meeting the aggressive time
lines outlined in the Cybersecurity Act of 2015, but with any
large program there are always opportunities to improve. The
primary goal should be to expand AIS participation to as many
organizations as possible because more participants will
ultimately impact the quality and improve the quality of the
data shared.
DHS can reduce the level of effort for organizations to
participate in AIS by increasing the ways that people can
access it and integrating it with analyst workflows. When an
organization wants to connect to AIS, it can take weeks between
legal reviews, between deploying technology for them to
actually get connected. DHS should continue to work with third
parties who can redistribute AIS through their sharing
platform, like ISACs and ISAOs, and security vendors like
Anomali, so organizations don't have to add additional
technology in order to participate.
Analysts collect and produce cyber intelligence as part of
their daily workflow. In the Anomali platform, analysts simply
check a box to automatically share with their community.
They're more likely to share because it's easy. It doesn't add
additional work for them. It's something they would have to do
anyway as part of their regular workflow.
The AIS program will benefit by integrating with security
technologies like Anomali to make it easier for organizations
to share back, so, again, as part of that daily workflow.
Cybersecurity isn't a marathon or a sprint. There is no
finish line in sight. We face a dynamic adversary, and we need
to use every advantage that we have. The attack surface is too
large and resources are stretched too thin for organizations to
defend alone. Information sharing acts as a force multiplier
and can help level the playing field.
In the most recent election, the Colorado State ISAC
partnered with Anomali to share intelligence in real time with
various Federal, State, and local organizations to maximize
their ability to defend the integrity of our elections.
Real-world success stories of the power of information
sharing, supported by public and private-sector partnerships,
will continue to drive adoption and participation in programs
like AIS.
Thank you guys for inviting me today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cagliostro follows:]
Prepared Statement of Patricia Cagliostro
November 15, 2017
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and distinguished
Members, I am honored to appear before the committees today to discuss
how we can improve the partnership between the public and private
sector to improve our Nation's security with cyber threat information
sharing.
I work for a leader in the cyber threat intelligence space called
Anomali. At Anomali, we have worked closely with the public and the
private sector to enable information sharing for several years. My role
is to lead a team of professionals in the global public sector to solve
the biggest challenges in leveraging threat intelligence to stop
critical threats and facilitate relationships between industry and the
public sector.
Anomali was the first company to automatically share intelligence
back to the Department of Homeland Security's Automated Indicator
Sharing program, referred to as AIS. We also integrate AIS information
with our technology and provide access to approved customers. Our deep
integration with AIS and experience with facilitating cyber
intelligence-sharing communities provides unique insights into the
critical factors for successful sharing programs and opportunities for
improvement in the AIS program.
In my testimony, I will describe the state of threat intelligence
in the private sector, how we can reduce the barrier to entry for the
private sector to share information through AIS and improve the quality
of information provided by AIS.
state of threat intelligence
In 2017, the Ponemon Institute commissioned a report: The Value of
Threat Intelligence: A Study of North American and United Kingdom
Companies that included over 1,000 respondents. (https://
www.anomali.com/resources/whitepapers/value-of-threat-intelligence-
ponemon-study) This report provides valuable insight into how the
private sector uses and consumes threat intelligence. The report found
that 80% of organizations use threat intelligence and of those
organizations, 84% identified threat intelligence as essential to a
strong security posture.
One of the biggest challenges identified by 70% of respondents was
the volume of available threat data. Today, there are over 400 million
indicators of compromise in the Anomali platform and we have seen the
volume of threat data from open, shared intelligence and threat
intelligence vendors grow exponentially since our inception. Threat
Intelligence Platforms like Anomali enable organizations to aggregate
and consume the overwhelming amount of threat intelligence available to
organizations.
The biggest value of threat intelligence is the ability to
integrate with an organization's security controls to detect and
prevent malicious activity on the network. 65% of respondents cited
integration as necessary to maximize the value of threat intelligence
data. Think of the No-Fly List that airlines use to prevent threats
from flying. If the data wasn't integrated with airline and airport
security systems, the value of the list would be diminished because it
couldn't prevent high-risk passengers from flying. Threat intelligence
integration provides the cyber no-fly list by integrating with security
controls to detect and prevent threats.
Once an organization can consume and integrate threat intelligence,
they have reached a maturity level where they are ready to share
intelligence. Sixty-two percent of organizations reported that they
share intelligence. Of those organizations, 50% share with trusted
security vendors and 43% share with trusted peer groups while only 30%
of organizations reported sharing with the government through programs
like AIS and CISCP. Organizations identified a lack of threat
intelligence expertise as the primary reason why they do not share
intelligence.
When we think about maximizing the value of information sharing in
the context of AIS, we need to keep in mind the state of threat
intelligence in the private sector. In my experience, these challenges
are also relevant in the public sector. You have to help yourself
before you help others and organizations in both the public and private
sector need the tools to handle the overwhelming amount of threat data
and integrate the intelligence before they are ready to share
intelligence. When they are ready to share, trust and ease of use are
critical for success.
barriers to entry for private industry
The barrier to information sharing through AIS and the quality of
information provided by AIS are intimately related because a
significant portion of the information provided by AIS is shared by the
participants. If participants do not share valuable information through
AIS, the quality of the information that is delivered will be impacted.
The level of effort to share intelligence through AIS and lack of
expertise in threat intelligence act as barriers to entry to share
intelligence through AIS.
When an organization wants to connect to AIS, they must sign a
terms of use document, setup a TAXII client, purchase a PKI certificate
from a commercial provider, provide your IP address to DHS and sign an
Interconnection Security Agreement. While this may not seem overly
complex, this process can take private organizations weeks to complete
because of legal reviews and change control processes. In the public
sector, this can be even more time-consuming because additional
processes and requirements can cause delays due to the time to get new
technologies on-line.
Once an organization is connected to AIS, they often find it
difficult to share intelligence. While there are a variety of options
available to private industry to share with AIS including TAXII client
software, a DHS website and email, they add additional work for
analysts outside of their workflow. Almost every organization is
struggling with the resource shortage in cybersecurity, and adding
additional work to share information will negatively impact
participation rates.
There is an extremely limited supply of skilled threat intelligence
analysts. When organizations share intelligence, they may be concerned
that they do not have the expertise to produce relevant intelligence
that other organizations will find useful. Organizations are afraid to
be the boy who cried wolf and look immature for sharing intelligence
that other organizations will not find useful.
These challenges are common for any information-sharing program and
are the first hurdle that Information Sharing Analysis Organizations
and Centers or ISACs and ISAOs must overcome. Anomali is the technology
platform for several ISACs and ISAOs and has identified several
solutions to reduce the barrier to entry for organizations to share
that can be applied to AIS.
When a new ISAC or ISAO partners with Anomali, the time line for
their members to gain access and start contributing is extremely short.
ISACs and ISAOs are provided with their own instance of the solution
and the members are automatically added to the platform. They simply
login to begin collaborating rather than waiting to deploy technology
in their own environment. We also work with the ISACs and ISAOs to
provide member outreach and deliver training so companies feel
comfortable with the solution. There is data already present in their
instance from open source and the ISAC which provides immediate value
to the analyst. The AIS program would benefit from continuing to
partner with third-party organizations like ISACs and ISAOs an security
vendors like Anomali to streamline the process to gain access to AIS.
Analysts collect and produce cyber threat intelligence as part of
their daily workflow. In the Anomali platform, analysts simply check a
box to automatically share intelligence with their community. They are
more likely to share because it's integrated with their daily
workflows, rather than an additional step or technology they must work
with. The AIS program will benefit from outreach by DHS to the security
industry to further integrate sharing with the technologies that
analysts use every day.
Analysts on the Anomali platform have a variety of options to
contribute that range from providing net new intelligence to enriching
existing intelligence. Analysts benefit from the diversity in sharing
mechanisms because they can participate at the level they feel
comfortable. Not all organizations produce net new intelligence and
allowing analysts to enrich existing intelligence with data like
sightings on their network or associations to an actor makes sharing
less intimidating and reduces the level of experience an analyst needs
to participate. The AIS program can benefit by expanding the types of
intelligence analysts can share beyond just indicators of compromise.
quality of intelligence
Measuring the quality of cyber intelligence can be incredibly
difficult because the value will vary based on who the organization is
and how they use threat intelligence. At Anomali, we work closely with
our customer base to more intimately understand what factors impact the
quality of intelligence they are leveraging. Ultimately, when
discussing the quality of intelligence, organizations want relevant
intelligence. They want to understand out of the millions of indicators
that are available, which ones need their attention. Relevant
intelligence is extremely powerful because it helps drive response and
reduce time wasted on low-priority information.
Think of cyber intelligence like a weather report. If I told you it
was going to be 65 degrees, would you wear a jacket? Before you made
your decision, you would want to know contextual details like where did
I get the report from, has my source been accurate in the past, and
when and where it was going to be that temperature. If I am a trusted
source, you may just take my word for it because I know what makes the
report relevant to you. If I knew that it is going to be 65 degrees, I
would wear t-shirt and shorts. If you are like my college roommate from
California, it's time for the down jacket.
Like the weather example, organizations derive relevance from
context about intelligence and the organization's own requirements to
make decisions. The more context they have about shared intelligence,
the easier it becomes to determine if it's relevant and select a course
of action. In the Anomali platform we enrich threat intelligence with
the contextual data and provide the tools that organizations need to
easily identify relevant intelligence. Our data model has defined
threat intelligence objects supported by flexible fields that allows
organizations to capture and store additional types of contextual data.
Today, AIS information has limited context which impacts the
private sector's ability to determine relevance and determine the
appropriate course of action. Organizations look at factors like the
source, confidence level, impact type, timeliness, and sightings among
other factors to determine relevance. The next iteration of AIS
supports STIX 2.0 which expands the AIS schema to allow for more
context which will improve the quality of the AIS data.
conclusion
When I first started at Anomali, people often asked how we forced
people to share intelligence. People assumed that when we talked about
sharing, we had to be forcing people because no one would choose share
unless they had to. Our approach wasn't to force people to share, but
to create an environment where sharing was easy and organizations
received value.
The AIS program has come a long way since its inception and as the
barriers to entry are reduced, more organizations will participate and
increase the quality of the data provided.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Cagliostro.
Mr. Mayer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT H. MAYER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT FOR
CYBERSECURITY, US TELECOM ASSOCIATION

Mr. Mayer. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Langevin, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today for this important hearing.
My name is Robert Mayer, and I serve as senior vice
president for cybersecurity at USTelecom. I also serve as chair
of the Communications Sector Coordinating Council, which
represents the broadcast, cable, satellite, wireless, and
wireline segments of the communications industry. The CSCC is
one of 16 critical infrastructure sectors operating through the
Department of Homeland Security's Critical Infrastructure
Partnership Advisory Council.
Today the wide variety and large volume of cyber threat
information sources, along with the growing number of
information-sharing venues, presents both opportunities and
challenges in creating real value to information sharing.
Since the passage of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing
Act of 2015, much has been done to reduce obstacles to sharing
and to facilitate enabling mechanisms and venues. The
communications sector works on multiple fronts to share cyber
threat information. In my written testimony, I note that for
more than 35 years, dating back to the Cold War era, the U.S.
Government has worked in operational partnership with the
communications sector to better assure the reliability,
availability, and resiliency of our networks.
The relationship between the communications sector and the
DHS National Coordinating Center for Communication stands alone
among critical infrastructure information-sharing partnerships
in both depth and length of partnership.
Jointly, the relationship between the Communications Sector
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, the Comm-ISAC, with
over 65 participating private-sector companies, and the NCC, is
one that many sectors are attempting to replicate.
Five of the largest domestic network service providers have
representatives embedded within the NCC and through the NCC
work on the floor of the National Cybersecurity Communications
Integration Center, or NCCIC, as it is known.
Many more formal and informal structured and unstructured
venues are described in the March 2017 FCC CSRIC report
referenced in my testimony.
As a practical matter, companies will participate in
information-sharing activities to the extent that they perceive
the benefits outweigh or at least match the costs. Any
information-sharing venue and mechanism that does not provide
contextualized, timely, accurate, and actionable information
that improves the provider's security posture will not meet the
test.
The CSRIC report found that a critical organizational
challenge facing our sector is the wide variety of private,
public, public-to-private, and international activities devoted
to cyber information sharing.
Many organizations, especially smaller service providers,
are unfamiliar with the breadth and depth of information-
sharing entities or lack the resources to commit to these
enterprises. These organizations are in most cases unable to
devote scarce resources to time-consuming efforts to filter
numerous sources of threat intelligence, validate what is
applicable, and then set implementation priorities.
While there are no easy solutions for these companies,
trade associations, like USTelecom, and the 13 other sector
trade associations that are also members of the CSCC provide a
critical link to information resources that can enhance their
security posture.
For many of the larger service providers, the distribution
of Classified information from the Federal Government is an
essential element of their overall risk-management
capabilities, and this can impact the quality of information
shared between private parties and within organizations.
We continue to request Classified information when
available, and we also ask that those pieces be downgraded as
much as possible so that dissemination to the practitioners in
the field can take place quickly.
With respect to the DHS AIS portal, there is still
important work that needs to be done to increase the value
proposition for companies within our sector. Most of the
concerns with AIS relate to the quality and usability of the
information for the particular needs of an ISP and its
enterprise. While the information distributed via AIS may be
helpful to certain entities, the value proposition remains
elusive for companies with more mature, sophisticated
cybersecurity programs.
To make cyber threat information sharing more viable and
valuable, we encourage the Government to look across various
information-sharing programs and analyze whether they are
functioning as intended, meeting the needs of their target
audiences, and identify gaps that need to be filled. Doing this
will ultimately result in higher quality, contextualized, and
more timely information being shared.
The good news is that DHS is aware of the current
limitations and is committed publicly to a multi-year effort to
enhance the automated machine-to-machine sharing capabilities.
DHS is to be applauded for its on-going and accelerating
outreach efforts to engage industry and to increase the value
of their information-sharing programs.
We remain committed to bringing all available industry
resources to bear in this vital area, and I look forward to
answering any of your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mayer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert H. Mayer
November 15, 2017
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for giving the communications
sector and me personally the opportunity to appear before you today for
this important hearing on maximizing the value of cyber threat
information sharing.
My name is Robert Mayer, and I serve as senior vice president
cybersecurity at USTelecom which represents companies ranging from some
of the smallest rural broadband providers to some of the largest
companies in the U.S. economy. I also serve as chair of the
Communications Sector Coordinating Council (CSCC) which represents the
broadcast, cable, satellite, wireless, and wireline segments of the
communications industry.\1\ The CSCC is one of the 16 critical
infrastructure sectors under the Critical Infrastructure Partnership
Advisory Council (CIPAC) through which the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) facilitates physical and cyber coordination and planning
activities among the private sector and Federal, State, local,
territorial, and Tribal governments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Communications Sector Coordinating Council, https://www.comms-
scc.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to thank the Members of this subcommittee for emphasizing
the concept of value in the context of information sharing. Of course,
we endeavor to share cyber threat information not for information
sharing's sake, but for the purpose of adding value to our operational
and strategic cyber preparedness and defense efforts.
Today, the wide variety and large volume of cyber threat
information sources, along with the growing number of information-
sharing venues, presents both opportunities and challenges in creating
real value to information sharing. Since the passage of the
Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015,\2\ much has been done to
reduce obstacles to sharing and to facilitate enabling mechanisms and
venues. Still, this law is just the statutory foundation that will
enable the actual sharing processes that need to be implemented;
getting the right information to the right people at the right time
with the appropriate privacy and security safeguards. This massive
effort requires constant innovation, on-going evaluation and
disciplined resource allocation. Below I briefly outline the work of
our sector in this area, some on-going challenges, and the important
role of the DHS as a facilitator of cybersecurity information sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2015, https://
www.Congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/754.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Communications Sector works on multiple fronts to share cyber
threat information, and individual companies use a variety of
information-sharing platforms and services to achieve their objectives.
From a sector perspective, two of the most prominent and robust
information-sharing venues operate in partnership with DHS.
First, the relationship between the Communications Sector and the
DHS National Coordinating Center for Communications (NCC)\3\ stands
alone among critical infrastructure information-sharing partnerships in
both depth and length of partnership. Jointly, the relationship between
the Communications Sector Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(Comm-ISAC) and the NCC is one that many sectors are attempting to
replicate. For more than 35 years, dating back to Cold War era
existential concerns about telecommunications reliability and disaster
recovery, the U.S. Government has worked in operational partnership
with leaders of the communications sector to better assure the
reliability, availability, and resiliency of our networks. DHS NCC
provides our industry with 24/7 on-site watch desk functions, helps
coordinate the communications sector for preparedness and response to
both physical and cyber events, and acts as the information exchange
portal to Government for us, and likewise as Government's portal to the
Communications Sector. The Comm-ISAC includes over 65 private-sector
companies that convene weekly, and on an as-needed basis, to share
information about events and threats that have or could have adverse
impacts on network service providers and their customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ National Coordinating Center for Communications, Department of
Homeland Security, https://www.dhs.gov/national-coordinating-center-
communications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, aligned with NCC activities is the Network Security
Information Exchange (NSIE) which meets every 2 months and is comprised
of companies that support DHS's and the Communications Sector's
National security mission.\4\ During these sessions, analysts and
security managers discuss threats and other issues that directly
implicate the reliability, resiliency, and integrity of the
communications environment. Five of the largest domestic network
service providers have representatives embedded within the NCC and are
on-call to respond to Government inquiries related to infrastructure-
impacting events of either a cyber or physical nature. Since the NCC is
one of three operational components along with US-CERT and the ICS-CERT
on the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC) floor, these same individuals are embedded within the NCCIC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Network Security Information Exchanges, Department of Homeland
Security, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/
NSTAC_08_0.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The NCCIC is a 24/7 cyber situational awareness, incident response,
and management center and operates as the principal Federal civilian
interface for multi-directional and cross-sector information sharing.
Through the auspices of the NCCIC, and more broadly the DHS Office of
Cybersecurity & Communications, communications sector companies
currently work with the DHS Automated Information Sharing (AIS) portal
using the STIX/TAXII protocols, which is designed to facilitate real-
time sharing of cyber threat indicators.\5\ Many of the largest
providers are working through the AIS portal, as well as other related
venues, to improve and increase the effectiveness and efficiency of
automated sharing for more end-users. Also under the NCCIC, member
companies participate in the Cyber Information Sharing and
Collaboration Program (CISCP) which provides a collaborative and
trusted environment in which analysts from multiple sectors learn from
each other to better understand and address emerging cybersecurity
risks.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS), Department of Homeland
Security, https://www.us-cert.gov/ais.
\6\ Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP),
Department of Homeland Security, https://www.dhs.gov/ciscp.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many more formal and informal venues and sharing mechanisms are
described in the March 2017 report on Cybersecurity Information Sharing
from the Federal Communications Commission's Communications Security,
Reliability, and Interoperability Council (CSRIC) Working Group 5
(CSRIC report).\7\ I now wish to touch on some significant findings in
that report, as well as general observations about current information-
sharing venues and platforms.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ CSRIC Working Group 5--Final Report, Federal Communications
Commission, https://www.fcc.gov/files/csric5-wg5-finalreport031517pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, as a practical matter and returning to the question of value
that is the focus of this hearing, companies will participate in
information-sharing activities to the extent that they perceive the
benefits outweigh, or at least match, the costs. Given the pressures on
providers to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of
their communications networks and systems, any information-sharing
venue or mechanism that does not produce contextualized, timely,
accurate, and actionable information that improves providers' security
posture will not meet that test of value.
More broadly, the CSRIC report found that a critical organizational
challenge facing the communications sector is the wide variety of
private, public, public-to-private, and international activities
devoted to cyber threat information sharing.\8\ Many organizations,
especially smaller service providers, are unfamiliar with the breadth
and depth of information-sharing entities or lack the resources to
commit to these enterprises. The rapid expansion of information-sharing
venues such as the Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations
(ISAOs) called for under the 2015 Executive Order ``Promoting Private
Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing'' threatens to dilute
resources and expertise through redundant or conflicting activities and
objectives.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Id. at 13.
\9\ Executive Order--Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity
Information Sharing, The White House--President Barack Obama, https://
obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2015/02/13/executive-
order-promoting-private-sector-cybersecurity-information-shari.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For many of the larger service providers, the distribution of
Classified information from the Federal Government is an essential
element of their overall risk management capabilities and this can
impact the quality of information shared between private parties and
within organizations. Having access to contextualized and actionable
Classified information is highly valuable. Similarly, not having access
to such contextual information is detrimental to operations, but so is
being unable to share some, or most, of the information with non-
cleared colleagues. We continue to request Classified information, when
available, and we also ask that those pieces be downgraded as much as
possible so that dissemination to the practitioners in the sector can
take place quickly.
With respect to the DHS AIS portal, there is still important work
that needs to be done to increase the value proposition for companies
within our sector. Most of the concerns with AIS relate to the quality
and usability of the information for the particular needs of an ISP and
its enterprise. AIS is, and was intended to be, a platform for broad,
cross-sector sharing that has resulted in information being downgraded
or simplified to be appropriate for all participating entities. While
the information distributed via AIS may be helpful to certain entities,
the value proposition remains elusive for companies with more mature,
sophisticated cybersecurity programs.
To make cyber threat information sharing more viable and valuable,
we encourage the Government to look across the various information-
sharing programs such as AIS and CISCP and analyze whether they are
functioning as intended, meeting the needs of their target audiences
and identify gaps that need to be filled. For example, the Government
needs to take the next step and determine whether there are more
effective ways to share information with companies who have more mature
programs, and specifically those who have been described as ``ICT
enablers''--i.e., the ICT companies that provide key services that
enable the cyber ecosystem. Doing so will ultimately result in better
and more timely information being shared.
I want to be clear that in highlighting current challenges we are
working on with Government, I do not mean to suggest that there is not
currently valuable information sharing underway. A Comm-ISAC member
receives more than one dozen alerts a day through the NCC from NCCIC,
US-CERT, ICS-CERT, ISACs, and joint law enforcement bulletins, and one
company reports that it can trace the addition of 2,800 unique
indicators in the past 10 months from the various DHS sources.
The good news is that DHS is aware of the current limitations and
appears to be committed to a multi-year effort to enhance the automated
machine-to-machine sharing capabilities. Our industry is committed to
this program as evidenced by broad sector participation in a pilot
managed by CTIA.\10\ That program is about to be operationalized after
testing new adaptations of the sharing platform to conform to
communications sector operating environments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Protecting America's Wireless Networks, CTIA, https://
www.ctia.org/docs/default-source/default-document-library/protecting-
americas-wireless-networks.pdf at 9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, I want to draw attention to the hundreds of smaller
companies in our sector who face a different set of challenges due
largely to their limited financial resources, technical skill-sets, and
operational priorities. These organizations are in most cases unable to
devote scarce resources to time-consuming efforts to filter numerous
sources of threat intelligence, validate what is applicable, and then
set implementation priorities. In many instances, they are unaware of
information-sharing venues, especially those venues that are operated
by the private sector and accessed via exclusive invitation. While
there are no easy solutions for these companies, trade associations
like USTelecom and multiple other associations that comprise the CSCC
are providing a critical link to information resources that can enhance
their security posture.
Despite these and other challenges, and the risk of oversaturating
the information-sharing space with low-value activity, I do want to
emphasize that without effective information sharing we have no hope of
combatting emerging threats to our National and economic security. DHS
is to be applauded for its on-going efforts to engage industry and to
increase the value of their information-sharing programs. We remain
committed to bringing all available industry resources to bear in this
vital area, and I look forward to answering any of your questions.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Mayer.
Thanks again to all of our witnesses for your testimony
today.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo, I want to start with you, because
you've got sort-of unique experience, extensive experience with
US-CERT at DHS. Now in the private sector at American Express
you have the opportunity to be part of what I think is the gold
standard organization with respect to information sharing on
the private side, the FS-ISAC.
We can talk about legislation all day, but the one thing
that we can't legislate is confidence. So from your
perspective, what are the one or two or three things that you
would recommend that DHS do or do better, perhaps, to build
confidence in the private sector in both the validity and the
credibility of cyber threat information that's being shared?
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. So getting back to some of the
comments I made in my opening remarks, I think DHS, a lot of
times they're not the original source associated with
information that they're sharing. So creating those closer
partnerships with the community in which they're receiving
information from, some of it comes from vendors and some of it
comes from other Government partners.
In doing that, they need to ensure that the message is
being carried that methods and sourcing of the--the source of
attribution, those aren't important actions for the community
to implement within their network.
Really, breaking apart those two things is a focus there,
being that--continuing to communicate with their Government
partners on the importance of that so that they can create
those trusted relationships with private industry.
I think, from my perspective, the confidence is going to
come based on the value of the indicators that they share. When
those indicators are proved to be unique and different from
what we receive from other sources, that increases the
confidence that they will get from the larger private industry
community.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thanks very much.
Mr. Knake, before I came to Congress, my colleague Mr.
Langevin worked on prior iterations of a bill we were able to
successfully get across the finish line in December 2015, the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015.
From your perspective, has the passage of that legislation
affected the flow of cyber threat information? Have you seen it
change? Has the threat landscape that companies and the
Government face, has that changed or been affected by our
legislation?
Mr. Knake. Mr. Chairman, in my view, what's happened is
that we've taken away the excuses for not sharing information,
but the reality is many companies still want to find an excuse
not to share. So you can no longer say: ``Oh, we're worried
about anti-trust issues, we're worried the FTC is going to come
after us, DOJ is going to come after us.''
The reality is that for those companies that had those
fears before the legislation, the legislation didn't remove
that as a barrier in their minds.
So I do think there's a small element of needing to educate
general counsels at large corporations on this issue. I spend a
lot of time working with leaders in the community, encouraging
them to push back when they are told by their lawyers that they
cannot share.
But in my view the real issue isn't the barriers to
information sharing, it's the incentives for information
sharing. You really need to find ways, we need to find ways as
a community to encourage companies to want to share, right?
They want to receive indicators all day long, but taking
the act of extracting an indicator from their network and
pushing it out to DHS is sometimes not worth the effort. In
their minds, it does nothing to protect them. That I think is
the main reason we haven't seen a flourishing of information
sharing.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So do you have any suggestions for how we
further encourage that?
Mr. Knake. I mean, I think the basic one I think would be
to encourage it ahead of time, before an incident happens. So
this is where I look to insurance as a possible incentive. If
Government were to provide a backstop to cyber insurance, that
in exchange for lower premiums you obligated your company to
participate in this kind of information sharing, that I think
is the kind of incentive that we need now to encourage
information sharing.
If you said, we have to do this because we're getting a
lower rate, sort of like Progressive on your car insurance,
right, under that model, I think we could incentivize more
information sharing.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thanks very much.
Ms. Cagliostro, very quickly. Last week, in a report from
the Office of Inspector General on DHS's implementation of the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015 it was recommended that in order to
achieve their mission DHS should obtain, ``the tools and
technologies needed to provide a cross-domain solution for
sharing and processing cyber threat information between the
Classified and Unclassified repositories.''
As DHS evaluates potential solutions for this, what are
your thoughts about the criteria for success for what those
tools can be?
Ms. Cagliostro. Sure. So when you talk about cyber
intelligence, it's a little bit different than traditional
human intelligence. In order to go and get access to human
intelligence, you have to put resources in country, language.
There's a tremendous time and effort resource commitment there.
For cyber threat intelligence, it's a little bit different,
because essentially I can deploy technologies and start
collecting cyber intelligence, and there's a very low barrier
to entry. That's why I think for when you're thinking about
cross-domain and bringing intelligence both up and down in both
directions, it's important to know at both levels where
intelligence is located.
So on the Classified side, for example, if it's already out
there in the public domain, then why is it still Classified?
Why is that indicator still Classified? The association to an
actor, how we discovered it, that might be sensitive, but the
indicator itself shouldn't be.
So I think when you're thinking about tools and
technologies, one of the big first steps should be aggregating
the publicly available information, so that way we can more
effectively and more quickly declassify tools.
Then the second piece becomes it needs to be a machine-to-
machine process. My background's the Department of Defense.
There's a number of ways to handle cross-domain. Some of it is
very manual; some of it is automatic. I think it needs to be
something that is a machine process. It shouldn't be someone
once a day logging in to download files and copy them over.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Very much appreciate the
responses.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, I want to thank all of our witnesses for your
testimony today and the work you're doing on this topic.
So if I could, I'd start with Ms. Barron-Dicamillo.
Thank you again for your work at US-CERT and, again, for
your testimony here and for, again, your previous Government
service.
So it's clear that you've greatly contributed to advancing
the cybersecurity of our Nation and that you appreciate the
value of information sharing. However, I would just mention
that in your testimony you state that American Express has not
participated in the AIS program due to limited adoption and
early challenges in demonstrating its full potential value, and
that you engage in outbound sharing primarily with the FS-ISAC
and other financial institution partners.
So while I recognize that we can do more as a Government to
increase the quality of the data that we share, the value of
information sharing itself is predicated on all parties
actively participating. We need major corporations like
American Express to be involved.
So what is your plan for joining this program and
contributing the insights that you gain on a daily basis in
defending your networks?
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. So through FS-ISAC, we actually
participate in the AIS program. We're not a direct participant,
but we get the--we share information through FS-ISAC, so we are
outbound sharing that information, which is also shared back
from FS-ISAC into the AIS community. Then AIS shares it through
FS-ISAC back to financial institutions like us. So we do
benefit from it through that relationship we have with FS-ISAC.
The reason why we haven't joined specifically is associated
with the CRADA agreement that you must sign when you join these
programs at Homeland Security. In doing so, it precludes us
from bringing on any additional cleared individuals within
American Express, because you have to go through a private
industry--or you have to go through the DOD private industry
clearance process. When you have a CRADA agreement with DHS,
you are forced through the facility clearance process versus
the DOD clearance process for individuals.
So we are not interested in creating infrastructure through
the facility clearance process, and that's primarily the reason
why we don't have the direct CRADA agreement with Homeland
Security for CISCP or AIS.
Mr. Langevin. So is that something that--a policy change
between the company and DHS that needs to change?
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. It's probably a policy change between
Homeland Security and DOD.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Well, that's something that we can look
at. Thank you.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. I'm not the only financial
institution that has that perspective. It would preclude any
other critical infrastructure participant from engaging in
those programs when they sign the CRADA, or engage in getting
additional cleared individuals through the clearance process
when they sign that CRADA.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you very much for that insight.
So I thank the Chairman for the question that he asked, the
second question, really what's changed. He asked Mr. Knake. So
I'd like to give the opportunity to you, Ms. Barron-Dicamillo
and Mr. Mayer.
The Cybersecurity Act of 2015, again, made substantial
changes to the legal authorities regarding cyber threat
indicator sharing. So what are your organizations or, for you
and Mr. Mayer, your member companies doing differently today
thanks to those authorities and liability protections?
I guess as a follow-up I could say, were any of those
actions impermissible before the law and what changed the
calculus in your organization?
Mr. Mayer. Thank you, Congressman.
I do think that the act had some significant benefits. I
mean, if nothing else, it created awareness on the part of our
member companies that information sharing was something that
was available, and it took care of some of the liability
concerns we had about sharing threat indicators.
I would put it in the category of saying that the act was
necessary, but it's not necessarily sufficient to incentivize
all companies to participate.
I think for our members who are more mature who have the
resources around cybersecurity, for them a lot of the
information they get from private sources, as well as their
ability to track global network flows and do their own analysis
around anomalies and things like that, it's faster, it's
contextualized. It limits the incentive to participate in some
of the information-sharing venues that currently exist.
Having said that, I would say that there's no shortage of
information-sharing activities that are underway in our sector.
We have identified informal, formal, structured, and
unstructured venues where information sharing is currently
taking place. It's a very active community.
Mr. Langevin. But I just want to know, really, what's
changed? What more specific things have changed since the act
was passed?
Mr. Mayer. Well, I think people have become more aware of
the need to share information, and there's a greater
willingness to do that. I think what I see is that the
information-sharing venues that exist are more robust today.
Our association, for example, has recently created an
information-sharing mechanism for small and mid-size
businesses. What we've heard from them is they don't have the
resources to participate in all of the information-sharing
venues. They appreciate a central association helping them in
terms of setting priorities and where to look for information.
But we have to go by--we have to understand that each
company is going to make their own determination about the
value of participating in information sharing. There's no one-
size-fits-all here.
So the answer to your question is, directionally, we've
made progress in information sharing. I don't know how to tell
you that it's correlated directly to the Information Sharing
Act.
Mr. Langevin. OK. Thank you, Mr. Mayer.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. I concur with the comments from Mr.
Mayer. I think we've seen increased visibility associated with
information-sharing organizations. There's been an increased
participation beyond just the ISACs, so all different types of
communities being able to engage in this, and those communities
then engaging back with the Government.
So the increased visibility across industry from the
passage of CISA and I think the aspect of liability protection
has also encouraged many to engage in ISAOs, ISACs, and others,
which is that bridge toward information sharing with the
Government.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Donovan.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I preface this with all of our cyber hearings by you're
talking to a guy whose VCR still blinks 12. So you have to
speak to me in layman's terms.
I guess the Chairman's goal here is to find out incentives
for information sharing. I guess the first thing you have to
look at is, like, what's the disincentives?
So maybe all of you could just explain to me what the
disincentives are. As a layperson, I would think that maybe you
wouldn't want your competitors to know of your vulnerabilities.
Maybe there's a fiduciary duty with your clients that if your
data is vulnerable that that might be a disincentive of
alerting the world that there's vulnerabilities in the system.
So maybe you just could explain to me what the
disincentives are for information sharing or exposures or
attempts of attacks for each of you, and then maybe we could
talk about the incentives.
Your National Transportation Safety Board, for somebody who
is not as familiar as you are, sounds like a wonderful idea.
But maybe we could talk about the disincentives first. Can you
explain to me a little bit about that and then we can figure
out how to give incentives for people to do it?
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Congressman.
I would break the disincentives up into two categories. One
would be reputational risk. If I'm saying, we've been targeted,
somebody's penetrated through our network, they're inside, we
found them there, here are the indicators that you can use to
see if they're inside your network, that can introduce
reputational risk. That could cause problems for stock. That
could cause problems with regulators.
The protections that were put in place I think address many
of those concerns, to the extent they can be addressed through
legislation, but there are things that are outside the control
of that legislation.
The other factor I would say is the work factor. If I'm as
an organization going to share information with another
organization, that's going to require me to do work. That's
going for me to require that I take staff and give them the
responsibility of sharing the information that other companies
want. If I'm in the situation in which my network has been
compromised, the last thing I'm thinking about is her network.
So I think that those are the two things that keep
companies from sharing information.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. I concur with Rob's remarks. I
definitely agree that reputational risk associated with
information sharing is paramount. It's in the front of your
mind when you're doing this. A lot of times you're ensuring
that the source of information is not to be attributed.
We leverage the traffic light protocol so that we can, as
we're sharing information, we can tell the recipient, is this
something that you can share publicly, or is this something you
can share within your community, or is this something that is
only between me and you as an individual.
That's been really helpful for addressing the reputational
risk associated with that. Then you understand where that
information is going to go on the other side.
Again, that is through a trusted relationship. So you have
to have a trusted community in which you can share that
information that adheres to those stipulations associated with
the TLP.
Then I definitely agree with the overhead to sharing. You
have to have a robust program in place, because as you share
information, you're going to get questions back. You want to
make sure you have the resources to provide that potential
context that might be needed for their individual environment.
So there's definitely going to be--you're going to have to
have the maturity within your organization to be able to--the
resources to be able to share that information in a way that it
doesn't cause them more work on the other end, and then trying
to figure out how to implement things, which can sometimes
happen and cause, you know, the lack of sharing.
Mr. Donovan. Ms. Cagliostro.
Ms. Cagliostro. I think there's two big reasons why people
aren't sharing. I think the first is, is this kind of lack of
expertise, especially in the small and mid-size market, where
they don't feel comfortable. Maybe they don't know if something
is going to be relevant to everyone else. There's insecurity,
and you don't want to be the organization that's sharing
irrelevant intelligence.
When you think about some of the large organizations, they
have full threat intelligence teams, they're producing
intelligence, and so there's a lot more that they can share.
For an organization that's a small or medium business, it
might be as simple as they've seen this on their network.
That can be useful information to other organizations as
well. If you're in the financial services vertical and a ton of
small banks are seeing a--you know, they're all seeing the same
indicator, they don't need to share net new intelligence, but
telling the other banks that they're seeing that is useful
information.
I also think that it's got to be really easy for people to
share. We talk all the time about how often we don't have
enough resource in cybersecurity and analysts are overburdened.
No one in cybersecurity says, ``Man, I have way too much free
time, I wish I had more things to do.''
So when we think about sharing, it has to be something that
is really easy for them. Like for Amex, for example, they're
part of FS-ISAC. They're already sharing with organizations.
What do they need to do? Why should they share with the
Government? Why should they add this additional step in their
processes?
So I think when we're talking about how we can improve for
AIS in particular and incentivize sharing, I think the first is
to make it easy for people to do. They shouldn't have to stand
up additional technology. They shouldn't have to go--it
shouldn't be a separate workflow for them. It should be part of
what they're doing already.
I think the other side is that what's unique about the
Government is that you have unprecedented visibility and
unprecedented--unmatched visibility, rather. If I'm explaining
to my executive why I'm sharing, they want to know, ``What's
the justification, what's the benefit that I get from this?''
If they could say, ``Well, I'm getting something that I
can't get anywhere else, only the Government has it,'' I think
that's something that's powerful. That's something where
there's an immediate reason of, ``Oh, OK, well, you're giving
me visibility that I have no other mechanism to get, please
keep sharing with them, I would like this to continue.''
Those, I think, are the primary ways we can improve it.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you.
Mr. Mayer. Congressman, I would echo the remarks around
small and medium business. I think all of the issues that were
raised there are, in fact, the case with our sector.
What I would say is, in the case of the network service
providers, especially from a critical infrastructure
perspective, there's absolutely no disincentive to share, in
fact just the opposite. There's a tremendous incentive to
share.
It's very common. First of all, we have formal venues where
on a weekly basis the network service providers convene and
talk about what's going on on the networks and what they're
seeing. On a quarterly basis, the chief information security
officers of the largest internet service providers meet to talk
about what's happening in the environment globally and what
they're doing to mitigate those risks.
Importantly, when events arise, you immediately see the
sector rallying to respond to those events. So, for example, in
October 2016 when the Dyn attack occurred, our members, through
the Comms-ISAC, immediately convened and were ready to respond
in any way that was requested. We coordinated that activity
through the National Coordinating Center.
So the nature of the networks and their interdependencies
and interconnection mitigates, I think, against any interest in
not sharing information that impacts the network.
This has been going on for quite a while. It's quite
sophisticated. It's often, you know, private and behind the
scenes. It does involve Government when necessary.
So I think that it's a very effective mechanism, and we
learn from our experiences with each event and it's gotten more
refined.
Mr. Donovan. Great. I thank you. All my time has expired,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the
Ranking Member.
I would like to, before I start, take a moment of personal
privilege to acknowledge the Texas National Guard and their
leadership development class program. So if they would stand.
We appreciate your presence here today.
I want to applaud them for all the work that they did
during Hurricane Harvey. You have at least two Texans in the
room, I believe, with the Chairman.
So we are greatly appreciative. As soon as I finish my
questioning, I look forward to chatting with you. Thank you all
very much.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. I'm sure I can safely say that
all Texans thank you for your efforts in those regards.
The gentlelady is recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you. It looks like the clock has
run, but I thank the Chairman for his indulgence.
Let me just read a statement that I thought was
particularly potent and I think all of us can reflect over.
Over the past year Russian actors targeted U.S. election
infrastructure. Of course, they are not my words, but words
from the intelligence community and particularly the Office of
Director of National Intelligence.
Hackers escalated efforts to breach the domestic energy
sector and WannaCry and NotPetya ransomware wreaked havoc on
public and private infrastructure around the world. According
to Symantec, the world of cyber espionage experienced a notable
shift toward more overt activity designed to destabilize and
disrupt targeted organizations and countries.
Let me also acknowledge that the NPPD Office of
Cybersecurity and Communications, specifically the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, carries
out the bulk of our DHS responsibilities relating to
facilitating the sharing of cyber threat information. It is a
fixture that we have in place.
Although DHS is authorized to deploy a range of tools,
resources, and programs to carry out its cyber mission, it has
limited authority to regulate privately-owned networks and
cannot require private entities to adopt specific security
measures, grant access to their systems, or share information.
So I am applauding and I do think it is important that we
have this hearing, but I would like to emphasize with the level
of breach that we experienced that this requires as much a
concern about the private sector as it requires patriotism and
the recognition that we must find a common path that gives
comfort to the layered tech industry but as well protects the
American people.
I don't think any of you sitting here, of whom I appreciate
very much your presence, want to be part of a breached
electoral system, one that is not reliable, one that does not
equate to the democratic principles that we are so attuned to.
So as I pose my questions, I'm hoping that we can find a
pathway. I am very interested in the thoughts offered that
suggested that we must make it easy. We should not have to
stand up new technology which means we don't have to complicate
it for you. Then, of course, ``what's in it for us?''. That's a
little difficult for me on the ``what's in it for us?'' because
I'm not sure I fully understand what would have to be in it for
us.
So why don't I go to the witness who indicated that, and
that would be Ms. Cagliostro.
What would it mean to say, ``what is in it for us?''
Ms. Cagliostro. So when I say that, I mean in the context
of you have to think about the return on investment for
organizations. In cybersecurity it is an incredibly research--
or, sorry, resource-strapped organization. CISOs are always
asking for more money. There are very few organizations, I'm
sure, that have spending decreasing.
So when we think about information sharing, it is a cost
like any other process or any other new tool or technique that
we're going to bring on-line.
In order for that cost to make sense, we have to empower
organizations with the answer for the ROI question. Is it that
we're giving them visibility they don't have? Is it that we're
helping them to protect organizations that are ultimately
liabilities to them because they connect to their network?
So in the example of banks, big banks have connectivity
into maybe smaller banks' networks. It is beneficial to share
information with those smaller banks because they expose the
bigger banks' network to risk.
So when I say the ``what's in it for me?'', I mean more in
the context of ROI. I completely agree with you, I think that
patriotism should play a role in this as well, but I think if
we really want to see success there we have to help
organizations answer the ROI question.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So would it be that the exposure,
publicity, I guess that part of--I mean, I don't think the
Government can give monetary value. So what would be the kind
of exposure that they wouldn't get that would be positive that
we could be engaged in for them doing information sharing?
Ms. Cagliostro. I think that the Government has access to
data, that is the thing that the Government has, and I believe
the number was 2,200 indicators so far that have been
declassified and released to industry.
I think that--so today there's something like 100 million
indicators. It is in our platform alone. There's a tremendous
amount of threat data that's available out there.
I think that the 2,200 number becomes a little bit less the
large or an imposing number when you think about the context of
available information. I think what Government can do is by
accelerating and maybe increasing the level of what they're
declassifying, then they're answering the question for industry
and saying, ``Hey, I'm now giving you data that you can't get
anywhere else.'' There's value here because you can't go to a
vendor and buy it. You can't go develop it internally.
Then that's an immediate quick answer that when a CISO or a
CEO says, ``Why am I sharing with the Government?'' they say,
because they're giving us visibility that we cannot achieve
anywhere else and ultimately that's going to benefit our
protections.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me ask this question that if all of
you would take a hit.
I have a third question, Mr. Chairman, and I'll be
finished.
In your view, what do companies perceive is the value of
sharing information with DHS--and you have answered it partly,
but I would like to hear the other members--recognizing that
there are issues with the timeliness and usefulness of some
shared threat data? What features of DHS bulletins, alerts, and
other products do companies find helpful? As well as what do
you think is--so the value, and then what do you think the
biggest challenge is?
I would like to start with the first witness because I was
interested in your comments about what would be helpful is
determining or we should be determining how the cyber incident
happened and what can we do to protect ourselves.
I noticed that you said we can't require it, but I'm really
looking for a way that we don't use the word ``require,'' but
we have a cohesive relationship that it is beneficial that I'm
willing to act positively to do it and it will help both
business and government. So somewhere short of requiring, but
obviously it has to be mutual benefit, as has been said.
But the challenges and the value of sharing information.
Mr. Knake. Yes, ma'am.
I look at this--I look to the Department of Defense as a
model on this. What the Defense Cyber Crime Center has done
with their DIBnet program is they have created the mechanism by
which companies can share, but they have also created a reason
to share. It is really because they take a customer service
approach to their community.
If you as a DIB company share information with DCCC, they
will share information that is pertinent back to you and to the
rest of the community.
You say, ``We saw this activity on our network,'' they'll
push that through the intelligence community. They'll come back
to you and say, ``Oh, that may be related to this, this, and
this.'' They'll give you mitigation methods, they will do
malware analysis, and they will push the findings from that
analysis back to you.
So I think if you want to get more information coming into
DHS you need to think not in terms of the volume of overall
data that you get back by participating, but what do you get
back specifically related to the information that you share in.
That would be how you would create a higher volume of
information coming into Government.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So it would have to be relevant to the
particular producer of information sharing?
Mr. Knake. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would that be the gist of it?
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. Yes, I agree with Rob and the
challenge. I think I would say it is really to help operators
institutionalize this information within their environments,
they need to be able to almost share playbook-type details. So
that kinds of context that, you know, that's going to be
specific to how I would implement these indicators within my
environment, which is more than just an IP address or a URL.
So the playbook-type details that you need to implement
this is just not available in a lot of the current information-
sharing systems. But the value is definitely inherent in all
information-sharing programs, and it comes down to one person's
detection is another person's prevention.
So between these two, the value and the challenge,
collectively, the ability to bring those two things together,
and technology and these information-sharing programs are
coalescing on those two that we're seeing through the evolution
of better capabilities, more available systems, and such.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I don't know if you want to add anymore.
Ms. Cagliostro. Sure. So I want to agree with Ann on what
she discussed with the context, because what tends to happen is
that if organizations don't have that additional context, I
think that's kind-of the easiest step to what I talked about
with that return on investment. Even if it is not net new
intelligence, but a course of action or a recommendation, I
think that can be really helpful, as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Mayer.
Mr. Mayer. Congresswoman, thank you.
I think you alluded to the fact that we're increasingly
seeing nation-state attacks. That's just the reality of the
environment right now.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes.
Mr. Mayer. In light of that, the Government brings very
unique capabilities, especially within the context of the
intelligence community, to bring contextual light to what the
campaign is, who are the targets, what's at risk.
Recently we have seen, and it is very encouraging, DHS
invite more communications about providing context around some
of these activities, advanced persistent threats, as they're
called.
The challenge for us, and it is very frustrating as you can
imagine, is that there are instances where Classified
information might be shared with people who are cleared, but
the actionable part requires sharing that information with
people inside your organizations who might not be cleared. That
frustration is real and we have to work to resolve that.
One of the ways we can do that, and DHS has offered to do
this, is we need to create tear-lines, and we need to bring the
technical people to the table so they can understand not
necessarily the attribution, but what does the campaign look
like, what's the context, who are the targets, what are we
seeing. That's a two-way street.
So just like we said we can't legislate confidence, we
can't legislate trust, but we can start building that trust,
and I think we are beginning to see that evolve. The question
is can we ramp it up quickly enough in light of the
accelerating attacks that we're experiencing.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I had--this was a third
question.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Yes, I'm sorry. The gentlelady's time has
expired. The gentleman from Virginia has a 4 o'clock
appointment, and I want to give him an opportunity to ask
questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Can I just put my question on the record,
and then I'll yield to this gentleman if I can?
Mr. Ratcliffe. You can.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It was to you, Mr. Mayer, because of--and
I keep thinking of call you mayor, so I'm trying to find out
what city you're the mayor of. Mayor of cyber threats.
But can you think about this? I will see whether or not I'm
still here after the gentleman speaks. But you were concerned
that we're learning a lot about--are we learning enough to
react to the evolving cyber threats?
Then last, this whole issue of new devices. Are we learning
enough about new devices? My position is that we need a lot of
work in that area.
So thank you for allowing me put the question on the
record.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Garrett, is recognized.
Mr. Garrett. So it is my pleasure. I thank the gentlelady
from Texas for some really good questions that I think dovetail
relatively well with what we have in our 5 minutes.
We talked about the actors being either nation-states or
non-nation-states. I think that speaks to the nature of the
threat. It troubles me because historically the paradigm of
existential threats--and, obviously a lot of you all are
involved in the private sector.
But I think that Mr. Knake nailed it when he talked about
the tragedy of the commons. If there's not cross-communication
we're lost. If we learn from the attacks on the grid in the
Ukraine or sort-of the probes in the Baltic States we
understand that what might be used against the public sector
one day may be used against the private sector the next. It
really doesn't matter who the threat is, but it is different
than what we faced in the past.
So I wonder--and by the way, I want to get this on the
record, Andy Greenberg's work, particularly in Wired, June 20,
2017, and his book, ``How to Switch a Country Off,'' which I'm
sure you all are familiar with, to the extent that there's
stuff that's outside the realm of Classified that can be
enlightening to individuals in the room and perhaps abroad who
are interested in learning about this, that is sort-of
sobering.
Having said all of that, I'm an advocate for limited
government. Having said that, if we don't information share,
we're lost. If we look, I think, at what happened in Ukraine,
almost everything that was used to flip the lights on and off
at will on a time line at the choosing of the attackers was
off-the-shelf, but the white list-black list information wasn't
shared, and so it wasn't caught.
Can you speak to the nature of how important it is to
communicate privately, publicly, and with one another? I would
love to get a 10- or 20-second bite on the nature of the
threat, if you could give a 1 to 10 scale as it relates to the
existential nature of the cyber threat. I think I know the
answer. I want to hear from the experts and I want it on the
record because I think America needs to know the answer.
We'll just work out way down the panel.
Mr. Knake. Thank you, Congressman.
I would say that the expectation we should have is that
everything we've seen happening overseas will happen in the
United States under the right geopolitical circumstances. If
the lights have gotten turned off in Ukraine when Russians saw
fit to turn the lights off in Ukraine, the lights will get
turned off in the United States when Russians see that it's in
their interest to do that.
So I think from that perspective we need to be planning,
and we need to be planning not just for how we protect the grid
but how we will respond and recover.
Mr. Garrett. You're not a preparedness guy, but the impact
of the lights going off is dead people, right? I mean,
literally human lives are lost when the electricity goes out,
whether it's people on ventilators, whether it's people who
need their medicines refrigerated, et cetera, right?
Again, I know the answer, you know the answer, but this
needs to be out there so that the American people understand
the gravity of the answer. But that's fair to say, right, human
life would be the consequence?
Mr. Knake. Yes. I think the important thing is to make our
adversaries aware that we will view that as the consequence and
we will respond accordingly on a National level.
Mr. Garrett. We can move down the table. I've got a finite
amount of time.
Ms. Barron-Dicamillo. So I would say it is important to
remember that a lot of the advanced persistent threat actors
moonlight as cyber criminals. So they are using the same tools
in their day job that they're using in the evening against--you
know, for criminal or for monetary-type initiatives.
So you have to look at them as the collective and look at
the tactics, techniques, and procedures in a collective in
order to be effective.
Mr. Garrett. I'm not even going to try to butcher your
name, ma'am.
Ms. Cagliostro. It happens all the time.
So you mentioned existential threat. I think those are
scary words, and I think they're appropriate words.
What's new--the threat is not new. We've always had
conflict with other nations. There's always been pressure
there. What's new is the reach that technology brings into our
lives. The nation-state can--I have a cell phone, I have a
watch. When you get into medical technology and device
technology it is literally implanted in your body. Self-driving
cars.
As you see this evolve the existential threat continues to
grow because it just becomes a larger and more personal way
that you can be touched and attacked.
Mr. Garrett. The scale--Mr. Mayer, we're going to get to
you--and the scale required to launch a decisive or
debilitating attack against a nation-state, it used to be
measured in cavalry or battle ships or battle tanks or fighter
planes, and now it can be an actor with internet access,
correct?
Ms. Cagliostro. Correct. Over the summer, I believe, or
some point earlier this year, there was a botnet that used
different devices, not traditional computers, servers, things
like that. They infected devices that are in your homes.
Because of the prevalence and the availability of those they
were able to create a pretty powerful botnet that could deny
service. So that's definitely something that----
Mr. Garrett. Mr. Chair, I'm about to run out of time. I
want to give Mr. Mayer a chance. But what I want to do here
today is draw on the expertise of these folks, again sort-of
recommend Andy Greenberg's work to the lay public, and
certainly look forward to talking more about this moving
forward.
Because another thing that's refreshing is the bipartisan
nature, I think, of the fact that we are addressing this. Sure,
people want to score political points. Yes, the Russians are
bad actors. This is about America's existential future.
I think that the takeaway needs to be that the
communication has to be public-private, and it has to be free-
flowing, because if the Ukrainians had good communication a lot
of these things perhaps are stopped because their systems are
updated to recognize the malware that was used against them, at
least theoretically.
But if it doesn't get updated every month--or every day
even--off-the-shelf stuff brings the whole grid down.
Mr. Mayer, I'm sorry, and I'm done.
Mr. Mayer. No, thank you, Congressman. Real quickly,
there's no question, I mean, the exponential growth of IoT
devices presents a serious risk to networks in terms of how
distributed denial-of-service attacks can occur, and there's a
lot of work being done to implement defense mechanisms.
But I want to just refer to something on US-CERT. It is in
the--it is a top item on the alert. It is Unclassified. It
speaks to a campaign against critical infrastructure involving
electricity, water, transportation, and some others. All of the
information or a good part of the information is in TLP,
traffic light protocol white, and there's whole series of
activities that can be done.
That kind of information that's provided by the Government
is invaluable and needs to get dispersed widely, not just in
terms of remediating the problem, but making people aware of
how significant the threat is, which is what I think you're
speaking to.
Coming from the public to encourage greater Government and
industry collaboration in this area is very important. I think
that it is bipartisan. I think that every Member of Congress
can help move that forward.
Mr. Garrett. Thank you. I apologize for going over.
Mr. Ratcliffe. No apology necessary.
I thank all of the witnesses for your testimony today. I
thank all of the Members for their thoughtful questions.
Members of the committee may have, in fact are likely to
have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we'll ask
you to respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will
remain open for a period of 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Congressman James R. Langevin for Robert K. Knake
Question 1. In your position paper, you identified multiple
obstacles in establishing a ``FINnet'', including the lack of cleared
personnel, the absence of secure facilities, and a strong cultural
difference regarding the handling of Classified material. Most
significantly, the financial sector differs from the Defense Industrial
Base in that it conducts business in the public domain as opposed to
within the Classified spaces. How would Classified material shared on
FINnet (or the CINet mentioned in the hearing) be utilized to defend
Unclassified networks?
Answer. If CInet were developed, the utilization of Classified
information by the financial services industry and other sectors would
be substantially the same as within the Defense Industrial Base (DIB).
Classified information shared by DOD over the DIBnet is shared for the
purpose of helping DIB companies defend their Unclassified business
networks from threat actors.
As with the DOD program, companies would not take Classified
information off of Classified networks and use that information on
Unclassified networks. To do so, would put at risk sources and methods
used to collect the information as well as violate the law, which
provides substantial penalties. Instead, indicators of compromise that
relate to Classified threat information would either be downgraded so
they can be used in Unclassified network defense activity or fed into
the Enhanced Cybersecurity Services (ECS) program, which utilizes
Classified indicators to detect and block attacks.
A network like CInet would provide two things: (1) The context
around threats; and (2) the ability to coordinate. On context, CInet
would allow the intelligence community to explain the importance of
certain indicators and what they may mean if detected within an
organization. For instance, if an indicator is triggered by traffic run
through the ECS program, companies would be able to communicate with
Government agencies to understand what the indicator was for. At
present, without this capability, companies participating in ECS have
no knowledge of what the program has detected.
On coordination, when an organization discovers an incident or when
law enforcement or the intelligence community have reason to suspect a
compromise within an organization, CInet would be an invaluable tool.
It would allow organizations to securely exchange information with
Government and with partner organizations. Such communication might
include both advice on remediation as well as information coming out of
the victim organization that others could use to see if they are
compromised or prevent a future compromise.
At the tactical level, participating companies would need to apply
for facility clearances. They would then need to construct a secure
storage area at the secret level--a Vault. They would need to hire or
appoint a Facility Security Officer who would be legally responsible
for ensuring that Classified information is protected. Companies would
likely choose to locate their Vault's close to their Security
Operations Centers (SOCs). A Vault would likely include one or more
terminals that would connect to the Classified network. Each terminal
would consist of a laptop and phone. Many companies would likely choose
to have a small conference table within the Vault for Classified
discussions. Information obtained on the Classified network would be
used to help guide decisions for protecting the Unclassified network.
Crucially, only officials within the company who have the appropriate
clearance and the requisite ``need to know'' would participate in these
discussions.
The investment needed to stand up such an operation is relatively
small for these organizations, many of whom have security budgets in
the hundreds of millions of dollars; however, a good interim step might
be to establish the network but place terminals in existing Government
or defense contractor facilities. Organizations with cleared personnel
could be stationed at these facilities or visit these facilities on an
as-needed basis.
It is also important to note that the Financial Services industry
has recruited heavily from the U.S. military, intelligence community,
civilian agencies, and defense contractors. Of the eight Global
Systemically Important Banks (G-SIBs)\1\ that are based in the United
States, five have Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs), or
equivalent, with backgrounds in National security. For instance, the
head of global cybersecurity at Citibank was previously the director of
the National Cybersecurity & Communications Integration Center at DHS;
the CISO at JP Morgan, came there from Lockheed Martin; the CISO at
Goldman Sachs is the former assitant secretary of cybersecurity &
communications at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS); the CISO
at Wells Fargo is a retired Naval Officer who served at the NSA; and
the CISO at Bank of New York Mellon spent 19 years at Booz Allen prior
to taking on that role.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/2016-list-of-global-
systemically-important-banks-G-SIBs.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All these firms have hired team members below the CISO with
Government or defense experience as have many other leading
institutions. All have personnel that have maintained their clearances
from Government or military service or received clearances from DHS.
Many have built out intelligence fusion centers that rival the
capabilities of Government agencies. They are actively tracking actor
sets as these actors target their systems and are continuously sharing
information with each other. In my view, they are at a stage of
maturity where real-time sharing of Classified information would be
useful and warranted.
Question 2a. What would give companies an incentive to participate
in a cyber NTSB given the evident reputational risks involved?
Answer. For a Cyber NTSB to succeed, it will be crucial that
companies are obligated to participate before an incident occurs. While
an incident is unfolding, companies will always believe that the risks
of sharing information about the incident outweigh the benefits. The
reason for that is simple: No benefits will accrue directly to them.
The value in sharing this information goes to the security of other
companies that are receiving the information and, in no small part, to
the National security of the United States. If, on the other hand,
companies receive a benefit, such as Federally-backstopped cyber
insurance, for commiting to notifying the Cyber NTSB and having its
team come in in the event of an incident, the risks could be managed.
Question 2b. Can Congress reduce these risks?
Answer. Congress could reduce these risks by establishing the
program in coordination with industry and directing relevant Federal
agencies to develop rules that would ensure the anonymity of
participating companies. Cogress should also ensure that information
shared under the program is protected from regulatory agencies as under
the existing Protected Critical Infrastructure Information program. Of
course, such protections should not exempt companies from meeting any
obligations to disclose incidents to regulators.
Question 2c. How can no-fault post mortems be encouraged across the
cybersecurity landscape?
Answer. I continue to believe that the best way to promote no-fault
post mortems is with insurance. A binding requirement through insurance
contracts, whether backed by the Federal Government or by the insurance
industry without Federal support, would provide the legal basis
necessary to gain commitments to engaging in post-mortem information-
sharing programs.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Ann Barron-Dicamillo
Question 1a. Can you describe your involvement with both the DHS
Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration Program (CISCP) and the
Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS) program?
Question 1b. What are your engagements with the leadership of each?
Question 1c. Have you run into any obstacles to your active
participation in each?
Question 1d. What is your plan for being an active participant in
each?
Answer. We currently receive the CISCP data via FS-ISAC and have no
plans to change that process. We were informed by DHS that
participating directly in the CISCP program would preclude the ability
of additional AXP employees obtaining security clearances through the
Private-Sector Clearance Program due to DoD policy.
We do not currently participate in the AIS program but have been
evaluating that program for possible future participation. We met
recently with DHS leadership about both the CISCP and AIS programs. Our
understanding from these discussions is that the data from the two
programs has substantial overlap. We also have concerns about the
validation of the data and the vetting of the participants for AIS. One
of our current threat intelligence vendors is in the process of
consuming AIS data which will then be validated. Once we have verified
that process, we will further evaluate AIS participation.
Question 2a. The Cybersecurity Act of 2015 made substantial changes
to the legal authorities regarding cyber threat indicator sharing. What
specific activities is your organization carrying out today thanks to
those authorities and liability protections?
Question 2b. What is your assessment of the effectiveness of the
current liability protections?
Answer. We have formalized our internal standards and operational
procedures with regard to cyber threat indicator sharing to comply with
the law. Our teams carry out these processes on a daily basis so we
take advantage of these authorities and protections constantly. While
the liability protections have not been tested in practice, we do
believe that such protections encourage the sharing of threat
indicators.
Question 3. Have you utilized the previously Classified indicators
that are provided within the AIS data feed to improve the protection of
your networks?
Our understanding is that we already obtain previously Classified
indicators shared by Government participants of AIS via the CISCP
reports to FS-ISAC.
Question 4. What changes to AIS and supporting activities do you
recommend to improve the effectiveness of the program?
Answer. We recommend the following enhancements to AIS to improve
the effectiveness of the program:

Add support for STIX 2.0.

Alleviate trust concerns for outbound sharing by additional
vetting of participants or supporting multiple trust levels or
communities of interest for sharing beyond the existing options
of DHS only, all USG, or all AIS participants.

Address data quality concerns through development of best
practices, training, and mechanisms for assessing and providing
feedback to participants.
Question 5. In your written testimony, you mention quality versus
quantity of threat indicator information.
Is there a need for high throughput data shared at ``machine
speed'' even if it hasn't been thoroughly analyzed yet?
Question 5b. Can companies conduct meaningful analysis on
indicators shared through AIS absent contextual information, or is that
essential for the indicators to be useful? What basis do you have for
making that determination?
Question 5c. Are the privacy protections put in place under the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015 adequate, particularly if indicators need to
be analyzed before sharing, which would allow time for more thorough
privacy reviews?
Answer. High-speed data is not very valuable without context. High
throughput can lead to more ``noise'' in the system and can be
paralyzing for less sophisticated organizations to act upon.
Companies can potentially conduct meaningful analysis of AIS data
without context but this requires more resources to validate and curate
that data. The cybersecurity industry has coalesced around the need for
more contextual information sharing as evidenced by Cyber Threat
Intelligence vendors producing information-sharing playbooks.
The challenge of privacy protections is that what constitutes
personal information is shifting and changing with new technologies,
and what information is sufficient to identify a specific individual
also changes with context and technology. The DHS ``Guidance to Assist
Non-Federal Entities to Share Cyber Threat Indicators and Defensive
Measures with Federal Entities under the Cybersecurity Information
Sharing Act of 2015'' is a helpful document which identifies some
categories of personal information which is unlikely to be directly
related to a cybersecurity threat, but we suspect this guidance should
be periodically updated.
We do think that the privacy protections, between the guidance to
non-Federal entities and the further guidance to Federal entities and
DHS on required reviews of specific fields such as raw email message
bodies, appear to be sufficient to protect personal privacy and have
not been a major impediment to participation in these programs.
Question From Honorable James R. Langevin for Patricia Cagliostro
Question. What changes to AIS and supporting activities do you
recommend to improve the effectiveness of the program?
Answer.
1. Incentivize organizations to share back to AIS by enriching the
intelligence with additional data and require organizations to
share to gain access. The Government has unmatched visibility
and intelligence available in Unclassified and Classified
environments. This data can be used to enrich shared
intelligence that organizations do not have access to. By using
this data to enrich the intelligence and limiting only to
organizations that share intelligence back to AIS, you create
an incentive to encourage organizations to share rather than
just consume. For example, an organization shares an IP address
and the Government knows that IP address is associated with a
campaign that affects the financial services industry. The
Government would enrich the shared indicator with this
information and share the enriched indicator with organizations
that share with AIS.
2. Create a grant program for security companies to develop bi-
directional integrations with AIS. Today, many organizations
consume and integrate AIS with their security tools, but there
is limited availability of bi-directional integrations.
Analysts collect and produce cyber threat intelligence as part
of their daily workflow. In the Anomali platform, analysts
simply check a box to automatically share intelligence with
their community. They are more likely to share because it's
integrated with their daily workflows, rather than an
additional step or technology they must work with. AIS will
benefit greatly from bi-directional integration with the tools
that they perform their daily work in. This requires
development resources from the security industry. The
Government could create a grant program for the security
industry to pay for the development required to create bi-
directional integrations with the AIS program.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Robert H. Mayer
Question 1a. The Cybersecurity Act of 2015 made substantial changes
to the legal authorities regarding cyber threat indicator sharing. What
specific activities are your member organizations carrying out today
thanks to those authorities and liability protections?
Answer. The ability to share information about cyber threats and
effective countermeasures among industry players and between industry
and Government is crucial, and the explicit liability protections for
sharing in accordance with Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA)
were welcome, as were the authorizations to monitor information systems
and share or receive cyber threat indicators and defensive measures.
The communications sector participates in structured cybersecurity
information sharing through, for example, the Communications
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (Comm-ISAC), the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC), DHS's
Communications Sector Coordination Council (CSCC), the National
Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC), United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), CTIA's Cybersecurity
Working Group (CSWG), and among others.
Since the passage of the CISA in 2015, we have focused on moving
beyond information-sharing trials to automated sharing via new
technologies. CTIA, through its Cyber Threat Information Sharing Pilot,
has been working with large, medium, and small companies in both the
wireless and wireline segments to support industry efforts to share
cyber threat indicators and facilitate integration with the DHS
Automated Information Sharing portal. The pilot program was completed
this year and made strides to test the ability to automate the sharing
of threat information among carriers to rapidly and effectively
mitigate cyber threats, specifically focusing on Telephony Denial-of-
Service (TDoS) attacks.
Question 1b. What is your assessment of the effectiveness of the
current liability protections?
Answer. While CISA has provided greater confidence to the private
sector in their ability to share cyber threat indicators by removing
certain legal barriers, valid concerns about liability remain. As an
example, last year the Automotive Information Sharing and Analysis
Center (Auto-ISAC) was subpoenaed as part of an on-going class-action
lawsuit against Fiat Chrysler. While the Auto-ISAC was able to
successfully quash the subpoena, the ordeal has reportedly had a
chilling effect on participant's willingness to share information.\1\
There was another example of a broker and a security researcher teaming
up to publicly release a vulnerability in a medical device in an
apparent effort to short the stock of a medical device manufacturer.\2\
As a result of examples like these, companies must still conduct
thorough legal and risk analyses before sharing cyber threat
information. These reviews, while necessary, can potentially result in
delayed sharing or an unwillingness to share until uncertainties
surrounding liability are resolved.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Joshua Higgins, Head of auto industry's ISAC cites ``chilling
effect'' of lawsuit on cyber info-sharing, Inside Cybersecurity (Nov.
2, 2017).
\2\ See Linette Lopez, Carson Block has a new short, and his
reasoning is super creepy, Business Insider (Aug. 25, 2016).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. Have your member organizations utilized the previously
Classified indicators that are provided within the AIS data feed?
Answer. Yes, our members conducted an automated cyber-threat
information-sharing pilot, that concluded in 2017, and the AIS data
feed was incorporated into the effort. Other members receive AIS feeds
on a regular basis and review and pass along information to front-line
resources when it is timely, appropriately contextualized and therefore
actionable.
Question 3. What changes to AIS and supporting activities do you
recommend to improve the effectiveness of the program?
Answer. Based on the pilot experience referenced in response to
question 2 above, the pilot participants explored use cases and
scenarios associated with telecom-specific threats that are not
currently covered in the AIS vocabulary.
In particular, the pilot addressed Robocall trace-back and
Telephony Denial-of-Service (TDoS) threat scenarios as well as SS7
Blacklist Global Title information sharing.
Given that AIS focuses on the sharing of declassified indicators
shared at the un-Classified level, we would support the continued
efforts of the participating AIS Federal agencies to declassify
indicators and to enrich the contextual information provided with the
indicators.

[all]
