- EXAMINING PHYSICAL SECURITY AND CYBERSECURITY AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING PHYSICAL SECURITY AND CYBERSECURITY AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

=======================================================================

FIELD HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 30, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-35

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

28-822 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            William R. Keating, Massachusetts
John Katko, New York                 Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Will Hurd, Texas                     Filemon Vela, Texas
Martha McSally, Arizona              Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     J. Luis Correa, California
Mike Gallagher, Wisconsin            Val Butler Demings, Florida
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Nanette Diaz Barragan, California
John H. Rutherford, Florida
Thomas A. Garrett, Jr., Virginia
Brian K. Fitzpatrick, Pennsylvania
Ron Estes, Kansas
Vacancy
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Steven S. Giaier, Deputy General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Rear Admiral Todd A. Sokalzuk, Commander, Eleventh Coast Guard
District, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
Mr. Carlos C. Martel, Director of Field Operations, Los Angeles
Field Office, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Eugene D. Seroka, Executive Director, The Port of Los
Angeles:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Mr. Mario Cordero, Executive Director, The Port of Long Beach:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Ray Familathe, International Vice President, International
Longshore and Warehouse Union:
Oral Statement.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    27

For the Record

The Honorable Nanette Diaz Barragan, a Representative in Congress
From the State of California:
Comments.......................................................    38
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Statement of Anthony M. Reardon, National President, National
Treasury Employees Union.....................................    52

Appendix

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Letter From the National Association of Waterfront Employers...    55

EXAMINING PHYSICAL SECURITY AND CYBERSECURITY AT OUR NATION'S PORTS

----------

Monday, October 30, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
San Pedro, CA.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1 p.m., at the
Port of Los Angeles Administration Building, 425 South Palos
Verdes Street, San Pedro, California, Hon. Michael T. McCaul
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Thompson, Correa, and Barragan.
Also present: Representatives Estes, Rohrabacher, Hunter,
Lowenthal, and Torres.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
Committee's meeting today is ``Examining the Physical
Security and Cybersecurity of Our Nation's Ports.''
Before I begin, I would like to note that we have a number
of Members that are not on the Committee of Homeland Security
attending today. I would ask unanimous consent that they be
allowed to participate in today's hearing.
I appreciate the effort taken on behalf of all those
involved to have this important field hearing take place. I
want to thank the Port of Los Angeles for hosting us.
This is an official Congressional hearing. So we must abide
by certain rules of the Committee on Homeland Security and the
House of Representatives.
I kindly wish to remind our guests today that
demonstrations from the audience, including applause and verbal
outbursts, which I doubt will happen here today, will be a
violation of House rules.
It is important that we respect decorum and rules of the
committee.
I have also been requested to state that photography and
cameras are limited to accredited press only.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today Members of our committee have gathered here to
examine the physical and cybersecurity of our Nation's ports. I
would like to thank everyone who has traveled a great distance
to be here and to CBP and the Coast Guard for the tour of Port
of Los Angeles and the Port of Long Beach.
I would also like to thank each of the witnesses and look
forward to hearing your thoughts on how we can work together to
strengthen the security of America's ports.
America's port system is an industrial engine that drives
much of our economic success. Currently, U.S. seaports support
23 million American jobs and 4.6 trillion in economic activity,
or 26 percent of our economy.
This year alone, the Port of Los Angeles has processed over
6 million containers. These ports will only continue to remain
busy, as our trade volume is expected to quadruple by 2030.
A safe and unrestricted flow of goods and services through
our marine transportation system has allowed the United States
to become a global economic superpower.
Keeping our ports and our cargo containers safe is
absolutely vital to our Homeland Security as well as our
National financial health. We must make sure they are not
susceptible to attacks from our enemies.
Unfortunately, America's adversaries are constantly looking
for ways to strike our country with cyber attacks. As our port
systems increasingly benefit from new technology and advanced
computer systems, they also find themselves in the crosshairs
of international hackers and rogue nation-states.
In June, this very port was briefly shut down because of a
cyber attack that cost nearly $300 million in economic damage.
That is not acceptable. We must do more to strengthen
cybersecurity and these essential maritime hubs.
Fortunately, the Committee on Homeland Security has been
taking action. Proud to say that we have a great track record
when it comes to work across party lines to pass common-sense
legislation.
Last Monday, the House passed a reauthorization of the
Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism program, an
important public/private-sector partnership that strengthens
cargo security and international supply chains.
That very next day, we passed legislation that requires the
Secretary of DHS to implement a risk assessment model which
focuses on cybersecurity vulnerabilities and risks at America's
ports.
In July, Republicans and Democrats came together to pass
the first ever comprehensive reauthorization of DHS with an
overwhelming bipartisan vote. This reauthorization approves the
preparedness and readiness capabilities of the Coast Guard and
TSA while creating a mechanism for port operators to share
cyber threat information and best practices.
Chairs of the 9/11 Commission, Tom Kean, Lee Hamilton, have
recently called on the Senate to pass this reauthorization. It
needs to get to the President's desk and signed into law.
Finally, I would like to express the committee's
appreciation to the leadership and staff of the Port of Los
Angeles Harbor Administration for making this event possible.
[The statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
October 30, 2017
Today, Members of our committee have gathered here to examine the
physical security and cybersecurity of our Nation's ports.
Before we begin however, I would like to thank everyone who has
traveled a great distance to be here and to CBP and the Coast Guard for
the tour of the Port of Los Angeles and the Port of Long Beach.
I would also like to thank each of the witnesses and I look forward
to hearing your thoughts on how we can work together to strengthen the
security of America's ports.
America's port system is an industrial engine that drives much of
our economic success. Currently, U.S. seaports support 23 million
American jobs and $4.6 trillion in economic activity, or 26% of our
economy.
This year alone, the Port of Los Angeles has processed over 6
million containers. These ports will only continue to remain busy, as
our trade volume is expected to quadruple by 2030.
A safe and unrestricted flow of goods and services through our
marine transportation system has allowed the United States to become a
global, economic super power.
Keeping our ports and our cargo containers safe, is absolutely
vital to our homeland security as well as our National financial
health. We must make sure they are not susceptible to attacks from our
enemies.
Unfortunately, America's adversaries are constantly looking for
ways to strike our country with cyber attacks.
As our port systems increasingly benefit from new technology and
advanced computer systems, they also find themselves in the crosshairs
of international hackers and rogue nation states.
In June, this very port was briefly shut down because of a cyber
attack that cost nearly $300 million in economic damage. That is not
acceptable.
We must do more to strengthen cybersecurity of these essential
maritime hubs.
Fortunately, the Committee on Homeland Security in the House has
been taking action. And I am proud to say that we have a great track
record of working across party lines to pass common-sense legislation.
Just last Monday, the House passed a reauthorization of the Customs
Trade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT) program, an important
public-/private-sector partnership that strengthens cargo security and
international supply chains. The very next day, we passed legislation
that requires the Secretary of DHS to implement a risk assessment model
which focuses on cybersecurity vulnerabilities and risks at America's
ports.
In July, Republicans and Democrats came together to pass the first-
ever, comprehensive reauthorization of DHS with an overwhelming
bipartisan vote. This reauthorization improves the preparedness and
readiness capabilities of the Coast Guard and TSA, while creating a
mechanism for port operators to share cyber threat information and best
practices.
Chairs of the 9/11 Commission, Tom Kean and Lee Hamilton, have
recently called on the Senate to pass this DHS reauthorization. It
needs to get to the President's desk and signed into law.
Finally, I'd like to express the committee's appreciation to the
leadership and staff of the Port of Los Angeles Harbor Administration
for making this event possible.

Chairman McCaul. With that, the Chair now recognizes the
Ranking Member, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank you for holding this important hearing on port
security today.
I am pleased to be joined by my colleagues here at the Port
of Los Angeles in the Congressional district represented so
well by Representative Nanette Barragan. As a Member of the
committee on Homeland Security, Representative Barragan has
been a champion for the Port of Los Angeles and this community.
She is a leading voice on matters relating to seaport, port
security, and facilitating commerce. We are fortunate to have
her as a Member of our committee, and her constituents should
be assured she is working hard in Congress on their behalf.
As well as a Dodger fan also.
I want to thank the other Democratic Members for joining us
today from nearby Congressional districts. They are
Representative Lou Correa, who also is a valued Member of the
Committee on Homeland Security; Representative Norma Torres, a
former Member of the committee; and Representative Alan
Lowenthal, who represents the neighboring Port of Long Beach.
These Members present here reaffirm their commitment to the
security and prosperity of these ports and the surrounding
communities. I know they will make this a productive hearing.
Earlier today, we had the opportunity to tour and be
briefed about both the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach. The
scope of the operations by the port and their Federal, State,
and local partners is impressive, as is the magnitude of the
security challenges facing the ports.
At the same time, the ports are vitally important to trade
and commerce, not just locally, but across the country, and
around the globe.
Indeed, the bulk of U.S. overseas trade is carried by
ships, many of which call on the ports we are discussing today.
The economic consequences of a maritime terrorist attack would
be catastrophic to the country in addition to the potential
loss of life and property.
Unfortunately, port security sometimes gets shortchanged
when it comes to allocating scarce Federal security resources.
I would argue that rather than spending billions on a border
wall, for example, we should invest in better securing our
ports by strengthening their physical security, providing
appropriate Customs and Border Protection officer staffing, and
enhancing cyber defenses.
With respect to staffing, the National Treasury Employees
Union, which represent front-line CBP officers at our ports,
report that currently nearly 1,500 CBP officer vacancies and an
additional 2,000 CBP officers are needed to properly secure our
ports while facilitating travel.
This shortage of 3,500 officers is unacceptable. It puts
the security of our ports in jeopardy and slows valuable
commerce.
Coast Guard resources are similarly strained. For instance,
the commandant of the Coast Guard has stated that there were
over 500 smuggling events last year about which the Coast Guard
had information but unable to respond to due to a lack of
assets. Earlier today we heard similar testimony from Coast
Guard officials. Again, this is unacceptable.
With respect to cybersecurity, Representatives Barragan and
Correa have raised before this committee a major cyber attack
that occurred in June of this year at the Port of Los Angeles.
A.P. Moller-Maersk had to shut down its container operation,
costing the company as much as $300 million, and causing weeks
of disrupted operations.
I look forward to hearing from our panel about the lessons
learned, the precautions put in place since that incident, and
what more remains to be done.
We should be putting our scarce resources toward addressing
these gaps in our Nation's security. I hope we can address all
of these important issues today and that we can continue to
work together to enhance the security of our Nation's port.
In closing, I want to thank the witnesses for joining us
today and all the men and women who keep these ports operating
securely and efficiently for the benefit of local communities
and our entire country.
Again, I appreciate the Chairman convening this meeting and
look forward to discussion.
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
October 30, 2017
Earlier today, we had the opportunity to tour and be briefed about
both the Port of Los Angeles and Long Beach. The scope of the
operations by the ports and their Federal, State, and local partners is
impressive, as is the magnitude of the security challenges facing the
ports.
At the same time, the ports are vitally important to trade and
commerce not just locally, but across the country and around the globe.
Indeed, the bulk of U.S. overseas trade is carried by ships, many of
which call on the ports we are discussing today. The economic
consequences of a maritime terrorist attack could be catastrophic to
the country, in addition to the potential loss of life and property.
Unfortunately, port security sometimes gets short shrift when it
comes to allocating scarce Federal security resources. I would argue
that rather than spending billions on a border wall, for example, we
should invest in better securing our ports by strengthening their
physical security, providing appropriate Customs and Border Protection
officer staffing, and enhancing cyber defenses.
With respect to staffing, the National Treasury Employees Union
(NTEU), which represents front-line CBP officers at our ports, reports
there currently nearly 1,500 CBP officer vacancies and an additional
2,000 CBP officers are needed to properly secure our ports while
facilitating travel. This shortage of 3,500 officers is unacceptable.
It puts the security of our ports in jeopardy and slows valuable
commerce.
Coast Guard resources are similarly strained. For instance, the
Commandant of the Coast Guard has stated there were over 500 smuggling
events last year about which the Coast Guard had information but was
unable to respond to due to a lack of assets. Again, this is
unacceptable.
With respect to cybersecurity, Reps. Barragan and Correa have
raised before the committee a major cyber attack that occurred in June
of this year at the port of Los Angeles. AP Moller-Maersk had to shut
down its container operations, costing the company as much as $300
million and causing weeks of disrupted operations. I look forward to
hearing from our panel about the lessons learned, the precautions put
in place since that incident, and what more remains to be done.
We should be putting our scare resources toward addressing these
gaps in our Nation's security. I hope we can address all of these
important issues today and that we can continue to work together to
enhance the security of our Nation's ports.
In closing, I want to thank the witnesses for joining us today and
all the men and women who keep these ports operating securely and
efficiently for the benefit of local communities and our entire
country.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Ranking Member. I think we have
more Members here than some hearings we have in Washington, DC.
That says a lot about the Members of the committee and the
Members who are locally here in the Los Angeles area. I want to
thank you all for being at this hearing.
We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us. First is Admiral Todd Sokalzuk. He is a commander of
the Eleventh Coast Guard District for the United States Coast
Guard at the Department of Homeland Security.
Next, Mr. Carlos Martel is the director of field operations
at the Los Angeles Field Office for U.S. Customs and Border
Protection.
We also have Mr. Gene Seroka, and he is the executive
director of the Port of Los Angeles.
Mr. Mario Cordero is the executive director of the Port of
Long Beach.
Our final witness is Mr. Ray Familathe, the international
vice president of the International Longshore and Warehouse
Union.
I want to thank all of you for being here today. Your full
statements will appear in the record.
The Chair now recognizes the admiral for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF REAR ADMIRAL TODD A. SOKALZUK, COMMANDER, ELEVENTH
COAST GUARD DISTRICT, U.S. COAST GUARD, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Admiral Sokalzuk. Good afternoon, Chairman McCaul, Ranking
Member Thompson, and Members of the committee.
I am honored to be here today at the great Port of Los
Angeles to discuss the Coast Guard's role in port security.
Mr. Chairman, I would especially thank you. I really want
to thank all of you for your leadership and encouraging support
of the Coast Guard on this issue.
My complete statement has been provided to the committee
and I request to have it entered----
Chairman McCaul. Admiral, if you would turn on your
microphone.
Admiral Sokalzuk. Just to be clear, I asked that my
statement be entered into the official hearing record.
The Coast Guard offers enduring value to our Nation. We are
the only branch of the U.S. armed services within the
Department of Homeland Security and uniquely positioned to help
secure our ports, protect the marine transportation system, and
safeguard America's National economic security.
The Coast Guard's governance of the marine transportation
system ensures that it remains safe, secure, environmentally
sound and productive, particularly with regard to shared
critical infrastructure that we rely on for National security,
border security, and economic prosperity.
The Coast Guard's efforts to secure our ports and marine
transportation system begins far from here, overseas. We
leverage international partnerships. Through the International
Port Security program, the Coast Guard performs its in-country
port security assessments to determine the effectiveness of
security and anti-terrorism measures exhibited by foreign trade
partners.
We maintain over 40 maritime bilateral law enforcement
agreements and 11 bilateral proliferation security initiative
ship-boarding agreements. These agreements facilitate
international cooperation and allow Coast Guard teams to board
and search vessels at sea suspected of carrying illicit
shipments, weapons of mass destruction, their delivery systems,
or related materials.
The Coast Guard's membership within the intelligence
community provides global situational awareness, analysis, and
interagency collaboration opportunities with various
counterterrorism components, including the Central Intelligence
Agency, the National Counterterrorism Center, and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Intelligence also helps us push our
boarders out.
Direct timely intelligence is just a key enabler across a
broad spectrum of threats for us. While more than 90 percent of
our 2016 at-sea interdictions of illicit narcotics and illegal
aliens were cued by intelligence, the Coast Guard's aging major
cutters limit our ability to respond to that, even though we
have the intelligence.
Critical acquisitions like the off-shore patrol cutter are
essential to our long-term success in our fight against
transnational criminal organizations.
So while cargo crosses the oceans and nears our shore,
Coast Guard personnel co-located with Customs and Border
Protection at the National Targeting Center screen ships' crew
and passenger information for all vessels required to submit a
Notice of Arrival before entering a U.S. port.
As these ships then arrive in American waters, our
authorities, through the Maritime Transportation Security Act,
provide a robust regime for security plan approval and
compliance inspections for both maritime facilities and the
vessels.
Area maritime security committees, just like the vibrant
one in this area, provide a recurring forum for key agencies
and partners to address risk at each port, some of whom you
have talked to today.
We support our local partners through our participation in
FEMA's port security grant program, and just this year
regulated entities within the Los Angeles/Long Beach Port
Complex received $11.8 million in Federal grant money to
bolster physical and cybersecurity.
In June, we did feel the effects of a cyber event here in
this port community. Thankfully, neither of these resulted in
marine casualties, but they certainly demonstrated the extents
to which cyber vulnerabilities could affect the marine
transportation system.
We in the Coast Guard treat cyber as an operational risk,
and, to that end, it is part of our enduring competency of
managing risk, just like we do across all of our missions.
We continuously work with our partners, continuously work
with DHS and across industry to strengthen our relationships to
help us to manage this risk and, importantly, with public and
private stakeholders.
So for over two centuries, the Coast Guard has safeguarded
our Nation's maritime interests, the Coast Guard has layered
security strategy, day-to-day operations and coordination
across government, to ensure that we are well-positioned to
address the broad range of offshore and coastal threats that
could impact our National security.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Admiral Sokalzuk follows:]
Prepared Statement of Todd A. Sokalzuk
October 30, 2017
introduction
Good morning, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the committee. It is my pleasure to be here
today to discuss the Coast Guard's role in port security.
The U.S. Coast Guard is the world's premier, multi-mission,
maritime service responsible for the safety, security, and stewardship
of the maritime domain. At all times a military service and branch of
the U.S. Armed Forces, a Federal law enforcement agency, a regulatory
body, a first responder, and a member of the U.S. intelligence
community, the Coast Guard operates on all seven continents and
throughout the homeland, serving a Nation whose economic prosperity and
National security are inextricably linked to broad maritime interests.
America's economic prosperity is reliant on the safe, secure, and
efficient flow of cargo through the Marine Transportation System (MTS).
The Nation's waterways support $4.5 trillion of economic activity each
year, including over 250,000 American jobs.\1\ U.S. economic stability,
production, and consumption, enabled by the intermodal transportation
of goods through the midstream economy, are critical to American
prosperity and National security. This trade-driven economic prosperity
serves as a wellspring for our power and serves as a leading source of
our influence in the world. While we are mindful of the need to
facilitate commerce, not impede it, the Coast Guard also recognizes the
critical role we play with port partners to reduce risks to U.S. ports
and maritime critical infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Ports' Value to the U.S. Economy: Exports, Jobs & Economic
Growth.'' American Association of Port Authorities, http://www.aapa-
ports.org/advocating/content.aspx?ItemNumber=21150, Accessed April 17,
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
a layered approach
Securing our maritime borders and reducing risk to our ports and
infrastructure requires a layered, multi-faceted approach. Because of
our unique authorities, capabilities, competencies, and partnerships,
the Coast Guard is well-positioned to undertake such an approach and
meet a broad range of maritime border security requirements. This
layered approach allows the Coast Guard to detect, deter, and counter
threats as early and as far from U.S. shores as possible.
For the past 227 years, Coast Guard men and women have patrolled
the Nation's ports and waterways to prevent and respond to major
threats and hazards. Since Congress established the Steamboat
Inspection Service in 1852, Coast Guard prevention authorities have
evolved alongside emerging threats and changing port infrastructure.
The Coast Guard established Captains of the Port (COTPs) to execute
these authorities and work with our partners to prepare our ports for
natural disasters, accidents, and deliberate acts. At the same time, as
transnational threats to the homeland have increased, so has our reach
and overseas presence through foreign engagement and overseas security
inspections.
international port assessments and vessel screening
The Coast Guard conducts foreign port assessments and leverages the
International Maritime Organization's (IMO) International Ship and Port
Facility Security (ISPS) Code to assess effectiveness of security and
antiterrorism measures in foreign ports. Through the ISPS Program, the
Coast Guard performs overseas port assessments to determine the
effectiveness of security and antiterrorism measures exhibited by
foreign trading partners.
Since the inception of ISPS in 2004, Coast Guard personnel have
visited more than 150 countries and approximately 1,200 port
facilities. These countries generally receive biennial assessments to
verify compliance with the ISPS Code and U.S. maritime security
regulations, as appropriate. Vessels arriving in foreign ports that are
not compliant with ISPS Code standards are required to take additional
security precautions while in those ports. They may also be boarded by
the U.S. Coast Guard before being allowed entry to U.S. ports, and in
some cases may be refused entry to the United States. In fiscal year
2017, the ISPS Program assessed the effectiveness of anti-terrorism
measures in nearly 150 port facilities of 52 of our maritime trading
partners, as well as conducted 35 capacity-building activities in 16
countries with marginal port security to prevent them from falling into
non-compliance with the ISPS Code.
area maritime security committees
In U.S. ports, the COTP is designated as the Federal Maritime
Security Coordinator (FMSC). In this role, COTPs lead the Nation's 43
Area Maritime Security Committees (AMSCs) and oversee the development,
regular review, and annual exercise of their respective Area Maritime
Security Plans. AMSCs assist and advise the FMSC in the development,
review, and implementation of a coordination and communication
framework to identify risks and vulnerabilities in and around ports.
Additionally, AMSCs coordinate resources to prevent, protect
against, respond to, and recover from Transportation Security
Incidents. AMSCs have developed strong working partnerships between all
levels of government and private industry stakeholders. The Coast Guard
screens ships, crews, and passengers for all vessels required to submit
an Advance Notice of Arrival (ANOA) prior to entering a U.S. port.
cyber risks and the marine transportation system
The Coast Guard and the maritime industry continually cooperate to
address the risks associated with new threats and technologies.
Security threats have evolved from coastal piracy to complex smuggling
operations, transnational organized crime, and terrorism. Safety risks
have likewise evolved as merchant shipping progressed from sailing
ships to ships driven by coal-fired steam boilers, to diesel engines
and most recently to liquefied natural gas. Waterfront operations
evolved from break bulk cargo to containerization, with sophisticated
systems now controlling the movement and tracking of containerized and
liquid cargo. The maritime industry is a dynamic industry that includes
many components. The maritime industry includes ships and mariners that
sail our waters, the ports and facilities they call upon, the waterways
upon which commerce moves, and water-borne access to maritime natural
resources. Our maritime industry provides vital transportation along
marine highways, enables the harvesting of marine and offshore natural
resources, supports recreation, and facilitates interstate and
international trade. By providing access to transportation, trade, and
natural resources, the maritime industry supports our Nation's economic
prosperity and is a key driver for our National economy.
The topic of cybersecurity within the maritime industry is as
dynamic as any other sector of business. The industry's global reach,
large volume of capital transactions, extensive use of commercial
services, and reliance on information technology create significant
opportunities for exploitation through the cyber domain--the June 2017
notPetya virus and the resulting impacts on APM's global operations, to
include subsequent defensive measures, highlighted these risks for the
world to see. As evidenced by the notPetya virus, the MTS will continue
to experience cyber impacts even though it may not be the intended
target. Thus the Coast Guard broadly views cyber as one of many
operational risks that must be managed. With the release of the Coast
Guard's Cyber Strategy in June 2015, the Coast Guard and their industry
partners have engaged in comprehensive efforts to raise maritime cyber
risk awareness, enhance preparedness and information sharing, and
capitalize on the opportunity to learn from other sectors of the
economy. As the Coast Guard transitions from enhancing cyber awareness
to promoting improved cyber governance, lessons learned from
collaborative efforts led through many of our AMSCs from COTP zones
throughout the country, will help inform this important effort.
conclusion
The Coast Guard offers truly unique and enduring value to our
Nation. The only branch of our Armed Forces within the U.S. Department
of Homeland Security, the Coast Guard is positioned to help secure the
border, protect the homeland, and safeguard America's National and
economic security. Since 1790, the Coast Guard has helped advance
American prosperity by mitigating risk to our Nation's ports and
infrastructure to ensure that the MTS operates safely, predictably, and
securely. While much has changed from the days of sail, our service has
continuously drawn upon our core competencies of mitigating operational
risk, and leveraging our crucial partnerships with State, local,
Tribal, and industry partners to advance security in U.S. ports.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Admiral.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Martel.

STATEMENT OF CARLOS C. MARTEL, DIRECTOR OF FIELD OPERATIONS,
LOS ANGELES FIELD OFFICE, U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Martel. Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson,
esteemed Members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today to discuss the role of U.S.
Customs and Border Protection in securing maritime cargo, an
important responsibility we share with our partners here today.
As lead DHS agency for border security, CBP works closely
with our domestic and international partners to protect the
Nation from a variety of threats, including those posed in
containerized cargo arriving at our seaports.
Serving as the director of field operations for the greater
Los Angeles area, including the L.A./Long Beach seaport, the
largest seaport in the Nation, I know first-hand how complex
cargo security operations are and how valuable our programs and
partnerships are to our National security.
CBP has several key programs that enhance our ability to
assess cargo for risk, examine high-risk shipments at the
earliest possible point, and increase the security of the
supply chain. I would like to highlight just a few of these
efforts for you today.
First, CBP receives advance information on every maritime
cargo shipment, every vessel, and every person before they
arrive at the port.
Second, CBP's advanced targeting techniques use the data
collected to enhance our ability to assess the risk associated
with these cargo shipments and with the entities involved.
Third, our partnerships, those with our DHS and Federal
partners, private industry, and foreign counterparts, increase
information sharing and enhance our domain awareness, targeting
capabilities, and ability to intercept threats at or
approaching our seaports.
For example, CBP's Container Security Initiative pushes our
security efforts outwards and enables CBP to partner with
foreign authorities to identify and examine potentially high-
risk maritime containers at the foreign port before they are
laden on U.S.-bound vessels.
CBP's 60 CSI ports now prescreen over 80 percent of all
maritime containerized cargo imported into the United States.
We also partner with private industry. The Customs Trade
Partnership Against Terrorism provides facilitation benefits to
rigorously-vetted members of the trade community who volunteer
to adopt tighter security measures throughout their entire
international supply chain. C-TPAT has grown from 7 initial
members to over 11,000 members today.
Finally, advanced, nonintrusive inspection equipment,
including X-ray and gamma-ray imaging systems, are placed at
domestic and foreign seaports. For example, in partnership with
the DHS Domestic Nuclear Detection Office, CBP has deployed
nuclear and radiological detection equipment, including
radiation portal monitors, radiation isotope identification
devices, and personal radiation detectors, to ports of entry
Nation-wide.
Radiation portal monitors enable CBP to scan nearly 100
percent of all arriving maritime containerized cargo for the
presence of radiological or nuclear materials.
Basically, detection and imaging systems enable CBP
officers to examine cargo conveyances, such as sea containers,
without physically opening or unloading them. Technology allows
CBP to work smarter and faster in detecting contraband and
other dangerous materials while facilitating the flow of
legitimate cargo.
CBP's detection technology, targeting capabilities, and
partnerships are part of a comprehensive strategy that enables
CBP to identify and address potential threats in containerized
maritime cargo before they arrive at our Nation's seaports.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. Be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Martel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carlos C. Martel
October 30, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee, it is an honor to appear before you today to discuss
the role of U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in securing
maritime cargo. As the lead U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
agency for border security, CBP works closely with our domestic,
international, and industry partners to protect the Nation from a
variety of dynamic threats, including those posed by containerized
cargo arriving at our sea ports of entry (POE).
The United States experiences an immense volume of international
trade, a critical component of our Nation's economic security and
competitiveness. In fiscal year 2017,\1\ CBP officers processed more
than 26.1 million imported cargo containers, including 11.9 million
maritime cargo containers at our Nation's seaports, equating to $847.7
billion in imports. CBP's cargo security and trade facilitation
missions are mutually supportive: By utilizing a risk-based strategy
and multi-layered security approach, CBP can focus time and resources
on those suspect shipments that are high-risk. This approach
incorporates three layered elements to improve supply chain integrity,
expedite legitimate trade, promote economic viability, and increase
resilience across the entire global supply chain system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Through August 31, 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Advance Information and Targeting.--Obtaining information
about cargo, vessels, and persons involved early in the
shipment process and using advanced targeting techniques to
increase domain awareness and assess the risk of all components
and factors in the supply chain;

Advanced Detection Equipment and Technology.--Maintaining
robust inspection regimes at our POEs, including the use of
Non-Intrusive Inspection (NII) equipment and radiation
detection technologies; and

Government and Private-Sector Collaboration.--Enhancing our
Federal and private-sector partnerships and collaborating with
foreign governments to extend enforcement efforts outward to
points earlier in the supply chain.
These interrelated elements are part of a comprehensive cargo
security strategy that enables CBP to detect, identify, and prevent
potential threats, including the use of containerized cargo to
transport counterfeit or illicit products, radiological weapons, such
as ``dirty bombs,'' or other dangerous materials, before they arrive at
our Nation's border. By leveraging intelligence-driven analysis,
innovative partnerships, and advanced technology, CBP secures and
promotes the movement of legitimate cargo transiting through the
maritime environment.
advance information and targeting capabilities
CBP leverages advance information about cargo, conveyances, and
persons, and tailors targeting activities to increase domain awareness
and assess the risk of all components and factors in the supply chain.
Statutory and regulatory requirements for the submission of advance
information, and the development of rigorous targeting capabilities at
the National Targeting Center (NTC), enable CBP to identify potential
threats and address high-risk shipments before a vessel arrives at a
U.S. POE.
The Trade Act of 2002,\2\ which provides statutory support for the
24-Hour Advance Cargo Manifest rule,\3\ also requires importers and
carriers to submit to CBP advance electronic cargo information for all
in-bound shipments in all modes of transportation. Furthermore, CBP
requires the electronic transmission of additional data, as mandated by
the Security and Accountability for Every Port (SAFE Port) Act of
2006,\4\ through the Importer Security Filing and Additional Carrier
Requirements rule (also known as ``10+2''). These requirements enable
CBP to target and mitigate high-risk shipments not just prior to
arrival in the United States, but prior to the loading of cargo bound
for the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Pub. L. No. 107-210.
\3\ The 24-hour rule applies only to maritime cargo.
\4\ Pub. L. No. 109-347.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This advance information requirement is a critical element of CBP's
targeting efforts at the NTC and enhances CBP's capability to identify
high-risk cargo without hindering legitimate trade and commerce. The
NTC, established in 2001, coordinates and supports CBP's intelligence
and enforcement activities related to the movement of cargo in all
modes of transportation--sea, truck, rail, and air. Using the Automated
Targeting System (ATS), the NTC proactively analyzes advance cargo
information before shipments depart foreign ports. ATS incorporates the
latest cargo threat intelligence and National targeting rule sets to
generate a uniform review of cargo shipments, and provides
comprehensive data for the identification of high-risk shipments. ATS
is a critical decision support tool for CBP officers working at the
NTC, the Advanced Targeting Units at our POEs, and foreign ports
abroad.
advanced detection equipment and technology
Advanced detection technology is another key aspect of CBP's
comprehensive approach to maritime cargo security. NII technology,
including X-ray and gamma-ray imaging systems, is placed at domestic
and foreign seaports and enables CBP to detect illicit and/or dangerous
materials. NII technologies are force multipliers that enable us to
screen or examine a larger portion of the stream of commercial traffic
while facilitating the flow of legitimate cargo.
CBP currently has 302 large-scale NII systems deployed to, and in
between, U.S. POEs. These systems enable CBP officers to examine cargo
conveyances such as sea containers, commercial trucks, and rail cars,
as well as privately-owned vehicles, for the presence of contraband
without physically opening or unloading them. This allows CBP to work
smarter and faster in detecting contraband and other dangerous
materials. As of September 1, 2017, CBP has used the deployed NII
systems to conduct more than 86 million examinations, resulting in more
than 20,600 narcotics seizures.
Scanning all arriving conveyances and containers with radiation
detection equipment prior to release from the POE is an integral part
of the CBP comprehensive strategy to combat nuclear and radiological
terrorism. In partnership with the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office
(DNDO), CBP has deployed nuclear and radiological detection equipment,
including 1,280 Radiation Portal Monitors (RPM), 3,319 Radiation
Isotope Identification Devices (RIID), and 35,294 Personal Radiation
Detectors (PRD) to all 328 POEs Nation-wide.\5\ Utilizing RPMs, CBP is
able to scan 100 percent of all mail and express consignment mail and
parcels; 100 percent of all truck cargo, 100 percent of personally-
owned vehicles arriving from Canada and Mexico; and nearly 100 percent
of all arriving sea-borne containerized cargo for the presence of
radiological or nuclear materials. Since the inception of the RPM
program in 2002 through August 2017, CBP has scanned more than 1.4
billion conveyances for radiological contraband, resulting in more than
6.1 million alarms in primary and secondary operations, all of which
have been successfully adjudicated at the proper level.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ As of September 1, 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CBP continues to look for more capable technologies that are more
efficient and effective. For example, a key enabler of RPM efficiencies
in the maritime environment is employing the concept of remotely-
operated RPM lanes at select seaports. CBP, together with DNDO, worked
on a pilot throughout fiscal year 2017 to pilot RPM remote operations
at the seaport in Savannah, Georgia. The goal is to provide CBP field
offices and ports with increased flexibility to reduce RPM operations
staffing demands and redirect staff to other high-priority mission
areas where and when feasible.
In conjunction with CBP's targeting capabilities, advancements in
cargo screening technology provide CBP with a significant capacity to
detect illicit nuclear and radiological materials and other contraband,
and continue to be a cornerstone of CBP's multi-layered cargo security
strategy.
government and private-sector collaboration
A critical and complementary component of CBP's effort to expand
and strengthen cargo security is our extensive domestic and
international partnerships with private industry and Government
counterparts. Close collaboration with our partners increases
information sharing, which, in turn, enhances CBP's domain awareness,
targeting capabilities, and ability to intercept threats at, or
approaching, our borders.
Federal Government Partnerships
CBP works closely with its DHS partners, including the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG), U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and the
Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) to coordinate cargo security
operations and deploy advanced detection technology. Since 2011, CBP,
USCG, and ICE have coordinated security activities through the cross-
component Maritime Operations Coordination (MOC) plan. The plan
addresses the unique nature of the maritime environment and sets forth
a layered, DHS-wide approach to homeland security issues within the
maritime domain, ensuring integrated planning, information sharing, and
increased response capability in each area of responsibility. CBP also
collaborates with DNDO as well as with numerous agencies within the
U.S. Departments of Defense, Energy, Health and Human Services,
Commerce, Justice, and Treasury to promote real-time information
sharing.
CBP has participated in numerous joint-operations with government
partners that led to the interdiction of illicit shipments. For
example, Project Zero Latitude was developed due to escalation of
foreign and domestic narcotics interceptions involving sea containers
of produce and seafood shipments, particularly involving Ecuador. At
the NTC, CBP conducted an analysis of historical ATS information and
cocaine seizure data. The analysis enabled NTC to identify several
smuggling trends that will facilitate the identification of future
suspect shipments.
International Partnerships
CBP also extends its cargo security efforts outward through
strategic partnerships with foreign countries through the development
of international cargo security programs and initiatives. One of CBP's
most effective international cargo security programs is the Container
Security Initiative (CSI). This initiative was established in 2002 with
the sole purpose of preventing the use of maritime containerized cargo
to transport a weapon of mass effect/weapon of mass destruction by
ensuring all containers identified as potential risks for terrorism are
inspected at foreign ports before they are placed on vessels destined
for the United States. Through CSI, CBP officers stationed at CSI ports
abroad and the NTC in Virginia work with host countries' customs
administrations to identify and mitigate containers that may pose a
potential risk for terrorism based on advance information and strategic
intelligence. Those administrations use a variety of means, including
detailed data assessment, NII, radiation detection technology, and/or
physical examinations to screen the identified high-risk containers
before they depart the foreign port.
CBP works closely with CSI host country counterparts to build their
capacity and capability to target and inspect high-risk cargo. Today,
in addition to weapons detection, many CSI ports are now also targeting
other illicit materials, including narcotics, pre-cursor chemicals,
dual-use technology, stolen vehicles, weapons and ammunition, and
counterfeit products. Furthermore, advancements in technology have
enabled CBP to increase the efficiency of CSI operations without
diminishing effectiveness by conducting more targeting remotely at the
NTC. CBP's 60 CSI ports in North America, Europe, Asia, Africa, the
Middle East, and Latin and Central America currently prescreen over 80
percent of all maritime containerized cargo that is imported into the
United States.
CBP's strong working relationship with our foreign partners is also
exemplified by the Secure Freight Initiative (SFI) in Qasim, Pakistan.
Through SFI-Qasim, 100 percent of containerized maritime cargo is
scanned (by both radiation detection and imaging equipment) prior to
lading on-board a U.S.-bound vessel. All targeting of containers and
monitoring of the scanning is done remotely via live video feed by CBP
officers working at the NTC. Physical examinations are conducted at
Port Qasim by Pakistani Customs officials and locally-engaged staff
hired and vetted by the U.S. Consulate General in Karachi. These
physical examinations are also monitored by live-feed at the NTC.
Creating the process for real-time data transmission and analysis
in Qasim required the development, installation, and integration of new
software and equipment. CBP partnered with the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE) to deploy networks of radiation detection and imaging
equipment in Qasim. Port Qasim continues to showcase the SFI program in
a country where the government and terminal operators support the
initiative, and where construction of dedicated facilities is possible.
From constructing the scanning site to providing adequate staffing
levels for SFI, the government of Pakistan remains a strong partner in
deploying SFI operations.
In addition to Port Qasim, Pakistan, since March 2014, CBP also
scans 100 percent of all U.S.-bound cargo containers from the Port of
Aqaba, Jordan, using trained and vetted foreign-service nationals to
transmit scan data in real-time to the NTC. Similar to implementing
operations in Qasim, CBP received the full support of the Government of
Jordan to implement 100 percent scanning in Aqaba. In addition to that
support, successful implementation of 100 percent scanning was possible
due to the low-to-medium volume of U.S.-bound cargo processed through
the port, and the small percentage of transshipped cargo, which allowed
scanning equipment to be placed at the entrance to the port so as not
to hinder the flow of cargo movement.
The impact of these programs has been amplified by the close
collaboration between CBP and DOE's Office of Nuclear Smuggling
Detection and Deterrence (NSDD). Many CSI ports integrate into their
operations partner country radiation detection equipment deployed by
NSDD. In a similar fashion, CBP and NSDD collaborated in the detection
equipment installation at the SFI operations in Qasim. The strong
coordination between CBP and NSDD extends to information and resource
sharing that enhances the security of maritime supply chain.
All trading nations depend on containerized shipping for the
transportation of manufactured goods, which underscores the importance
of international programs such as CSI and SFI. Collaboration with
foreign counterparts provides increased information sharing and
enforcement, further secures the global supply chain, and extends our
security efforts outward.
Private-Sector Partnerships
An essential component of CBP's cargo security operations is our
close and effective collaboration with private industry partners. For
example, CBP works with the trade community through the Customs Trade
Partnership Against Terrorism (CTPAT) program, which is a public-
private partnership program wherein members of the trade community
volunteer to adopt tighter security measures throughout their
international supply chains in exchange for enhanced trade
facilitation, such as expedited processing. CTPAT membership has
rigorous security criteria and requires extensive vetting and on-site
visits of domestic and foreign facilities. This program has enabled CBP
to leverage private-sector resources to enhance supply chain security
and integrity.
CTPAT membership has grown from just 7 companies in 2001 to more
than 11,180 certified partners today, accounting for more than 54
percent (by value) of goods imported into the United States. The CTPAT
program continues to expand and evolve as CBP works with foreign
partners to establish bi-lateral mutual recognition of respective
CTPAT-like programs. Mutual Recognition as a concept is reflected in
the World Customs Organization's Framework of Standards to Secure and
Facilitate Global Trade, a strategy designed with the support of the
United States, which enables customs administrations to work together
to improve their capabilities to detect high-risk consignments and
expedite the movement of legitimate cargo. These arrangements create a
unified and sustainable security posture that can assist in securing
and facilitating global cargo trade while promoting end-to-end supply
chain security. CBP currently has signed Mutual Recognition
Arrangements with New Zealand, the European Union, South Korea, Japan,
Jordan, Canada, Taiwan, Israel, Mexico, Singapore, and the Dominican
Republic and is continuing to work toward similar recognition with
China, Brazil, Peru, Uruguay, and India.
CBP also collaborates with port and terminal operators to enhance
its agility, responsiveness, operational efficiencies, and unwavering
commitment to our mutually supporting objectives of safety, security,
and prosperity. CBP recently launched the Advanced Qualified Unlading
Approval Lane (AQUA Lane), an expedited clearance system for CTPAT sea
carriers arriving at CTPAT terminal port operators that qualify under a
set of predetermined mandates to allow them to immediately unlade their
cargo (only) upon arrival in the United States. This CTPAT benefit
provides the trade community with monetary savings in terms of labor
costs, as well as additional container movement efficiency and delivery
predictability.
CBP has also been re-engineering our operations in collaboration
with the Port of Los Angeles' Trans Pacific Container Service
Corporation (TraPac). The TraPac terminal in the Port of Los Angeles
has invested in technology and infrastructure to upgrade the terminal
to an automated terminal environment that supports both the targeted
NII X-ray/gamma-ray imaging of targeted commerce, and the 100 percent
mandated radiation scanning of all incoming commodities at the TraPac
terminal. In a joint effort, TraPac, DNDO, and CBP developed a new and
innovative method for automated radiation scanning of in-bound
containers in the terminal's intermodal rail yard. Since December 2016,
the terminal's automated conveyor systems transport in-bound containers
through CBP RPMs before the containers are loaded onto railcars.
Similar to TraPac, through a public-private partnership agreement,
CBP and DNDO continue to work with the Northwest Seaport Alliance to
employ a straddle carrier portal at the Pierce County Terminal in
Tacoma, Washington. The straddle carrier portal will provide a fixed
portal radiation scanning capability that will require fewer CBP
personnel to conduct radiation scanning of cargo containers and will
allow the port to regain some of its operational footprint and more
quickly process cargo destined for rail transportation.
conclusion
CBP's targeting activities and advanced technology enhances CBP's
capability to assess whether U.S.-bound maritime cargo poses a risk to
the American people. Working with our government, international, and
private industry partners, CBP's cargo security programs help to
safeguard the Nation's borders and our seaports from threats--including
those posed by radiological weapons.
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I
would be pleased to answer your questions.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Martel.
Chair now recognizes Mr. Seroka.

STATEMENT OF EUGENE D. SEROKA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE PORT OF
LOS ANGELES

Mr. Seroka. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the House Homeland Security Committee.
My name is Gene Seroka. I am the executive director here at
the Port of Los Angeles. On behalf of our mayor, Board of
Harbor Commissioners, along with the women and men who do the
work at our port complex, it is a distinct honor to host this
important and timely hearing at America's port.
Today's hearing seeks to examine the physical and
cybersecurity of our Nation's ports. I cannot think of a better
place to begin that examination than right here at the Port of
Los Angeles.
While the port is immense in scale, covering 7,500 acres of
land, 43 miles of waterway, 100 miles of rail configuration,
including 27 terminals and 270 berths, its scale is perhaps
exceeded only by its scope.
We are the Nation's busiest container port. Setting a
record among last year as the busiest container port in the
Western Hemisphere, moving more than 9.2 million 20-foot
equivalent units.
Together with our neighboring Port of Long Beach, we handle
goods to and from each and every one of our Nation's 435
Congressional districts, account for more than 40 percent of
our Nation's imports, and 30 percent of our Nation's exports.
All told, the trade through our complex has an economic
impact in excess of US$311 billion and related to over 3
million jobs throughout the country.
The scale and scope of our cargo operations gives us an
outsized role in the Nation's economic prosperity. So it is a
matter of course that we treat our responsibility to protect
this critical piece of America's trade infrastructure with the
highest of importance.
Security starts with our Los Angeles Port Police force, a
specialized law enforcement agency that operates 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week, protecting the port from threats, whether
it be by land, sea, air, or cyber space.
The capabilities of our police force include canine units
used to search vessels and containers, full-time dive unit to
inspect critical infrastructure, and sea marshals program for
all inbound and outbound cruise ships and vessels of interest.
Our Port Police has a long and impressive track record of
successful joint operations with other law enforcement
agencies, our State partners and Federal partners alike,
including the United States Coast Guard, the FBI, Secret
Service, Department of Homeland Security, and especially
Customs and Border Protection.
There are two areas the Federal Government can assist our
Port Police in maintaining the physical security of the port
complex: Training and equipment.
With respect to training, the Port Police provides only
POST-Certified and Federally-recognized regional Maritime Law
Enforcement Training Center on the West Coast of the United
States. We call it MLETC.
The curriculum, approved by Federal Law Enforcement
Training Center, includes coursework in law enforcement,
maritime operations, underwater improvised explosion detection,
tactical and boarding operations training. The MLETC also hosts
Federally-recognized emergency management training, as provided
by Texas A&M engineering extension.
Future grant funding or Federal support would help us
enormously in this continuing effort to provide a highly
specialized training right here on the West Coast.
With respect to equipment. The extended border efforts of
CBP, internationally and Nationally, is of great importance to
the region and the Nation.
We ask for support in CBP's recapitalization projects to
leverage technology and human effort in the detection of
weapons, contraband, and emerging highly dangerous narcotics,
as demonstrated by the deadly opiate epidemic.
As you know, many of these substances are incredibly toxic,
deadly to users, and of great concern to unsuspecting labor,
workers, law enforcement personnel, among others, that
encounter these compounds.
Finally, I would like to focus my remaining remarks on
cybersecurity. The Port of Los Angeles is especially sensitive
to the needs for cybersecurity protection because of our
organization and the rest of the maritime shipping industry,
for that matter. It is becoming increasingly reliant on digital
industrial infrastructure.
In 2014, the port established the Nation's first port
cybersecurity operations center. Some of you witnessed that
today, where more than 20 million cyber intrusion attempts per
month are thwarted right here at the Port of Los Angeles. That
is 7 to 8 attacks every second on our port complex.
The center is run by a dedicated cybersecurity team and
acts as a centralized location proactively monitoring network
traffic to prevent and defect cyber incidents. It is also able
to contain and manage any attacks that can be discussed with
law enforcement agencies, like the FBI, the Secret Service, and
local law enforcement for investigation purposes.
But we know there is much more that needs to be done. The
recent cyber attack on Maersk and A.P. Moller terminals was a
call to action for all of us. We know that we must move swiftly
to address cross-sector risk.
The port ecosystem is a complicated one, relying on
vendors, logistics companies, multitudes of clients, and
transportation service providers. Adding in other critical
infrastructure providers like energy, communications,
information technology sectors, and the need to address our
collective vulnerability becomes an absolute necessity for all.
To that end, we recommend continued and focused engagement
with the broader maritime industry to identify and disseminate
best practices, assist in assigning roles and responsibilities,
assist in educating, informing, and improving the way industry
conducts vulnerability assessments, leverage port security
grant programs to incent cybersecurity applications, and look
at ways to improve information sharing in and across the
maritime industry, promoting cybersecurity awareness,
preparedness, and response standards.
With that, I conclude my remarks for this afternoon.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Seroka follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eugene D. Seroka
October 30, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the House
Homeland Security Committee: I'm Gene Seroka, executive director of the
Port of Los Angeles, and on behalf of our Board of Harbor Commissioners
and the men and women who work in our port complex, it is my pleasure
to welcome you to America's Port. I appreciate this opportunity to
testify before you today and play a role in shaping a critical area of
need in the maritime shipping community. With respect to our physical
security and cybersecurity preparedness the Port takes its
responsibilities seriously and has a robust security and emergency
preparedness plan to prevent and manage either natural or man-made
disasters.
In order to protect our Port, we created and continue to expand the
capabilities of a security infrastructure that fully integrates both
physical and cybersecurity preparedness throughout the port complex,
and supports coordinated rapid response with law enforcement agencies.
Our infrastructure connects port-wide surveillance systems, and
integrates a variety of measures including access control,
communications, and intrusion detection systems. Recognizing the
magnitude of the task of securing our gateway, we have invested
hundreds of millions of dollars of our own funds in our security
infrastructure. At the same time, finding opportunities for assistance
from Federal grants is paramount and an area where we continue to look
for support from Congress. Regarding our level of coordination with law
enforcement, as demonstrated earlier today on your various site visits,
the Port works hand-in-hand with local law enforcement agencies, our
State partners, and our Federal partners--including the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG), the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the U.S. Secret Service, and the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
The Port of Los Angeles is especially sensitive to the needs for
cybersecurity protection because we believe the maritime shipping
industry, while already having integrated technology throughout the
system, is becoming increasingly reliant on digital industrial
infrastructure.
Last year, we partnered with GE Transportation to develop a first-
of-its-kind port visibility tool that allows our supply chain
partners--from the cargo owners to the liner shipping companies and
everyone involved with the cargo conveyance process--to achieve more
efficient operations through secure, channeled access to big data.
Earlier this year, we piloted the tool at our largest terminal with
tremendous assistance from U.S. Customs and Border Protection. The
success of the pilot has encouraged us to expand the portal to the rest
of our terminals.
While the digitization of the maritime supply chain is an exciting
opportunity, earlier this year, we also saw the vulnerabilities
associated with application of digital infrastructure to our
operations. In June, the information systems of one of our industry's
largest companies, Maersk, was compromised by a cyber attack. The
global cybersecurity attack called ``nonPetya'' severely impacted
Maersk's operations, both globally and at the Port. The reverberations
of that attack were felt here at the Port of Los Angeles, where one of
largest terminals shut down out of an abundance of caution. Recent
reports indicated the incident cost Maersk over $300 million. This
incident, coupled with the increasing reliance on digital
infrastructure, should be a ``call to arms'' for the industry.
We applaud you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for your
leadership on the passage of the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
(CISA) in 2015. We also want to acknowledge the work of Congressmembers
Torres, Correa, and Barragan, all of whom are here with us today, along
with their other co-sponsors, for all of their work on the recent House
passage of H.R. 3101, ``Strengthening Cybersecurity Information Sharing
and Coordination in our Ports Act of 2017.'' We support that
legislation and believe that cybersecurity information sharing is a key
tool to help protect our ports and maritime community against
cybersecurity attacks.
Furthermore, we appreciate the partnership with the U.S. Coast
Guard (USCG) and have worked collaboratively with them for many years.
We appreciate the guidance issued in December 2016 to clarify the
reporting of suspicious activities and breaches of security to include
cybersecurity. We believe the Maritime Transportation Safety Act (MTSA)
addresses the key risks to the industry and that it can be flexible
enough to manage cybersecurity risks as well as others in the industry.
At the same time, the USCG issued a notice for comment in July, the
draft Navigation and Inspection Circular (NVIC) Guidelines for Cyber
Risks at MTSA regulated facilities which provided guidance on how
cybersecurity risks should be integrated into Facility Security
Assessments (FSAs).
Among ports, we at the Port of Los Angeles have worked to be a
leader on cybersecurity issues for many years. We built and created a
comprehensive Cyber Security Operations Center (Center) that has been
operational since 2014--the first of its kind for any U.S. port. The
Center plays an invaluable role for the Port and is managing an
unprecedented level of attacks: Over 20 million cyber intrusion
attempts per month, literally 7 to 8 attacks every second on average.
The Port is seeing a growing volume and variety of malicious cyber
attacks ranging from denial-of-service attacks, more standard data
breaches, botnet, and malware attacks along with possible insider
threats.
The Center is literally the centerpiece of our cybersecurity
operation. It is run by a dedicated cybersecurity team and is used as a
centralized location to proactively monitor network traffic to prevent
and detect cyber incidents. It is also able to contain and manage any
attacks that can then be discussed with law enforcement as needed for
investigation purposes. It uses advanced systems to proactively monitor
and prevent, detect, and respond to cyber attacks. It also collects
data that can be analyzed and shared with other agencies, such as the
FBI, the U.S. Secret Service, and local law enforcement.
Partial funding for the development of the Center came through the
Port Security Grant Program with the majority of the funds coming from
the Port. It is ISO 27001 certified, the recipient of American
Association of Port Authorities IT Awards of Excellence in 2014 and
2016, and has been featured in several Nation-wide publications. The
Port of Los Angeles is the only U.S. port authority with an ISO 27001
certified Cyber Security Operations Center. However, our work is far
from finished--much more needs to be done.
To that point, while the Port is working to manage its own systems,
we know that there is cross-sector risk that comes from all of the
players in the Port environment. As mentioned, the Port environment is
one where we are seeing increasing digitization; so it is critical that
cybersecurity be imbedded in the front end--ensuring there is
``security by design'' in the process. As you might imagine, the port
ecosystem is a complicated one, relying on vendors, supply chain
providers, the multitude of clients and service providers. To add
another layer of complexity, the Port also relies on other Critical
Infrastructure (CI) providers like the energy, communications, and
information technology sectors as well. In many cases, the Port may not
have visibility into any of these partners or other CI sectors
cybersecurity posture, and as a result, cyber risk exists throughout
that system. In light of the constantly rising cybersecurity attacks
and systemic risks to the maritime sector, it is critical that the port
and maritime community come together to discuss the shared risk and
tools to approach the risk. To that end, we would recommend a number of
policy initiatives for review and consideration together:
1. Create a seamless effort between the U.S. Coast Guard and the
National Program and Protection Directorate (NPPD) at the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security to help the maritime industry
break down and share best practices to manage cybersecurity
risk from the operational impacts on a cyber attack to the more
traditional data breach attacks.
2. Continue efforts working with the maritime sector so we better
understand how to assign roles and responsibilities to the
multiple players in the cybersecurity world, including the
USCG, NPPD, FBI, Secret Service, law enforcement etc.
3. Run National-Level Exercises that include cybersecurity attacks
on the maritime sector to better inform and focus the need for
cybersecurity vulnerability assessments, preparing cyber
incident response plans, and other basic cyber planning and
response exercises.
4. Incentivize cybersecurity project applications to the Port
Security Grant Program funding programs; waive the cost-share
requirements for cybersecurity assessments at major trade
gateways, and maintain the Port Security Grant Program funding
level at $100 million.
5. There is a need for increased CBP maritime staffing to ensure
the security of passenger and freight facilities, and there is
a need for CBP detection equipment to be upgraded to ensure new
technologies are utilized to detect security risks and provide
cybersecurity safeguards at major port gateways.
6. Work to evaluate the current status of existing maritime
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISAC) to measure the
effectiveness and value of maritime only ISACs.
7. Expand engagement with the International Maritime Organization
(IMO) and other applicable international organizations to
increase global maritime cybersecurity awareness, preparedness,
and response standards.
The Port of Los Angeles is the largest container port in the
country and an important economic driver for the Nation. U.S. seaports
need to remain a high priority when determining projects to enhance our
country's position in the global trade market. In order to compete in
the international marketplace, our facilities and infrastructure needs
to be maintained at the highest level with continued Federal
investment.
The Port of Los Angeles would like to thank the committee for
holding this hearing as the importance of this topic cannot be
understated. Our Nation's ports cannot be forgotten when security is at
the forefront of maintaining our National economy.
The Port of Los Angeles takes a great deal of pride in being a
model for port security infrastructure. We trust that Congress will
take the necessary action to ensure that the Port of Los Angeles and
ports across the country receive the necessary funding to continue to
make infrastructure improvements. With the proper focus on security
infrastructure, the United States will continue to lead the world in
international trade well into the 21st Century.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Seroka.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Cordero.

STATEMENT OF MARIO CORDERO, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, THE PORT OF
LONG BEACH

Mr. Cordero. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to speak on port
security matters this afternoon.
My name is Marco Cordero, and I am the executive director
of the Port of Long Beach. Prior to joining the port, I served
as chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission. As a former
Federal appointee, I can appreciate the importance of Federal
and local partnership with regard to securing our Nation's
ports.
As the second-busiest seaport in the United States, the
Port of Long Beach is a major gateway for U.S.-Asia trade. We
support more than 1.4 million jobs Nation-wide, and in 2016
moved more than 6.8 million TEUs, also known as containers. We
are on pace for 7 percent growth for year-end 2017.
Combined with the Port of Los Angeles, we comprise the
busiest port complex in the Nation and the ninth busiest in the
world. In 2016, combined, we moved 400 billion in containerized
trade, which is 40 percent of the Nation's import cargo.
Since the terror attacks of September 2001, the port has
received more than 1.6 billion in Federal grants to compliment
the extensive investments by the port, the city of Long Beach,
marine terminal operators, and carriers to ensure that the
Nation's largest container gateway remains open and safe.
This is a multi-layer security effort that requires the
continued participation of funding by our Federal partners. We
appreciate the Federal support and hope that this program will
not be further reduced beyond the annual $100 million
appropriation.
The safety and security of the port is of utmost
importance. Our Joint Command and Control Center, a 24/7
maritime domain awareness center, is a critical hub for
coordinating security efforts that include partnerships with
local, State, and Federal law enforcement agencies as well as
maritime and private-sector stakeholders.
Through innovative efforts, the port has a monitoring
network of over 400 cameras, a comprehensive fiber-optic
network, an integrated security management system for
synchronized monitoring, and quick threats detection, access
control and alarm monitoring, boat patrols, radar systems, a
vessel tracking system, and sonar equipment.
Securing the flow of goods to and from the United States is
a complex mission involving numerous partners across the globe.
Together, these partners, the port seeks to secure the global
supply chain through a broad range of tools, including
information sharing, risk-based analytics, and the application
of advanced technologies.
We understand the Congressional interest in 100 percent
scanning of all incoming cargo. Although a worthy goal, there
are formidable practical challenges for ports like Long Beach
and Los Angeles that handle over 15 million containers per
year. Such challenges include technology and funding for
equipment and personnel to handle these high volumes.
We see value in deepening the level of engagement with
global partners and utilizing big data to target those
containers that pose a concern.
The port also strongly supports the continuation of
programs like the Customs Trade Partnership Against Terrorism
that incentivized shippers to secure each step in the supply
chain.
Landside security is of critical importance. The port is
extending additional layers of protection by developing
analytics and sensors to better forecast the landside movement
of goods to and from the port, rely heavily on information
technology to operate as well as to secure the port and complex
and its assets.
As you know, with increased reliance on technology comes
the increase on ability to cyber attack. As an example, the
port's information management division successfully thwarts
over 30 million threats a month.
In addition to man-made cyber threats, the maritime sector
is also susceptible, as we all know, to technology disruption
from natural hazards and disasters.
Business resiliency is a critical part of the port's on-
going cybersecurity planning. Preparation, response, and
recovery planning are paramount to ensure that we assume
operations swiftly. Protocols must be clear on how to best
contain an incident to prevent further interruption, and
response teams must have specialized training and be prepared
to engage.
There is not a one-size-fit-all solution because each port
has a different business model. Our information management
division has developed and implemented an enterprise-wide on-
line cybersecurity awareness training program. It is believed
that once cyber operations are understood on an enterprise-
level systems and protocols can be organized to continuously
promote cybersecurity throughout the organization.
We also understand the importance of vulnerability
assessments to identify the prioritized gaps that could lead to
interruptions affecting key operations. The port has undergone
regular assessments over the years and plans to continue this
practice.
Our decisions must be information-driven. An environment
that promotes the sharing of information which includes
balancing the need to protect property information, or
proprietary information, with protecting our National critical
infrastructures.
Last, a new and potential threat to safety and security is
that of unmanned aerial systems.
The unhindered operation of UAS near terminals and ships
could pose an immediate danger to the port complex and
operations. UAS operations in vulnerable areas must be
restricted and local first responders should be deemed the
enforcement entity authorized to mitigate threats. We believe
this type of enforcement is better delegated to local public
safety personnel working in conjunction with Federal partners.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to address the
committee. Protecting U.S. ports must be a core capability of
our Nation. We appreciate the support of this committee, and we
stand ready to work with you and your staff to protect the
people and economic vitality of our ports.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cordero follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mario Cordero
October 30, 2017
introduction
Thank you, Chairman McCaul and Members of the House Homeland
Security Committee for the opportunity to speak on the subject of port
security, including cargo screening, cybersecurity and industry
partnerships in the maritime environment. My name is Mario Cordero and
I am the executive director for the Port of Long Beach. Prior to
joining the Port as the executive director, I served as chairman of the
Federal Maritime Commission and before that I served as a Long Beach
Harbor Commissioner.
background
As the second-busiest seaport in the United States, the Port of
Long Beach is a major gateway for U.S.-Asia trade and a recognized
leader in security. The Port is an innovative provider of state-of-the-
art seaport facilities and services that enhance economic vitality,
support jobs and improve the quality of life and the environment. As a
major economic force, the Port supports more than 30,000 jobs in Long
Beach, 316,000 jobs throughout Southern California and 1.4 million jobs
throughout the United States. In 2016, the Port of Long Beach moved
more than 6.8 million 20-foot equivalent units (TEUs) of cargo, also
known as containers. The Port's cargo containers account for nearly 33
percent of the containers moving through U.S. West Coast ports, and
nearly 1 in 5 moving through all U.S. ports. Currently, the Port is on
pace for a 7 percent growth for 2017.
Combined with the Port of Los Angeles, both ports comprise the San
Pedro Bay, the busiest port complex in the Nation and the ninth-busiest
port complex in the world. Together, the two ports moved $400 billion
in containerized trade or nearly 16 million TEUs in 2016. This includes
almost 40 percent of the Nation's imported cargo. A 2010 report
commissioned by both ports and the Alameda Corridor Transportation
Authority found that cargo moving through the San Pedro Bay Port
Complex, made its way to every Congressional district in the
continental United States. As a result of the volume of cargo moved
through this complex and transportation-related activities, protecting
the San Pedro Bay ports is vital to our National economy.
port security
Safety and security are among the top priorities at the Port of
Long Beach. Since the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, the Port
has received more than $1.6 billion in Federal grants to complement the
extensive investments made by the Port, the city of Long Beach, marine
terminal operators and carriers to ensure the Nation's largest
container gateway remains open and safe.
The Port of Long Beach's Security Division collaborates regularly
with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP), U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), the Long Beach Police and
Fire departments, as well as other Federal and State law enforcement,
security, and emergency-response agencies. Ensuring the security of
major international gateways like the Port of Long Beach is a multi-
layered security effort that requires the continued participation of
and funding by Federal partners. Since 2001, we have responded to
evolving threats to the integrity of the Port, threats that now include
cyber attacks. In addition, a threat that also has real potential for
damage or disruptions is from unmanned aerial systems.
The Port takes a leadership role in the development of strategies
to mitigate security risks in the San Pedro Bay, working closely with
multiple partners, both public and private, to plan and coordinate
security measures. Based on our professional experience, we recognize
threats and formulate the best mitigation strategies. The Port of Long
Beach's Joint Command and Control Center, a 24-hour-a-day maritime
domain awareness center, is a critical hub for coordinated security
efforts that include partnerships with local, State, and Federal law
enforcement agencies as well as maritime and private-sector
stakeholders. Formalized agreements have been made with these partners
to share security information, coordinate threat information, develop
plans and coordinate operations.
The Control Center houses over $100 million in technical security
assets. Through innovative efforts, the Port has a monitoring network
of over 400 cameras, a comprehensive fiber-optic network, a port-wide
wireless system, an integrated security management system for
synchronized monitoring and quick threat detection, access control and
alarm monitoring, boat patrols, radar systems, a vessel tracking
system, and sonar equipment. In addition, law enforcement operations
have been fully integrated between the Port of Long Beach Harbor Patrol
and the Long Beach Police Department.
Cargo Screening
Securing the flow of goods to and from the United States is a
complex mission, involving governments, businesses, and non-profit
organizations across the globe. And, the Port of Long Beach represents
a key player in this mission. Together with these partners, the Port
seeks to secure the global supply chain through a broad range of tools
including information sharing, risk-based analytics, and the
application of advanced technologies. While we understand Congressional
interest in 100 percent scanning of all incoming cargo at our Nation's
ports, to do so would impede the flow of commerce to a halt and require
an unprecedented investment in technology and personnel at each of the
hundreds of terminals across the Nation. A greater return on investment
can be made by deepening the level of engagement with global partners
and utilizing ``big data'' to target those containers that pose a
concern. The Port strongly recommends continuing to invest in programs
such as Custom's Trade Partnership Against Terrorism that incentivize
shippers to secure each step in the supply chain, rather than focusing
on a single step in the process.
As it relates to ``big data'', the Port is actively working with
Federal partners to tap into their targeting capabilities to provide a
coordinated response to vessels and cargos of interest. The Port of
Long Beach is extending these layers of protection landside by
developing analytics and sensors to better forecast the landside
movement of goods to and from the port. This will not only better align
Port personnel and security infrastructure deployments, it also
improves the efficiency of our local and intermodal operations. These
efforts have been achieved by investments from the Port and the Port
Security Grant Program (PSGP). Reductions to the PSGP has placed
constraints on the ability of ports around the Nation to sustain these
investments and it is recommended that Congress restore the Port
Security Grant Program to the $400 million level so that U.S. ports can
continue to stay one step ahead of adversaries.
Cybersecurity
Information Technology Risk and Cybersecurity
The number of U.S. data breaches across educational institutions,
shipping firms, Government agencies, military, medical facilities,
financial firms and other businesses jumped to a record to a record 791
in the first 6 months of 2017. This is a 29 percent increase from the
same time period in 2016. Information technology is a critical
component of the goods movement system. The Port is tightly integrated
with various stakeholders across the supply chain and it is essential
that data exchanged between stakeholders is protected.
Phishing campaigns targeting general port staff and stakeholders
have increased by up to 70 percent throughout the Nation. Cyber attacks
are increasingly targeting the sectors of the economy that have
traditionally underspent in the information management and technology
areas. For both the private and public sectors, it is a matter of when,
not if, a cyber attack will take place.
The Port of Long Beach's Information Management Division
successfully thwarts over 30,000,000 threats a month. The goal is to
build a sustainable program that balances the need to protect against
cyber attacks while balancing the need to run the Port's business. In
this information era, new technologies are outpacing traditional
information security controls.
Maritime Sector Application
The Port of Long Beach relies heavily on information technology to
operate, as well as to secure the port complex and its assets. Like
other industries, the maritime sector has seen an increase in cyber
attacks, in part because ports are National economic drivers and manage
critical infrastructure. That is why, in addition to above water, on
water, and underwater security monitoring and threat detection,
cybersecurity has become a critical endeavor for the Port.
Private-sector businesses, such as terminal operators, control a
substantial portion of the Port's economic activity through a wide
variety of facilities. In the port complex, the targets for major cyber
threats include; port administration facilities, shippers, vessels,
terminal operating systems, equipment, storage facilities, rail, and
truck operations. Potential perpetrators who could carry out cyber
attacks include state-sponsored criminal groups and individuals, either
inadvertent or intentional. Cyber threats to the maritime environment
include; hacking, jamming, phishing, spoofing, malicious programs,
taking control, and network denial-of-service.
Some of the motivating factors for cyber criminal activities may
involve smuggling, cyber extortion, gaining business advantage,
intellectual property theft, and disrupting or destroying critical
National infrastructure. In addition to man-made cyber threats, the
maritime sector is also susceptible to technology disruption from
natural hazards such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and tsunamis. Threats
to ports and their partners are dangerous to the large number of
workers, travelers, and visitors in and around the port community.
Coupled with the potential catastrophic economic impacts, maritime
cyber events could impact our National well-being as much as, if not
more than, other types of attacks.
Business resiliency has become a critical part of the Port's on-
going cybersecurity planning. Reducing the potential for single-point
failure, building redundancy into technology systems, and system
recovery back-up processes are vital to ensuring ports remain viable
and resume operations as swiftly as possible in the event of an
incident.
Response and recovery are critical to successful mitigation and
business resumption. Protocols must be clear on how to best contain an
incident to prevent further interruption, and response teams must have
specialized training and be prepared to engage 24/7. Protocols should
make clear who receives notice of the event and what assets are
available to quickly assist. In a port environment, a resilient
logistics chain needs to be able to absorb a business interruption and
then quickly resume an acceptable level of goods movement. In order to
develop a comprehensive resiliency plan to address cybersecurity,
factors that should be addressed include: Infrastructure needs and
protection, transportation systems, and development of business
continuity plans.
Addressing Challenges
There are a number of challenges that must be addressed to enhance
cybersecurity in maritime environments. There is not a one-size-fits-
all solution because each port has a different business model. A lack
of awareness about an organization's own systems creates opportunities
for exploitation at a basic level. Information technology systems can
be a patchwork of legacy structures, some integrated with newer
technologies. These systems can be administered by operators with a
myopic focus resulting in the ``siloing'' effect. The ``siloing''
effect is not an information technology problem. It is an
organizational and cultural issue that takes effort to change. At the
Port of Long Beach, there is an on-going effort to align the enterprise
Information Management function with the special needs of the Security
Division.
The Port of Long Beach's Information Management Division has
developed and implemented a well-received enterprise-wide on-line
cybersecurity awareness training program. Best practices show that
information security requires shaping appropriate behavior in people as
well as making sure funding is allocated at the appropriate level for
rapid detection and response approaches. It is expected that by 2020,
60 percent of enterprises, information security budgets will be
allocated for rapid detection and response approaches, up from less
than 30 percent in 2016.
Solutions
Solutions to these cybersecurity challenges exist. All entities
must take inventory and identify their own systems and capabilities,
which includes identifying employee and contractor access to port
facilities and information systems. In assessing impacts, it has been
determined that people cause the most damage. The Port of Long Beach
has taken a leadership role in having implemented extensive
cybersecurity awareness. Some terminal operator stakeholders have
requested that the Port aid them in developing similar programs. It is
believed that once cyber operations are understood on an enterprise
level, systems and protocols can be organized to continuously promote
cybersecurity throughout the organization. Legacy systems can be
evaluated and updated to meet the ever-changing cybersecurity needs.
The next step in achieving awareness is to have a comprehensive
vulnerability assessment conducted by subject-matter experts. It is
critical to identify and prioritize gaps that could lead to
interruptions affecting key operations. The Port of Long Beach has
undergone regular assessments over the last several years from well-
respected partners and plans on continuing this practice. The
governance of a comprehensive enterprise-wide cybersecurity program
that is integrated into a larger stakeholder framework continues to be
one of our key information technology goals.
When a cyber attack occurs, decisions must be driven by
information. An environment that promotes the sharing of information
will include balancing the need to protect propriety information with
protecting our national critical infrastructures. The city of Los
Angeles created a Cyber Security Fusion Center to facilitate the
exchange of cyber information, and the Ports of Long Beach and Los
Angeles both have access. The Port of Long Beach takes pride in being
led by our Information Management Division in being recognized as
National Cyber Security Alliance--Cyber Security Champion since 2010.
The Port also participates in the San Pedro Bay Cyber Working Group
and the Critical Infrastructure Partnership Advisory Council. The USCG
Sector Los Angeles/Long Beach, Area Maritime Security Committee has
approved a committee and we are active participants and the Information
Technology function provided a presentation on the latest information
on proactively preventing cyber attacks. This information was shared
with everyone and provided to the USCG leader for inclusion in the on-
going sharing efforts. In 2016, the Port of Long Beach staff
participated in Cyber Guard 2016, a National-level cybersecurity
exercise sponsored by Department of Defense, Department of Homeland
Security, and FBI. As cyber threats cross traditional physical and
jurisdictional boundaries, we support the involvement of State, local,
and private stakeholders in a comprehensive, National-level exercise
program.
The USCG's focus on cybersecurity in the maritime sector has
created a need for specialized mission requirements. These requirements
must be supported through adequate funding to develop and acquire
subject-matter experts and other resources to deliver meaningful
guidance to ports around the country. Valuable guidance has been
provided by the National Institute of Standards and Technology's (NIST)
Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cyber Security.
Coordination between NIST and the USCG will continue to lead the way in
formulating the strategies required for a more comprehensive National
cybersecurity posture. There should not be one-size-fits-all approach
to managing cybersecurity risk because each port or logistics partner
will experience different threats and vulnerabilities, as well as have
different capabilities to address them.
unmanned aerial systems
The Port of Long Beach is also actively following the discussion of
incorporating Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) into the National airspace.
While the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Extension, Safety, and
Security Act called for enforcing regulations to allow operators of
critical National infrastructure to apply to prohibit or restrict UAS
operation adjacent to these facilities, no such rule was promulgated.
Enacting this legislation is crucial to the safety of those who work in
the port complex. The UAS industry has quickly outpaced the Federal
rulemaking process. The unhindered operation of UAS's near terminals
and ships could pose an immediate danger. UAS operations in areas where
they present an inherent danger must be restricted and first responders
should be deemed the enforcement entity authorized to mitigate threats.
The Port of Long Beach's Board of Harbor Commissioners recently
approved a UAS permitting and enforcement mechanism, but based upon
current case law citing Federal pre-emption, the Port is limited to
only regulating the take-off and landing. As a result, we are
supportive of the language added to the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2017
to further study the potential gaps between existing Federal, State,
and local laws. A review of the time it will take to develop a
comprehensive look at the full range of local efforts and juxtapose
them against the ever-evolving Federal authorities could take years.
Port staff has also identified significant gaps between what the FAA
can enforce and where local enforcement can act. The FAA appears to
have a limited footprint in the field and cannot respond to reports of
UAS flying near critical infrastructure or in a careless and reckless
manner. It is believed that this type of enforcement is better
delegated to local public safety personnel, working in conjunction with
their Federal partners.
conclusion
It is important to recognize that while we vigorously try, no one
can stop all attacks. It's a matter of when, not if, and being prepared
with a response plan that involved both technology and information
recovery as well as making sure this is integrated into our Business
Continuity program. Protecting U.S. ports must be a core capability of
our Nation. There seems to be either high-level discussion about
cybersecurity or fragmented tactical-level technical detail. Focusing
on the development of common frameworks and strategic policies is
sorely needed. A road map that provides guidance and flexibility for
industry decisions makes sense and will strengthen our National
cybersecurity posture.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address the committee on
these critical issues. The Port of Long Beach stands ready to work with
you and your staff to help protect the people and economic vitality of
the United States.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, sir.
Chair now recognizes Mr. Familathe.

STATEMENT OF RAY FAMILATHE, INTERNATIONAL VICE PRESIDENT,
INTERNATIONAL LONGSHORE AND WAREHOUSE UNION

Mr. Familathe. Good afternoon, Chairman McCaul and Members
of the committee.
Thank you for inviting me here to speak on the security of
America's ports. I am here on behalf of the 50,000 members of
the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, ILWU, working
at America's West Coast, Alaskan, and Hawaiian ports.
The men and women of the ILWU are not only the first put at
risk by a terrorist attack on a port, they are also a vital
part of our first line of defense.
During any emergency at a port, our members work hand-in-
hand with emergency responders to do everything from containing
fires and chemical releases to moving endangered or dangerous
cargos.
Our skills and knowledge of the waterfront are invaluable.
Among our ILW members are the Los Angeles Port Police, a model
125-officer dedicated work force to port safety and security.
Following a port emergency, it is our members who work
rapidly to recover port operations. That is why port security
is so important to us and why we want to see the American
taxpayer get the most benefit for all the dollars they invest
in Federal port programs.
It is our view that the Transportation Worker Identity
Credential program, TWIC, is a costly failure. Roughly 750,000
American maritime workers are covered by TWIC. It costs between
$300 to $500 per person just to apply for and renew the
credentials over a 10-year period. That is roughly $225-375
million just in TWIC application costs to our industry.
TWIC readers are also expensive. As the GAO reported in
2012, readers are often unreliable. The new Coast Guard rules
in 2016 on TWIC readers at the passenger facilities will alone
cost the industry another $157.9 million over 10 years.
The Federal Government itself spends tens of millions more
on staffing the TWIC program, processing applications, and
spot-checking credentials. It also provides millions more in
port security grants tied to the TWIC program.
Yet, despite spending of hundreds of millions of dollars on
TWIC, no attacks have been identified as having been stopped by
TWIC. No experts cite TWIC as an impediment to future terrorist
attacks on American ports.
TWIC does produce one result: Hardship for waterfront
workers. Despite the law saying TWIC applications will be
processed in less than 30 days, TSA reports that TWIC
enrollment delays are more than 60 days.
More than 50,000 workers have had to file appeals after an
initial TWIC denial. On an appeal, the burden is on the worker
to prove that he or she is, in fact, eligible for TWIC. Due to
the large volumes of processing, TWIC appeals can take up to 6
months. During all of these delays, the worker cannot even get
unemployment insurance.
Money from TWIC could better be invested in many beneficial
programs, including budgeting for an increase in CBP officers
on the front lines at the ports of entry. Not only does a
stronger inspection force improve security, it makes ports more
efficient. Our ports cannot offer extended hours or weekend
shifts to reduce freight congestion if CBP lacks officers.
We also question the need for more spending on cameras. The
Port of Los Angeles alone has 700 cameras linked to its
security center, and other ports are equally saturated.
Would it not be wise to invest our money in closing the
real gaps in security?
The ILW believes the threat from cyber attacks is such a
gap. This includes hacks to TWIC data systems.
TWIC data can reveal not only personal information, but it
shows the work patterns of thousands of water-front workers.
That is high-value information to anyone planning a terrorist
attack on a port.
In June 2015, Maersk, the world's largest shipping line,
was attacked by an unknown actor with a variation of a
ransomware attack. This attack affected 17 Maersk terminals
world-wide, including along America's West Coast where the ILW
works. Maersk estimated damages between $2- and $300 million.
The Maersk terminal in Los Angeles, the port's largest
terminal, was closed for days. Delays continued to ripple
through Maersk's system globally for weeks. Operations at
Maersk terminals in Los Angeles and the Pacific Northwest
returned to work only because ILW members still had the know-
how how to temporarily return to paper-based operations.
Imagine the damage to our National security if port
operations were brought to a standstill at just the time
America is moving critical military equipment and supplies to
respond to an international crisis or when our armed forces are
already in combat.
We would be fools not to assume that America's opponents,
who have already launched major cyber attacks on U.S. computer
systems, have not also considered this scenario.
The ILW believes this is the time to review our port
cybersecurity. We believe this is the time to review the
critical dollars we are investing in port security, physical
and cyber, to assure we are providing our country with the best
protection.
The ILWU representing the men and women who have built
their careers working on the waterfront thank each of you for
your commitment to our ports, and we promise you will have our
full support in genuinely improving port security.
That concludes my remarks.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Familathe follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ray Familathe
October 30, 2017
Good afternoon Chairman McCaul and Members of the committee: Thank
you for inviting me to testify on the state of the physical and
cybersecurity at our Nation's ports. I am here today on behalf of the
approximately 50,000 members of the International Longshore and
Warehouse Union (ILWU). The ILWU represents longshore, warehouse, and
maritime workers in the States of California, Washington, Oregon,
Alaska, and Hawaii.
As a union, we have actively worked to improve port safety and to
reduce the risk of terrorism at our work sites. Our members are not
only among the first men and women that would be put at risk by a
terrorist attack on an American port, they are also a vital component
of our country's first line of defense. Our highly-skilled workers are
critical to any emergency response within a West Coast port, whether it
is operating cranes and heavy equipment to move vulnerable or dangerous
cargo from harm's way, or contributing our know-how to containing fires
and limiting release of harmful commodities. Longshore workers are in
fact natural allies of law enforcement and first responders on the
waterfront.
Indeed, our members include the Los Angeles Port Police, a model
125-officer force dedicated to port safety and security. This
specialized police force has over 100 years of experience protecting
our ports, and hosts a joint terrorism squad tasked with preventing
attacks on our maritime facilities.
ILWU members also serve on the maritime security committees
operated by our ports, and we strongly encourage our port industry
partners to fully integrate the union into their command and control
centers, including union participation in planning and emergency
response drills. As a partner in port security, we not only help guard
against and respond to acts of terror, but also our members are
critical to assuring a rapid recovery of port operations.
Without a doubt, the ILWU takes port safety and security seriously
and we strongly support programs that genuinely contribute to
protecting our members and America's ports. Unfortunately, not all
Federal programs meet that standard. I would like to address one
program that has demonstrated no effect on better securing our ports--
the TWIC program. The reality is that in a modern container facility,
the longshore worker has no real access to the cargo, and the
documentation associated with a container's contents is not available
to the worker. TWIC credentialing of longshore workers is, as a
practical matter, a feel-good measure promoted by those who do not
understand modern container terminal operations as a way to appear to
being addressing public and political concern about port security. The
reality is that TWIC does nothing to mitigate the real threat--
container access outside the terminal throughout the supply/
transportation chain.
TWIC is also an expensive program for workers, our employers and
for the Federal taxpayer. An estimated 750,000 American maritime
workers are covered by TWIC, at an approximate cost of $300 to $500 per
person to apply for the needed credentials and renewals over 10 years.
That is roughly $225 to $375 million dollars just in TWIC application
costs to the industry. Just the recently-issued Coast Guard rules on
TWIC readers at passenger facilities alone is estimated to cost
industry another $157.9 million over 10 years. In addition, the Federal
Government spends tens of millions of dollars on staffing the TWIC
program, processing applications, and spot-checking credentials. It has
also provided millions more in port security grants to port authorities
tied to the TWIC program. Yet despite the expenditure of hundreds of
millions dollars on TWIC--making TWIC the maritime industry's most
costly security program, eating up an enormous percentage of our
limited funds for port security--no one can point to any genuine gain
in the fight against terrorism. No attacks have been identified as
having been deterred by TWIC. No experts cite TWIC as an impediment to
potential terrorist attacks on American ports. TWIC is simply a costly
failure for the industry and for the American taxpayer.
Furthermore, we are not convinced that TWIC readers will work in a
maritime environment. A GAO report on the TWIC pilot program released
in February 2012 concluded that ``readers capable of passing all
environmental tests would represent a serious business challenge to
manufacture in terms of cost per unit.'' Further, a high number of
cards malfunctioned electronically. Durability of the card is a serious
issue. Sun, wind, grime, dust on cards caused fading, stained and
peeling cards that have difficulty being read by TWIC readers. Further,
participants in the pilot program said they would reduce the number of
guards when the reader was installed--the same guards who know the
names and faces of the regular workforce.
As well as being a failed security program, TWIC is a significant
hardship on those 750,000 Americans who work on the waterfront. Not
only is it expensive to apply for the TWIC credentials, but also the
application process itself is rife with bureaucratic delays and
hardships. As recently as February 2015, the TSA reported TWIC
enrollment delays of more than 60 days and recommended that applicants
apply for their TWICs at least 10 to 12 weeks early. Those delays
occurred despite a statutory requirement to respond to the applicant
within 30 days. In addition to major delays, applicants face the need
for two or more in-person meetings at the nearest TWIC office just to
apply and later collect the credentials.
During consideration of port security legislation, the ILWU has
advocated for a background check limited to ``terrorism security
risks,'' and to ensure that there is due process for workers denied a
TWIC card. However, we remain concerned that in a number of instances,
TWIC has been used to single out workers who may have an old felony
charge in their background but do not pose a terrorism security risk.
Further, since implementation of the TWIC program, more than 50,000
workers filed for appeals after an initial TSA determination that the
worker was ineligible to receive a TWIC. On an appeal, the burden is on
the worker to prove that he or she was not convicted of any felony by
obtaining court and police records and sending them to the TSA. TSA
issues interim denials in all cases when the record on file with the
FBI is an open arrest for a disqualifying offense. Even if the arrest
has been dismissed by local law enforcement, local officials often fail
to update this status with the FBI. In short, the FBI database is far
from complete, yet TSA relies on it exclusively. Due to the large
volumes, the processing of TWIC appeals and waivers at one time took
over 6 months, during which time the worker cannot work or even obtain
unemployment insurance.
At a minimum, the ILWU strongly urges this committee to draft
legislation to place the onus on TSA--not the worker--to obtain court
and police records when the FBI database is incomplete. It is a
considerable hardship that workers must prove they have no
disqualifying convictions before obtaining a TWIC card.
Recognizing the inadequacies of this very same FBI datebase,
Congress puts the burden on the FBI to fill the missing gaps when it
conducts background checks for gun purchases. Why should American
workers be treated more harshly when it is their very livelihoods at
stake?
Another issue that should be of concern to Members of this
committee, is container access outside the terminal throughout the
supply/transportation chain. Prior to 9/11, ILWU marine clerks were
assigned responsibility to ensure that seals on containers were not
tampered with before entering the port complex, and ensuring that
unsealed empty containers were not carrying contraband or even people.
Cameras have replaced people to perform this function, but cameras
cannot verify that seals have not been broken and resealed. Only by
yanking on the seal and inspecting its integrity with human eyes can we
determine if the seal has been tampered with en route. Cameras also
cannot see a hidden compartment inside an empty container. We stand
ready to assist in this effort if the Coast Guard decides it is a
necessary component of port security.
In addition to recognizing the role humans play in inspecting
containers, Customs and Border Protection (CBP) staffing is also
critical to safe and efficient port operations. Given the enormous
responsibilities of CBP--in scale and importance--Congress needs to
provide a budget that puts a full roster of CBP officers on the front
lines at our ports of entry. Not only are CBP officers the lead force
for inspecting goods and passengers when entering the United States,
but at America's ports our work comes to a stop without adequate CBP
staffing. Our ports cannot offer extended hours or weekend shifts to
reduce freight congestion if CBP lacks officers. These officers are key
to getting imports and exports efficiently and safely moving through
America's ports.
The ILWU also recognizes the multiple threats presented by cyber
attacks. This includes potential hacks into public and private systems
that collect TWIC data. TWIC data can reveal not only personal
information, raising the risk of identity theft, but it also reveals
the work patterns of thousands of waterfront employees. That is
information of high value to anyone planning a terrorist attack or
criminal activity at a port. It is now far easier for hostile interests
to simply employ the skills of any of the tens of thousands of
individuals and criminal organizations around the world with expertise
in cyber attacks than it is to invest years in trying to recruit and
radicalize a random waterfront worker who only has limited access to
data and cargo. We need to take port cybersecurity seriously and stop
using ineffective measures like TWIC.
We would also be foolish not to acknowledge that we are at risk
from cyber attacks not just from terrorist organizations, but from
hostile governments in Russia, Asia, and elsewhere. In an era where
wars are now often preceded or replaced by cyber attacks, ports are
vulnerable. And bad actors have already shown what they can do with a
cyber attack on maritime facilities.
On June 29, 2017, the Los Angeles Times carried this headline,
``Maersk's L.A. port terminal remains closed after global cyber
attack.'' Maersk, the world's largest shipping line was attacked in
June by unknown actors with a variation on a ransomware attack called
``NotPetya.'' This attack affected at least 17 Maersk terminals world-
wide, including several along America's West Coast where the ILWU
works. Maersk estimated its damages at between $200 to $300 million
dollars. The Maersk terminal here in Los Angeles, the Port of Los
Angeles' largest terminal in fact, was closed for days. Delays
continued to ripple through Maersk's system for weeks after the attack.
Operations at Maersk terminals in the Pacific Northwest return to work
only because ILWU members had the know-how to temporarily return the
terminal to paper-based operations.
This attack, which impacted other companies as diverse as FedEx and
drug manufacturer Merck, was actually designed to destroy data files
and cripple operations--not hold computer systems hostage for ransom
payments. The maritime industry is considered at high risk from such
attacks due to the wide-spread use of older technology. This attack was
so sophisticated however that it badly impacted Maersk, the company
considered our industry's technology leader. If this attack had hit
other major freight companies that lack Maersk's more advanced
technology, the damage to port and maritime operations could have been
far worse. Imagine the damage not just to our economy but to our
National security if major port operations on the West Coast were
brought to standstill for days at just the time America is moving
critical military equipment and supplies to respond to an international
crisis or when our armed forces are already in combat. We would be
negligent and foolish to not assume that America's opponents--who have
already launched major cyber attacks on our private and public computer
systems--have not also considered this scenario.
The ILWU believes the time to comprehensively review our port
cybersecurity is now. We believe it is time to review the critical
dollars we are investing in port security--physical and cyber--to
assure we are providing America the best protection.
Port security grants should be awarded based on their real impact
on security, with an increasing priority on funding cybersecurity. We
have enough cameras on the docks, many of which are used to monitor
worker performance rather than monitoring for illegal entry. In fact,
we already have over 700 cameras that are tied into the threat
detection center just here at the Port of Los Angeles.
We also have enough fences paid for by U.S. taxpayers. The Port of
Stockton actually used a port security grant to place a fence in a
seemingly illogical narrow space at its river port. Ironically, this
fence was installed to justify allowing the workers who process
fertilizer (a key component in many explosives) from not having to
apply for a TWIC. Despite the objections of Congressman Jerry McNerney,
the Coast Guard took no action to reverse the plan, the fence was
installed making the Port's security worse--not better.
The ILWU representing the men and women who have built their
careers working the waterfront, thank each of you for your commitment
to our ports and we promise you have our full support in genuinely
improving port security.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, sir.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Let me share my concern about cybersecurity.
Mr. Seroka and I visited over lunch. I am very concerned
about the attack that occurred last June. To echo again Norma
Torres's bill we passed out of committee I think will help
address.
I think you are absolutely right, we need to come up with a
comprehensive strategy and plan to protect our ports.
I worry about the destructive nature of this virus and the
attack. I don't think the press has really reported the
severity of this. It is something that wiped out, you know,
huge volumes of data, coming from a bank in Ukraine from a
virus called NotPetya that very likely have emanated out of
Russia.
A Russian attack on the Ukraine bank, the indirect victim
is Maersk. Maersk gets impacted by the bank that they have. The
virus gets into their systems, and then it impacts the Port of
Los Angeles, having to shut down that terminal and then go to a
manual procedure. Not to mention dozens of ports globally that
were impacted by this one attack that got into the system.
I know the offensive capability of Russia, China, Iran, and
North Korea. I think what happened in June demonstrates how
vulnerable our ports can be to this type of cyber attack.
So, Mr. Seroka, to you, can you tell us the extent of the
damage done and then what was done to repair that?
Then, moving forward, what can we do in Congress to help
with the situation?
Mr. Seroka. Mr. Chair, as you stated, the attack impacted
one of our 27 terminals here at the Port of Los Angeles.
With the map to the side of you, that is the southern-most
entity that you see, shaped like a sideways L. The A.P. Moller
facility.
In and of itself would be the fourth-largest port in the
United States; nearly 500 acres of land, 23 miles of roadway
inside of terminal operation.
It is the pre-eminent facility that we have here at the
Port of Los Angeles and arguably on the West Coast of the
United States.
But it is important to note a couple of things. The attack
that took place was pointed at, through a derivation of other
efforts, at that particular company itself, not at the Port of
Los Angeles as a whole.
The Port of Los Angeles in and of itself in use with that
cybersecurity center has a domain of landlord operation here at
the port. Simply meaning that we work with our private-sector
customers to work here directly on that 7,500 acres of
property.
What we saw immediately thereafter was our largest terminal
shut down for several days. Then as they moved to a manual
operation, moving maybe 10 percent of the cargo they normally
would on any given day through this port.
They represent about 12 percent of the port's throughput
today. The math from there becomes very significant.
The inability for the work to take place with Customs and
Border Protection to clear the goods that come into the United
States in the efficient electronic manner as designed was also
thwarted. Simply stated, each container would have to be
cleared on a manual basis by running that information over to
Customs for evaluation.
So everything as we know it today was slowed down
tremendously.
Your question then is, what can we do next? That is
outlined in my written remarks as well as the testimony I gave
here moments ago. It is three specific things.
Because this is such a private--public-private relationship
between entities such as this municipality in the city of Los
Angeles and its municipal agency, the Port of Los Angeles, the
private-sector companies that work with us as customers every
day, or lessees, long-term leases that average between 25 and
30 years to conduct operations here, and the necessity for
those two groups to get together I think is job No. 1.
How can we compare best practices? More importantly, how
could we share information of intrusion or potential intrusion
that we have seen not only here locally but on a broader scale
geographically?
Within that collaboration also rules of engagement, how we
best can cooperate together.
I understand, not from Maersk specifically, but from other
entities, that there may be some intrepidation on how
Government's overreach in the cybersecurity center could be of
some concern. I would like to have that bond work even closer.
With the cybersecurity center that we have employed since
September 2013 here at the Port of Los Angeles, I advocate that
we expand the fiber ring of that security center to be able to
envelop the port's entity as its whole, that 7,500 acres.
How better we could work in response to the needs of the
private sector without intrusion on their private and
proprietary information.
I think that also takes money, and how we can better look
at what money means to us today and how it goes downline.
I think it would be inappropriate for me to respectfully
ask for a specific dollar amount today. But as we come to you
with new ideas and new ways by which we can expand this fiber
ring and create a more collaborative environment of sharing
information through the Federal level down through our
international counterparts and our customers, it will take some
very creative looks at how we can model this, not only for Los
Angeles and Long Beach, but how it will have impacts beyond.
But there is a lot of work to be done on the ground so we
understand how better our role can be played.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
I look forward to working with you. Because you are
correct, this was not a direct attack on the Port of Los
Angeles, but the next time it could be. I think we need to be
prepared for that.
Admiral, Mr. Martel, you know, the Navy has pulled out of
the Western Hemisphere in terms of interdiction efforts,
leaving the Coast Guard as the sole proprietor of that mission
to protect the United States and its coastal waters.
Estimates are that one out of every three targets, you can
only hit one out of every three targets. Which means two maybe
getting in.
So my question is, well, first of all, if you can give me
some, recognizing the space we are in, indication of things
that we have stopped that were a victory for the United States.
But also, what is your biggest concern about what we are
missing?
Admiral Sokalzuk. Chairman McCaul, I will talk first about
what we have stopped. What we have stopped is a record amount
of cocaine in the transit zone that is being attempted to flow
into this country this year.
Although the fiscal year 2017 official numbers are not
tallied yet, because that is a very specific process, just in
the Eastern Pacific alone, we interdicted a hundred thousand
pounds more than we did last year. I am quite sure that this
year will be a record.
We were able to do that even though there is no Navy
presence down there, all with Coast Guard assets, by the
commandant strategy of concentrating Coast Guard ships in the
transit zone and interdicting these in the Eastern Pacific.
One of the things that challenges us in that at this point,
sir, is the state of our assets. That, in fact, one of the
ships that you saw today was destined for that transit zone was
unable to make it there the due to mechanical problems.
So the acquisition of the OPCs are very important for us to
have more success on that. The--and the continued incredible
performance of the National security cutters in the transit
zone during the recent hurricanes. They actually ran some of
intelligence operations down there that are normally done out
of a major joint interagency center, due to the hurricanes.
So, sir, that is--we are only getting a portion of that.
Some estimates 20 to 30 percent of the flow. So that can tell
you how much is actually flowing into the country at this
point.
Chairman McCaul. Mr. Martel.
Mr. Martel. Chairman McCaul, speaking from landside and
within the port, we have interdicted quite a bit of narcotics
in transit, freight remaining on-board, headed for Australia
and Canada.
We have also worked with State and local partners in
assisting in the interdiction of panga, maritime events that
are landing along 200 miles of littoral border that I oversee
as part of my area of operation.
I think the biggest challenge that we have in CBP landside
are the marinas. We have over 90 marinas along the coastline
that we have to patrol. We do not have the assets to operate
outside of the port.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
My wife is pointing to Mr. Cordero. I agree with you on the
UAS threat. My time has expired.
But I do think that is something the committee will be
taking a look at in terms of right now as I understand it there
are no restrictions. We know that--we have seen in Syria able
to take these drones and turn them into explosive devices and
chemical and biological weapons.
Mr. Cordero. Well, thank you, Chairman.
I think coincidently this morning we were on the rooftop of
the command and control center. The committee I think saw
first-hand the potential threat when we viewed what seemed to
be a super gigantic drone. Actually it was a one-man aerial
craft in which, again, there is no restriction.
I think we see that the testimony you have heard this
morning regarding not only the value of the cargo that comes
into our Nation, which is a significant portion of our GDP in
terms of the international trade as a whole, you know, you
think about the worst scenarios of any damage to the
infrastructure in this port, it is frightening.
So I do appreciate the committee looking into this issue
and addressing as we go forward.
So, Mr. Chairman, thank you so much for raising that point.
Chairman McCaul. Chair recognizes Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank all the witnesses for their illuminating
testimony.
One of the comments that ran through everyone's
presentation was the notion that it is critical for the Federal
Government to participate in this process of securing America's
ports. Especially on the financial end.
Everything we had an opportunity to experience to date, so
much of it was because of the Federal Government, either
through FEMA grants or through other port security grants that
are managed, that enable you to step up.
Sometimes we have tough decisions to make. But what I have
seen here today says that the mission you have undertaken is a
serious mission. We have to fund it. You know, second- or
third-best toward addressing this mission is not good enough.
To that extent, we are challenged from the CBP standpoint
to maintain a certain level of staffing.
Mr. Martel, are you able to maintain that? Or do you have
some challenges with bringing new people in?
For the record, you know, we have had issues around the
lie-detector tests that comes into play. We get told our
veterans, who get out of the military with clearances, end up
not being able to pass the CBP tests. They are holding
clearances.
Would we reduce that reliance on lie-detector tests? Has
that been helpful, or are you still waiting to see?
Mr. Martel. Sir, I think that is still under evaluation.
While we believe that the new protocol, the new direction
we are using for the lie-detector appears to be a positive. I
would have to get back to you as to what the actual results
are.
What I can say here locally is from the Los Angeles field
officer's perspective, we are adequately staffed.
We have not--we have implemented a number of new
prototypes, technology, innovation, and whatnot to become more
efficient so we could redirect staff to where we need them.
So we have not--again, we--I would say adequate. I would
not say that we are overstaffed and that we would welcome
additional staffing. But we have sufficient staff to effect our
mission here locally in Los Angeles.
Mr. Thompson. I wouldn't expect you to say anything else.
Admiral, can you talk a little bit about the TWIC card as
relates to the Coast Guard and whether or not the reference to
some concerns about it and the reader mandate that Congress has
put on you, whether or not you will be able to meet that?
Admiral Sokalzuk. Yes, sir, Congressman Thompson.
So the Coast Guard considers the TWIC card a very important
component of our layered system of maritime security at this
point.
I mean, there is no other standard antiterrorism background
check that is being done.
In relation to the reader rule, the Coast Guard initially
published the final rule last summer. Got some feedback from
industry about concerns with the rule, confusion of how it is
applied.
So we are taking a look at that, considering a possible
delay in the rule. We are working through the rulemaking
process on looking at the ultimate implementation of that rule,
sir.
Mr. Thompson. Just one of the comments I would like to say
on that is when TWIC was first envisioned, the notion was there
would be one card that would allow a worker to get into a port.
But what has happened is every port has their own I.D. card
in addition to the TWIC card. They ask for the same
information.
So the notion is if we can eventually get to a universal
card. But what has happened, as the port directors can tell us,
that is also a revenue stream for local government, in some
instances. Because you have to pay for the card.
So it is security, on one hand, but it is revenue on the
other that gets plowed into some aspect of the particular
situation.
So, Mr. Familathe, can you, since you had some issues with
TWIC, do you have some better suggestions for port security
workers? Are you saying we need to tweak TWIC?
Mr. Familathe. I agree with your comment, and I like the
way you said that. We need to tweak it.
We are not saying get rid of it. It is necessary to protect
America's ports and the security of this country. We understand
that is vital. But tweaking it so that it works for the workers
is essential right now.
When there are small problems, the delays in the process,
in going through all the hoops and--it is just not acceptable.
Because a worker can't collect unemployment insurance. He can't
go to work to feed his family. We would just like to see the
process streamlined so that it works the way it should be.
Mr. Thompson. Well, the only other point I would like to
make, Mr. Chairman, is everyone talked about partnerships. Now
it is important, if we are going to get it right, everyone has
to work together.
One of the things that put this committee together,
Congress felt that if we are all in this together, we ought to
be talking to each other, we ought to be training. Because we
are fighting a common enemy.
So the partnership principle is absolutely essential for us
to work. Old stovepiping of how we do things won't keep us
safe.
So I compliment the men and women that I have talked to
today on getting it right. But it is continuous training, it is
continuous upgrading of equipment. All those things that will
continue to keep us safe.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Well said.
Chair recognizes Mr. Estes.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Martel, there are currently 61 Container Security
Initiative ports in 35 different countries. You know, that is
where we are doing some of the forward checks and starting the
process on inspections.
Are there plans to add more CSI ports in the future? Do
those plans also include having Customs and Border Patrol
staffers or using local inspectors there?
Mr. Martel. Sir, I think we are always looking for
opportunities to expand our footprint with regard to Container
Security Initiative. Whether we have officers on the ground,
whether we are working with foreign administrations and viewing
inspections remotely, that is going to vary based on the
footprint, the technology that is available.
But, in answer to your question, yes, I think we are
looking to increase that where we can, where it is available.
The staffing footprint really will depend on the
configuration, the logistics, and what agreements we have with
the foreign government.
Mr. Estes. Do we see better results from having our own
forces there versus using local, or do we know enough yet to
know we need a distinction?
Mr. Martel. Sir, I think it is--I don't know that we would
make a distinction on that. I think when we are able to view
things remotely, it is like having a person there. So our
competence level that we have eyes on the container, eyes on
the inspection, is the same as if we had someone there.
Mr. Estes. Have you had issues or concerns with some of
the--I mean, one of the things--I had an opportunity to go look
at the Port of Rotterdam. One of the comments that was made in
our decisions there was the biggest risk is somebody coming in
and bribing an officer.
I don't know if we have that as a risk in some of the
foreign countries more so that might affect this?
Mr. Martel. Sir, from our standpoint, all of the
individuals that are involved at our CSR locations are vetted,
especially the foreign service nationals, who are vetted by our
local embassies there.
Sir, I would have to get back to you as to what our
protocols are and what we think the risk assessment is. But our
confidence level is pretty high that those issues have been
addressed.
Mr. Estes. Just to be clear, they weren't talking about
that in terms of CSI, they were talking about in general what
their experience was in the port, in general, and not anything
in particular.
Admiral, can we talk a little bit about, you know, the
inhouse cybersecurity capabilities that the Coast Guard has? Do
you have capabilities that help you with those resources and
that protection?
Admiral Sokalzuk. Congressman Estes, yes.
So first let me thank the Congress for the support and the
fiscal year 2017 that helped us build our cyber protection
teams and our cyber service provider resources in the Coast
Guard.
So the cyber protection teams are really about defending
Coast Guard networks at this point. Because if our networks
aren't working, we cannot offer any, you know, perspective or
assistance to anybody else. The cyber service provider group is
more of a capability for recovery and routing, you know, bad
things out of Coast Guard networks and that.
But Coast Guard cyber has provided us great perspective
during some of the recent cyber incidents. That is always a
resource for us to come and help industry.
I think one of the key things, as we talk about cyber in
general, sir, is that we really have to instill a culture of
cyber risk management. One of the ways we are doing that is in
the area of maritime security committee meetings, which is
exactly what some of the folks have talked about here, is
sharing information, sharing the results of a vulnerability
assessment, and making everybody aware of what you are seeing
on your systems.
The Coast Guard recently published some guidance, the
public comment period just closed on it, for cyber protection
at facilities at this point.
Mr. Estes. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Chair recognizes Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
Ranking Member Thompson as well for holding this hearing here
in Long Beach because----
Ms. Barragan. San Pedro.
Mr. Correa. San Pedro. Los Angeles and Disneyland. Covered
all the basis.
Chairman McCaul. Got it all covered.
Mr. Correa. Yes, sir.
But, you know, what I am reminded of is this asset. As I am
hearing testimony and questions here from the committee, where
can we invest the resources to be best used? What is the price?
I am thinking to myself, what is the price of not being
prepared?
Because, you know, the biggest port in the United States,
all the commerce--I have just heard 40 percent of all imports,
30 percent of all exports of this Nation through this area.
What is it that we need to do?
So I guess my question would be, if there is one thing we
need to invest in right now, what would that be?
Open it up to the committee.
Mr. Seroka. From our side, I have been told by staff that
there may be some that don't like the term ``fusion center.''
We need to redefine, that is OK.
But what we see here immediately at the Port of Los Angeles
is the need to formally bring in public and private-sector
interests to do exactly what I mentioned earlier, share best
practices, alert other partners of vulnerabilities, and have a
systematic way of processing that information through expertise
and the movement of data.
That would be the No. 1 ask.
I will get you numbers specifically off-line. We have been
looking at that and talking with our Board of Harbor
Commissioners specifically as to how we can quickly move out.
Second would be the expansion of that fiber ring I
mentioned. The Cybersecurity Center that you toured earlier
today, Congressman, shows an ability to capture data of
potential threats or folks trying to find our weaknesses.
The ability to expand that ring, and that could be looked
at as an analogy of just covering the entity of the entire port
complex itself and allowing others to jump in.
Meaning could we be another firewall to those private-
sector entities that are facing Congress every day and
potential threats in and of themselves.
Mr. Correa. I want to say that that is going to--love to
hear your comments right now because that seems to be the theme
that we have heard over and over again in our committee
hearings on cybersecurity. Best practices, everybody working
together, private and public sector, to make sure that
everybody coordinates when it comes to cyber defense.
I want to thank you very much.
I guess another question to our folks at the Coast Guard
and others.
Resources. You are severely lacking resources.
Defending the coast, defending our Nation.
Multipliers. We talk about working with our allies. Other
folks have vested interests with us on security, economic
issues.
Where do you suggest, what other agreements, what other
nations do we need to approach in terms of working with us?
Keeping in mind that we want to trust, but we also want to
verify.
Mr. Martel. Sir, I will say from a CPB standpoint, we
partner with other nations, other foreign customs services----
Mr. Correa. Anybody else that we don't that we should be?
Mr. Martel. Sir, off the top of my head, no. I think that
all of the partners that we have address our current and
impending threats at the National level.
Locally, we work closely with HSI, with various task force
State and locals to have connectivity with those countries that
have a nexus, whether it be inbound or outbound, here at the
Port of Los Angeles.
Mr. Correa. Admiral.
Admiral Sokalzuk. You know, through the international port
security program, we have engaged 150 countries. We visit those
port facilities to make sure that they are exercising proper
physical security procedures. We will begin to look at cyber.
Because we just consider that another way that we have to
manage risk in the port at this point. So I think that has been
very successful for us.
I think that from a--from an information exchange point, as
I talked about earlier, the area maritime security committees
that here locally in the country, of course, most of them at
this point have a cybersecurity subcommittee where we have a
lot of these discussions and exchange a lot of that
information.
I will just recognize too some of the--I will recognize
A.P.M. Maersk, Mr. John Ochs, who came and spoke at the Area
Maritime Security Committee, was very candid about what A.P.M.
faced in that particular attack.
Just in terms of resources, obviously, you know, it will
take resources to do some of these things as we understand
cyber threats. As they evolve, all of our systems are becoming
more complicated, so we will have to be willing to make
investment.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Chair, I yield.
Chairman McCaul. Sticking with committee Members as a
priority, Ms. Barragan is recognized.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you. I want to thank you, Chairman and
Ranking Member, for holding this hearing in my district here in
San Pedro to examine security at the Port of Los Angeles, or as
we like to call it here, America's port.
Thank you to all the witnesses for your work and for being
here today to provide testimony and your perspectives.
You know, the Nation is just facing evolving threats
constantly. When I came to Congress, it was important for me to
seek an appointment to this committee because of the importance
to the homeland and to the ports, which is by far the largest
economic engine in the region and touches every Congressional
district.
So it makes me really happy to be here today to have this
hearing. So thank you, Mr. Chairman, for doing that.
Before I get to my questions, I have some statements I want
to enter into the record from local groups and individuals
concerning security at the Port of Los Angeles.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]
Comments For the Record Submitted by Hon. Barragan
comment 1 of 4
Carlos Garcia
A real homeland security risk to the Ports of Los Angeles and Long
Beach lies at their ``back door'' and is not addressed by the Coast
Guard and Customs or the Port of Los Angeles to the best of my
knowledge. The risk lies at the Rancho LPG facility where two 12.5
million-gallon refrigerated butane storage tanks are located in San
Pedro less than 0.25 mile from the Port of Los Angeles. The facility is
located on private property not under the jurisdiction of the
California State Lands Commission or on land under the Port of Los
Angeles' jurisdiction. However, the Port does have an ownership
interest in the railroad spur track which serves the Rancho LPG
facility.
The risk posed by a terrorist attack on the Rancho LPG facility is
significant. If the facility was attacked and one of the tanks
ruptured, liquid propane would be released and evaporate in the ambient
air. When an ignition source is encountered, possibly from one of the
three back up gas compressors on-site or even a spark from a passing
car, there would be a vapor cloud explosion. Using the TNT equivalent
calculation methodology in CFR guidance (40 CFR Part 68), the impact
radius would be about 3 miles in a worst-case scenario. According to a
September 2010 Cornerstone Technologies report, such an explosion would
cause large-scale structural and physical damage due to the rapid
overpressure caused by the explosion. The impact would encompass
terminals in Long Beach and include nearly all of the terminals in the
Port of Los Angeles and the Los Angeles Cruise Terminal as well as the
visitor-serving areas of the proposed San Pedro and Wilmington
Waterfront projects.
There are also five horizontal bullet tanks located near the larger
butane tanks each capable of holding 60,000 gallons of liquid propane
under pressure on the Rancho LPG facility. They might also be
compromised in vapor cloud explosion that ignited the pooled liquid
butane leaking from one of the larger butane storage tanks. The burning
butane would be hot enough to melt the bottom of the steel pressure
vessel tank resulting in explosion of the propane tank in a boiling
liquid vapor cloud explosion (BLEVE).
There are numerous Federal, State, and local agencies that regulate
the facility besides the Department of Homeland Security including:
Federal:

U.S. Department of Transportation

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

U.S. Defense Logistics Agency

U.S. Department of Occupational Health and Safety
Administration
State:

California Environmental Protection Agency

California Emergency Management Agency

California Department of Toxic Substance Control

California Department of Industrial Relations, Division of
Operational Safety and Health

South Coast Air Quality Management District

Local:

Los Angeles City and County Fire Departments, as the
designated Certified Program Agency

Los Angeles Police Department

Los Angeles Emergency Management Department

Los Angeles City Attorney

City of Los Angeles Bureau of Sanitation Industrial Waste
Management Division

City of Los Angeles Department of City Planning.
However, I am not aware of any coordinated efforts at the Federal,
State, and local levels to mitigate the physical security
vulnerabilities posed by this facility described above. I doubt that
any of the hearing witnesses will address these risks.
I believe that these risks should be evaluated by the Department of
Homeland Security in addition to seaborne threat scenarios addressed by
the Coast Guard, Customs, and the Port of Los Angeles. The Rancho LPG
storage facility represents a much easier target than the seaborne
threats that will probably be the focus of the October 30 field
briefing on port security.
comment 2 of 4
Janet Gunter and Chuck Hart, San Pedro Peninsula Homeowners United,
INC.
October 30, 2017
The Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach represent significant &
documented targets of terrorism due to their surrounding population
densities, their massive employee work force, and the number of
concentrated ignition sources, including chemical and fuel terminals.
These facts highlight the prime opportunity for terrorism to cause
extraordinary loss of life and extreme infrastructure damage resulting
in financial collapse of the U.S. cargo industry. Many of us well
understand this.
The issue that stands above and apart from this public
understanding . . . in its ``inexcusable'' state of existence . . . is
the Plains All American Pipeline/Rancho LPG storage facility, storing
in excess of 25 million gallons of highly explosive liquefied petroleum
gases, on the precipice of the Port of Los Angeles. This single site
offers any terrorist the ``mouthwatering invitation'' to strike. With a
single one of its two 44-year-old tanks having a blast radius of over 3
miles, the opportunity for devastation is pure ``gold''.
On September 11, 2014, Congressman Waxman's office hosted a public
meeting on the Plains/Rancho LPG facility. Mr. David Wulf, director of
the DHS Infrastructure Security Compliance Division, publicly
acknowledged that the Plains/Rancho LPG facility is a ``Tier One Soft
Target of Terrorism''. The antiquated tanks of this facility are
readily accessible and can be easily ruptured by either a high-power
rifle or rocket-launched grenade. Considering the recent actions of the
Vegas shooter and his direct aim at nearby fuel tanks in his attack, we
are given additional anxiety by this LPG tank target potential. We are
talking about an explosive and cascading inferno potential that is
extraordinary in its scope.
Both expedited and exempted from numerous permits and regulations
by the Nixon administration in the early 1970's, this facility was
introduced solely as a ``storage'' site for LPG received via pipeline
from Algerian ships calling at Berth 120. This was envisioned as an
``emergency'' action necessary for back-up energy supply under the
false notion that the import of this commodity would wean America off
of foreign oil. Both Nixon's political demise and the explosive nature
of this gas, eliminating it as a broadly-used energy source, caused the
original Petrolane LPG facility to go bankrupt. In the 1980's, instead
of the port and city of Los Angeles welcoming the opportunity to remove
the already well known high-risk potential of this site, they embraced
an entirely ``new'' business venture for the successor. Taken over by
Amerigas, a pipeline was installed to Ultramar refinery (now Valero)
several miles away in Wilmington for the expressed purpose of ``off-
site storage'' of the facility's ``most'' hazardous commodity, butane
gas. That pipeline was later tapped into by BP (now Tesoro) refinery in
Wilmington to also transport their own butane for storage. This use was
``never'' anticipated nor reviewed in the highly-deficient EIR
performed for the initial project. The existing business operation is
``entirely'' different. While a rail dock is mentioned in the EIR of
1973, there is no analysis of rail use, whatsoever. Both the rail and
pipeline uses, which now currently traverse both under and over port
public trust lands, have never considered the volatile nature of this
gas nor identified its associated risks and liabilities. In 2008, this
facility was purchased by the Plains All American Pipeline company and
is operating as a Limited Liability Corporation under the name, Rancho
LPG LLC.
Sadly, since the DHS publicly announced the high risk of this site
in 2014, we have yet to see any responsible action. Opportunities
abound to affect change to eliminate this highly dangerous risk
exposure at multiple levels of government. The function of the Plains/
Rancho LPG facility depends ``entirely'' on the use of public trust
lands to facilitate its operations. Without those assets, there is NO
business conducted at Rancho LPG!
The Surface Transportation Board ruled last March that the ``local
government'' has the right to ``policing of safety'' on the use of the
Port's own rail. Our Federal legislators should be leaning heavily on
local Government officials to enforce this right and protect the
innocent and our ports. The ``use'' of the pipeline under public trust
lands falls into the same category. California State Lands Commission
also has an obligation to the people of our State as guardians of the
public trust. The DHS charter states the following: ``Whereas the
Department of Defense is charged with military actions abroad, the
Department of Homeland Security works in the civilian sphere to protect
the United States within, at, and outside its borders. Its stated goal
is to prepare for, PREVENT, and respond to domestic emergencies,
particularly terrorism.
We urge immediate action on this issue by the leadership. The
consequences of not responding are far too great to ignore any longer.
Sincerely,
Janet Gunter,
Member SPPHU.
Chuck Hart,
President SPPHU.
comment 3 of 4
Marcie Miller
October 30, 2017
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security asks everyday citizens
such as myself, ``If you see something, say something.''
Today I am saying something and I hope Homeland Security is
listening.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security has long been aware of the
dangers of storing and transporting ultra-hazardous chemicals. Forty-
five years ago politicians and safeguards failed this community by
enabling Petrolane to build--with the assistance of the U.S.
Government--the bulk storage facility known today as Rancho LPG, LLC.
Adjacent to a pre-existing community of people and places of
commerce; at the Nation's largest and arguably most important port of
entry; on unstable landfill; in a known seismically active fault zone;
in a methane zone.
The inappropriately located Rancho LPG bulk storage facility
remains as a reminder of just what a homeland security failure looks
like. So now a new generation inherits this ticking time bomb, despite
the unanimous consensus that the risks are unacceptable.
Oil and gas industry lobbyists and paid consultants knowingly play
down the likelihood of catastrophic risks. Yet, we know the unthinkable
is possible; we witnessed that at Fukushima and at countless other
ultra-hazardous biochemical disaster sites. If you choose to do
nothing, you will abdicate your responsibility to protect this State's
greatest resource--people.
What can you do?
1. Please, determine that human life is more important than
corporate greed;
2. Remove politicians and lobbyists from the determination process;
According to the city of Los Angeles Ethics Commission, over the
last 10 years, Rancho LPG, LCC has donated over $22,000 to local
politicians, including current Councilman Joe Buscaino; previous
Councilman and current Rancho lobbyist, Rudy Svorinich; and just days
after rendering a decision in favor of Rancho LPG, LLC, L.A. City
Attorney Trutanich received a large contribution to the ``Trutanich
Office Holder Committee 1301975'' from Plains Marketing, LP on 2/25/11.
Rancho LPG, LLC has donated handsomely to EastView Little League,
an organization synonymous with sitting two-term Los Angeles Harbor
Commissioner, Anthony Pirrozzi, long-time league president, member of
the steering committee, and coach.
In 1977, Gov. Jerry Brown tasked the California Public Utilities
Commission to inspect the marine terminal of Petrolane, Inc. to
determine its potential hazard to the surrounding area. Despite his
acknowledgment of the high risks associated with the siting of this
ultra-hazardous facility, his final report concluded only that,

``The city of Los Angeles Department of Building and Safety has
determined that Petrolane's low temperature liquefied petroleum gas
(LPG) units are not exempt from Section 91.0102 of the Los Angeles
Municipal Code as originally indicated. Accordingly, on April 20, 1977,
the department issued an order to comply to Petrolane, Inc., which
directs the company to file plans and obtain building permits for the
two low temperature LPG storage tanks. The review will include a check
to ensure their ability to resist seismic loading.''

Needless to say, the seismic issue has remained. Had the original
Petrolane facility been subject to SEC. 91.0102., it could never have
met the requirements of the code, the purpose of which was,

`` . . . to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare
by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings
and structures erected or to be erected within the city, and by
regulating certain grading operations within the city.''

It is important to note that this section of the Los Angeles
Municipal Code was replaced in November 21, 1989 by Ordinance No.
165310, which deliberately elevated the safety bar not only for new
construction, but also for ``alterations'' and ``repairs.''

`` . . . Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code
specify different materials, methods of construction or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a
conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the
specific requirement shall be applicable.''

It should come as no surprise that Governor Brown received
substantial campaign donations and questionable loans from the
Petrolane company.
3. Act swiftly to correct past failures and mitigate dangers before
the unthinkable does happen.
In 2007, the ``Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act
of 2007, mandated that the Secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security establish risk-based performance standards for the security of
high-risk chemical facilities within 6 months of the enactment of the
Act. Also mandated was the development of vulnerability assessments as
well as the development and implementation of site security plans for
high-risk chemical facilities. The CFATS interim final rule was
promulgated to fulfill the requirements of this Act.''
Why has Homeland Security done nothing to protect both people and
property from the profoundly high-risk chemical facility casting a grim
shadow for miles in every direction?
Further evidence of risk-based performance threats to homeland
security are records collected by the California Public Utilities
Commission regarding the staggering number of train derailments along
the Pacific Harbor Line, which transport these chemicals throughout the
Port of Los Angeles and the San Pedro/Wilmington communities.
Although the Pacific Harbor Line has a fine-tuned public relations
strategy that toots a loud bullhorn about its attention to safety, the
truth is, CPUC documents a jaw-dropping 40 derailments between 2008 and
2012! I have contacted CPUC numerous times to obtain 2013-present
records but never received a response. Simply based on this
unacceptable derailment record, the Homeland Security Appropriations
Act of 2007 mandates immediate intervention to cease and desist all
Pacific Harbor Line operations
Why has nothing been done to mitigate this risk???? Why are
regulators not all over this??? These facts must be known. Thank you
for reading my concerns and, hopefully, for changing the course of
history.
comment 4 of 4
James Dimon
Having looked at the current situation with Port of Los Angeles
(POLA) security and their relationship with law enforcement which
surrounds the port complex the following has been determined to be a
necessary component toward POLA and community safety.
We believe by ensuring Los Angeles Police Department, Harbor
Division is equipped with license plate reader technology it would add
an important layer of security to the port complex extending miles in
some cases from its shores.
This technology is already being utilized by surrounding
communities like Rancho Palos Verdes and should include participation
by the Los Angeles Port Police as well.
We also believe a pact of cooperation should exist with the
implementation of this technology, stressing the importance of
different agencies to sharing critical safety information with each
other, thereby increasing the effectiveness of the system and the
security of not only POLA, but that of the citizens who reside on its
boarders.
The technology is proving to be highly effective in identifying
intruders into the city of Rancho Palos Verdes alerting law enforcement
before they can act and as an increasingly valuable investigative tool.
POLA is currently bringing millions of people to the Complex
utilizing existing infrastructure. POLA's expansion projects are
working to improve that infrastructure that will bring millions more in
the future. Plans for the San Pedro Market Place, Alta Sea, Banning
Shores and the Avalon Blvd expansion will undoubtedly increase the
desire to come down to the Port Complex.
In closing we need to be proactive with our approach to addressing
what will be increased security of POLA and the surrounding
communities. Here is an opportunity to get ahead of the security issues
with a police division which is tops in the country practicing law
enforcement.
Please consider the importance License Plate reader technology
would provide toward a huge boost to Port Security and that of its
neighbors.

Ms. Barragan. Thank you. So statements are from groups like
the San Pedro Peninsula Homeowners United, Mr. James Diamond,
and Carlos Garcia. They offer the committee an often-overlooked
local perspective as we consider port issues.
Mr. Familathe, thank you for raising the issues with the
TWIC program. This is something I have heard not just from your
organization but from others. The concerns on what the program
does or doesn't do and the burdens it imposes.
We always want to make sure that we have security at the
forefront. So I am hoping that we can work in a bipartisan
fashion to address some of the concerns that were raised here
today. So we have a lot work to do on that.
Now, for my questions, I know that Mr. Martel indicated
that the staffing was sufficient.
Mr. Familathe, you are on the ground. Your members are on
the ground. You handle the cargo. In your perspective, given
that your members are there and you see first-hand, but do you
believe that the current CBP staffing levels at the ports are
adequate?
Mr. Familathe. No, I do not.
Our members work 7 days a week. There are only a few no-
work holidays throughout the entire year. With pressures to
move cargo 7 days a week through ports like Los Angeles and
Long Beach, it is important that not only the longshoremen are
there. We can get the cargo off the ship. But if CBP doesn't
have it budgeted to have that staffing on the weekends and the
CBP officers there to X-ray the cargo, then we can't keep that
cargo moving.
So it works hand-in-hand.
We would really like to see the proper budgeting.
They may have the staffing. I won't challenge Mr. Martel
here on that. He knows his operation better than anyone. But
maybe they don't have it budgeted to have those CBP officers
working weekends.
Ms. Barragan. Certainly, we will follow up on that.
Mr. Cordero raised an issue that I get asked about all the
time. That is, do a hundred percent of the containers and the
cargo that come into the port get scanned?
Mr. Martel has indicated that a hundred percent get the
radiation scan, but only the high-risk get the X-ray.
My question is does the fact that we don't X-ray 100
percent, knowing that Mr. Cordero said it was impractical, does
that leave our port at risk?
Mr. Martel. I don't believe that it does.
I think we have a very robust targeting system. We are able
to get information as part of the 24-hour advance cargo
manifest rule, we are able to get cargo information 24 hours
before the cargo boards a vessel.
So we have a unique opportunity to scan the commodity, look
at all of the shipper/consignee information, bounce it against
various Classified law enforcement databases, trade databases,
open-source information, to do an in-depth assessment as to
whether or not the cargo presents a threat.
Ms. Barragan. Thank you.
Mr. Seroka, I want to ask you about an incident that
happened in the fall. You may have--I am sure you heard about
it--the high-speed chase that ended here at the port complex.
It ended up with the suspect climbing a large crane and even at
one point passing two workers on his way up, before ultimately
falling to his own death. It was an unfortunate incident.
I think a lot of us were surprised that a car could get
onto the port and to do this. I often think about bombings.
What we do today is we put up these barricades so cars can't
get past. That this gentleman was able to access the port
complex as easily as he did.
Can you tell us what additional security procedures have
been put in place as a result of this? Because of my concern
that it could pose to homeland security.
Mr. Seroka. If I may, Congresswoman, it would be helpful I
think to the committee to start with a wider context of this
specific incident.
The alleged assailant stole a car from a dealership in the
Inland Empire, approximately 60 miles away from the port.
Moving through multiple counties with various jurisdictions of
pursuit, the driver was moving through our network of surface
streets and freeways in a very erratic manner. Insomuch that
leadership of these agencies had moved closer and then decided
to retreat from this particular driver, not to impede upon the
public's safety.
The driver then approached the harbor area on the 110
Freeway. All throughout this police chase that went through
multiple counties, we had no indication that this driver was
targeting or set to enter the port complex.
After weaving his way through several street and local
neighborhood enclaves, a U-turn was made to go back onto the
110 Freeway and take an immediate exit off of that freeway
toward port property.
From all accounts, both on-site as well as in the air, as
this was telecast by local news on multiple channels, the
driver began to follow traffic and turned in to a specific
terminal that was led in by ILW work force that was going to
work for the nightside shift.
That is a traditional gate that will be open to our workers
so they can get on-site with safety and move to their jobs
beginning at 6 p.m. The penetration was made at approximately
5:50 in the evening.
Getting onto the terminal site was met with response from
our Los Angeles Port Police unit within 3 minutes and 20
seconds of notification of that breach.
Once on-site, there were a number of tactical details and
protocols that needed to be followed, especially through the
allied agencies, and the necessity of highly sophisticated
response teams that were called to that particular site once
Port Police had cordoned down the situation.
It is unfortunate, but that individual did climb a crane
and either fell or jumped to his death.
What we have done in the timing since then, although none
of this could have been predicted, is that we fortified gate
activities, not only at that particular facility, but also
created different paths of cargo entry as well as personnel and
visitor entry with credentialed folks that will be working on
the port.
In addition, all of these standards at the particular
facility that was breached and others that we immediately took
under evaluation were at or above United States Coast Guard
standard for entry and exit.
But we will continue to raise the bar on that in
collaboration with Coast Guard, CBP, and other allied agencies
to make sure that our threshold goes well beyond that is
mandate.
Ms. Barragan. I yield back, and I apologize for going over.
Chairman McCaul. The Chair recognizes Mr. Rohrabacher from
Orange Country.
Mr. Rohrabacher. It is good to be back. Some of you may not
understand, but I represented this area for about 10 years.
Mario and I worked out a lot of problems together. But it took
a lot of work to do it. I tell you that much.
We have--you know, this port is one of the great assets of
our country. As such it has got special considerations that we
have to look at. I know as the 1900's turned into the 20th
Century, we faced certain challenges. I happen to have observed
the changes that were taking place when we went from having
everything in boxes and taken off the ships in boxes, and
longshoreman would have to take them off individually.
The great cost and actually cooperation that was necessary
to create this new system that we have, or the system we have
now, of containers, which is basically so efficient we have
developed what would be a conveyor belt across the ocean. That
is how efficient we are.
Well, a lot of people are taking advantage of that conveyor
belt to make money. That is what they should do. We have a
market system here. People looking for profit.
But I would hope that as we look at the new challenges that
come with this change of technology that we make sure the
people using the conveyor belt help pay for the things that we
need to do to make sure that that economic conveyor belt stays
in process.
Mr. Lowenthal and I have been really involved in that issue
for a long time. We still are active in this.
So as we are looking at some of the things, Mr. Chairman,
that need to be done to keep this system safe, which is what we
are focusing on today, but also functioning, let's make sure
that we work together, but we take the approach that those
profiting from this new system will pay the bill in devising
ways of making it work better.
These new challenges, Mr. Chairman, that you focused on
today, thank you for being here to help us discuss those.
The cyber attacks. Let me know--I am on the Science
Committee, and even I have a tough time in figuring out how
these cyber attacks work. Today with the testimony that we have
had, it has been very beneficial to me and I am sure to all of
us to think how we can deal with this. We have already--we have
got an example now.
We know, over the years, as I say, since I represented
this, we know that even when there is a slowdown here, it costs
hundreds of millions of dollars just to have a slowdown. If
there is a cyber attack, it shuts the whole thing down even for
a couple days, it is an economic catastrophe. Thus we do need
to work together to see what we can do to head off those
problems.
We talked also today, someone mentioned drones.
Well, we never had to worry about drones 20 years ago, did
we? But, yes, that is something we are going to have to think
about. Think about what the penalties should be, what the rules
should be.
I want to ask, Mr. Chairman, someone mentioned
overreaching. That we can't be overreaching in cyber. Which
one?
Mr. Seroka. I mentioned that, and that is not exactly what
I stated.
Mr. Rohrabacher. Could you give us a note of caution of not
going too far so that if we are trying to make the system safe
that we don't freeze it.
Mr. Seroka. I mentioned in my earlier question and answer
back to the Chairman that as my recommendations and that of our
department here, which is a municipal agency in the city of Los
Angeles, that I felt there were a couple things we needed to
do. One was that collaborative spirit of bringing people
together, sharing information systematically----
Mr. Rohrabacher. What about overreach? Where does that come
in?
Mr. Seroka. As I stated on the record that there are some
in private-sector industry that feel that Government may
overreach. As we get into those areas, we need to have a
sensitivity toward that.
Being on the ground here and coming from the private
sector, I think I see a lot of those sensitivities and can help
find those unique aspects that we can work together.
Mr. Rohrabacher. So in other words----
Mr. Seroka. We have to be mindful of that.
Mr. Rohrabacher [continuing]. What we have got to do is we
have got to make sure we are taking care of the problem but not
so much that we are killing the patient when we are trying to
correct the disease.
So that is my only admonition--two admonitions. No. 1,
let's find ways of paying for it by the people who are making
the profit on this conveyor belt, and, No. 2, let's make sure
we don't overreach so that we are actually becoming the enemy
and slowing down this great wealth-producing enterprise that we
have here in our ports.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for coming and joining us today.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you for being here.
Excellent point with respect to overreach. The
cybersecurity bill we passed out of committee--it is law now--
was predicated on the Department not being able to regulate.
Because we thought to have a true information-sharing
relationship, you are not going to share information with some
entity that can regulate your industry.
I think providing the liability protection even went
further so that, you know, the financial institution here can
share with the other one without threat of a lawsuit.
So I hope that is working. It has been a great experiment.
But the threat is very real.
So thank you for that.
Mr. Lowenthal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
inviting me.
It is really an honor, as the person who is the co-chair of
the Ports Caucus in the Congress of the United States and also
as the representative of the Port of Long Beach, cybersecurity
is not an area that I am proficient in. So for me this has been
a great experience, just listening.
But I want to get back to, you know, we have a lot of
conversation or much of the conversation focused on the impact
of the cyber attack in June of this past year to Maersk.
When I spoke to Maersk about that right after they said,
you know, they are going to be able to cope with it and live
with it. They didn't like it. But they had the resources.
But they also indicated to me that they were not alone.
There were a lot of smaller, you know, lines that were also
impacted in other ships. It is not just the large people.
So I want to get back to the Coast Guard.
You know, with this attack, which I believe occurred off
the Black Sea, and there were over 20 ships that lost their GPS
systems. Researchers have indicated now, I believe, that there
really are software vulnerabilities in commonly-used
communications and navigation systems on cargo vessels and
tankers, et cetera.
I would like to know from the--if there are these
vulnerabilities, not just for the large ones, and the large
ones were saying we will live. We don't know how the smaller
ones that were impacted are actually going to be able to exist,
you know, and whether they--the question is, what is the Coast
Guard--are you aware of that right now in our system that is
out there, we have these vulnerabilities?
Maybe the large companies will be able to fix it, but what
are we going to do about this? Does the Coast Guard see this as
a tremendous vulnerability that is out there?
Admiral Sokalzuk. Congressman Lowenthal, thank you, sir.
I think the Coast Guard does see this as a vulnerability.
We have had several instances now, this Black Sea incident that
you referred to.
Mr. Lowenthal. That is right.
Admiral Sokalzuk. Those ships figured out what was going on
through use of relying on their training to IMO standards and
things like that, figured out that their GPS signals were not
indicating the right thing in their position systems.
I think as these electronic systems become more
interconnected, we will see more of that.
I think, you know, one thing that we have to realize in a
lot of these stems is the human in the loop has to work well,
has to be well-trained, has to understand some of this. We have
to look at all these systems and build that resiliency into
there that somebody has other ways to verify the operation of a
system.
In this case, it was training for them. They probably had
visual aids to navigation or something like that. Just like in
this country, as you approach the ports, you don't completely
rely on GPS, you start to rely on the visual aids to navigation
that the Coast Guard maintains.
But we worked with IMO and industry to develop guidance
that takes cyber into account into safety management systems
for ships. So there is an IMO circular out on that right now,
sir.
But we have to continuously identify these risks and really
instill this culture of constantly evolving how we manage risk
in cyber. But ultimately there has to be, you know, resiliency
and redundancy that people can rely on. It is oftentimes humans
and people with good training.
Mr. Lowenthal. I want to follow up--thank you for that
answer--something that Mr. Martel talked about, and I think
you--and when you were talking about your advanced information
systems that you get about what is taking place, it just
triggered to me a conversation that I had with Mr. Seroka
recently about the ability or the need to kind-of coordinate
all the digital information and really understand not just a
day or two before a ship is coming, but exactly what is
happening and to be able to share that information.
So I really want to say to follow up to ask Mr. Seroka, how
can--what are the improvements that we are already beginning to
see in the information systems technology and how can that help
us with the cybersecurity?
Mr. Seroka. Yes, Congressman. You are referencing a
discussion we had about one of our signature initiatives here
at the Port of Los Angeles, the Port Optimizer, or Information
Sharing Portal.
Mr. Lowenthal. Yes.
Mr. Seroka. That was co-designed between General Electric
Transportation and the Port of Los Angeles.
Mr. Lowenthal. I believe the Port of Long Beach is going to
soon be part of that system also.
Mr. Seroka. We are very hopeful. Yes.
Executive Director Cordero and I have been speaking about
those opportunities regularly as to who we could really work
together in this area.
Mr. Lowenthal. I encourage that.
Mr. Seroka. Thank you.
Dating back about 3\1/2\ years ago, Congressman, you will
remember the depths of congestion that we witnessed not only
here in southern California, but throughout most of the world's
east/west trade gateways due to dislocations in the supply
chain, new partnerships that were being formed, the unfortunate
financial travails our maritime community had been facing since
the advent of the recession, and other causes.
We felt at that time that if we could do a better job
sharing information across stakeholder groups we could find
operational efficiencies that would be necessary to bring this
port complex and others not only to standard but beyond that
for what our customers expected.
So we began working with--with customs and specifically Mr.
Martel, along with others in Washington with the Department of
Homeland Security and CBP, Rich DiNucci, to be specific, who
offered ideas on how we could utilize information through the
Customs Advanced Manifest System, which Mr. Martel referred to
earlier, is a vetting process used 24 hours between vessel sail
from Asia here to the United States.
My ask was pretty simple in that I wanted to utilize
generic information. I did not want to know what was inside the
container, how much it cost, or any other sensitive or
proprietary data that Customs may hold.
The point of bringing General Electric on was one of a
company who has a great reputation of being a steward of
information, and holds many Federal, State, and local contracts
throughout the Nation.
That information now in its earliest stages has been tested
here at the Port of Los Angeles and with the permission of
Board of Harbor Commissioners will be rolled out to the
entirety of the port over the coming months.
The idea is that the earlier line of site we have on this
information the better we can mobilize our service providers
and partners to move the cargo and its conveyance system in a
much smoother way.
Having earlier access to that data will also show,
potentially, any abnormalities so this group of trusted
partners can again convene and talk about what we can learn
from those and how best we can protect our interests of our
assets, people, and the cargo that moves through our port.
Mr. Lowenthal. Thank you.
As I yield back I also want to agree with Congressman
Rohrabacher that we definitely need a sustainable revenue
stream to enhance the movement of goods.
Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. The Chair recognizes gentleman from San
Diego, Mr. Duncan Hunter.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for being
here. San Diego.
Let's start with this. The Chairman hasn't talked about it.
But he has got a book called ``Failures of Imagination.'' Did I
get that right? ``Failures of Imagination.'' It starts off with
a pretty catastrophic attack in the District of Columbia. But
it goes through things we haven't thought of yet.
So the containers, where everybody is checking those, if
there was one failure of imagination, something you that
haven't thought about yet today, what is it? It is a big yacht
that blows itself up? What would be our failure, sitting here,
after something bad happening?
Because we are checking out containers all the time now.
You are focusing there. So if I was a bad guy, I would sure as
heck not do anything on a container. I would do something else.
Talked about we stopped using panga boats. We are now using
recreational boats more. Right? Because they don't get flagged.
Anyway, what is a failure of imagination here?
Mr. Cordero. If I may, Congressman, says that is a great
question.
As I note in my testimony, part of the concerns or issues
we were going to address is what are the new threats? To the
question.
The unmanned aircraft is that new threat. I mean, because
when you start talking about the potential, what could happen,
a catastrophe.
I think, on the other hand, if we are proactive and make
sure we approach this issue in a way that the port authorities
would have the ability to restrict usage of the unmanned
aircraft and/or drones as we know it, then of course it
certainly would mitigate that type of threats.
Mr. Familathe. In my testimony that was submitted, ILW used
to inspect all the containers coming out of the waterfront. As
the industry changed, cameras were installed at the gates in
the terminals.
We no longer open doors on containers. We know how
vulnerable we are in this country from within. Empty containers
are parked on the street. Truck drivers pick them up, bring
them into the terminals. I believe that that is a huge
vulnerability for us.
When our guys used to open the doors, you could see if
anything was inside. Now that doesn't take place. A camera is
looking up top, but you are not seeing inside the container, of
all the containers, of particularly a small port like San
Diego.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Gentlemen.
I have got one more question too. So we got UAS not looking
inside containers.
Yes, Admiral.
Admiral Sokalzuk. So, Chairman Hunter, what I would say,
sir, is I think we have got to put that imagination into our
exercises. Make sure that we fully explore things like when we
have an incident, like some of the things that we have just
had, where we are operating on backup systems and we are doing
things manually that somebody can't do something that gets
something through into this country.
No matter what realm it is, whether it is within Customs'
realm or the Coast Guard's realm, I think we have got to inject
a lot of imagination into those exercises and really look at
that particular piece when we are operating in manual mode.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Mr. Martel. Sir, I would echo the admiral's comments.
I would also add to your point. Private vessels, pleasure
craft continue to be a challenge for us. You know, I think we
need to strive to have better domain awareness of our
responsibility. That is presently, you know, one of the
challenges here locally within Los Angeles.
I think working through the AMSC, through our regional
coordinating mechanism, working with all the State and locals,
getting out there and working with harbormasters and whatnot is
part of our plan. It is what we are currently doing, to try to
have more visibility as to what that threat is. But that
continues to be the unknown because those vessels come in and
out daily.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
Last question. Try to do it in 1 minute.
What percentage of the port or of the terminal operators
are foreign-owned in Los Angeles and Long Beach?
Mr. Seroka. Ninety-eight percent?
Mr. Hunter. Are foreign-owned.
Mr. Seroka. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. Who approves who owns them?
Meaning, can the Iranians operate a terminal? Can the
Iranians--can somebody--can Pakistan operate a terminal? Or are
they all happy countries that operate----
Mr. Seroka. No. That would be a situational awareness with
respect to how the vetting process goes with respect all the
way down to municipal----
Mr. Hunter. Ninety-eight percent of the ports.
Mr. Seroka. Similar circumstances.
Mr. Cordero. Yes, that is correct, Congressman.
I would also say that the CPS process right now that is in
the District of Columbia certainly addresses those issues. Of
course that process specifically addresses the security threats
with potential transactions.
Mr. Hunter. Does CBP look at a terminal operator
differently if they are--let's say that they are--name a good
country; I don't want to say if there are good or bad countries
because we are all wonderful.
But let's just say a Western civilization, first-world
country, versus Iran.
Do you look at the normal operator differently if it is
owned by different types of folks?
Mr. Martel. Sir, that I would have to get back to you on in
terms what we do at the Coast Guard.
Mr. Hunter. You do game theory. That is how you determine
what targets to go after to pick.
Mr. Martel. Yes.
Mr. Hunter. I would have to play into there. Right.
Admiral Sokalzuk. Congressman Hunter, I don't think we look
at them differently. We enforce the same standards on them for
facility security, facility security plans, facility security
assessments, unannounced spot checks. All those things.
So I think that rigorous approach, while I am unaware that
we have ever modified it for a certain national terminal owner,
I think that is what really helps us maintain security in the
port is that regimen.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Good points.
Thanks for the plug for my book as well.
But I think imagination is important. Red team exercises to
keep, you know, finding vulnerabilities. I think the cyber
event demonstrate a vulnerability that we can hopefully make
better.
Mrs. Torres, is recognized.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you again for
inviting me to participate in this very important hearing right
here in California, the Port of Los Angeles.
I want to also thank Ranking Member Thompson and both of
your staffs for helping me with my bill. Certainly, we could
not have been able to get it through the committee without your
assistance of your staffs and all of the commitment that we
have seen today from the Members of the committee. So thanks
again for that work.
Going back to a comment that you made earlier today as we
started this conversation, Mr. Seroka.
The attack pointed at the company when we were talking
about this last cyber attack in August. I forget.
How can we not think that the attack was not necessarily
targeted at a company but at global commerce? And they utilized
the company to stage the attack?
Certainly, someone could have known that, you know, these
attacks were targeting major ports, not just in the United
States, but globally, shutting down one of the biggest
terminals here.
The livelihood of my district is intimately connected with
the work that all of you do here, not just in the Port of Los
Angeles, but in the Port of Long Beach. It is critically
important for me that, you know, you have the support that you
need to ensure that you do your job. That is why this bill is
so important to me. That is why in last Congress I worked with
Buddy Carter to put permanently into law the FLETC program.
I want to ask you about the MLETC program that you have
here. So that is, what, a child of the FLETC program? That is,
what, an MOU between FLETC and MLETC? Can you explain how that
works?
Is that only unique to the Port of Los Angeles Long Beach?
Mr. Seroka. Yes, it is unique to the Port of Los Angeles
where the maritime----
Mrs. Torres. Exclusively.
Mr. Seroka [continuing]. Where the Maritime Law Enforcement
Center is domiciled here in the Port of Los Angeles, and under
the direction of the FLETC, as you had outlined.
One specific statement for the record. We have not
predisposed anything with respect to how this or other cyber
attacks were first looked at, where they were targeted, who
they were going to impact.
We have got to keep a wide line of vision around what we
know, what we learn. Putting a lot of that energy, which has
also been a constant theme from the committee, as to how we can
harness that energy looking forward and evaluating those
threats that we don't know of today. How best--and I think the
term was just used--how best we can look at what we don't know.
Mrs. Torres. For example, the unmanned aircraft, the camera
systems that are currently watching employees that could be
targeted or used as a target to more than watch the employee
activities for good or bad. But could, you know, be utilized to
do harm.
Mr. Seroka. Right. It is a daunting task, Congresswoman,
because I don't think I would ever in good faith sit here and
tell you that we will have everything covered coming out of
this meeting.
Our job here as stewards of this agency are to de-risk and
minimize risk across a broad cross-section of potential areas
of threat.
Looking introspectively at our own vulnerabilities, those
which others have cited, and working through that collaborative
effort that I mentioned to try to find every way we can to push
down----
Mrs. Torres. My time is very limited. So I am going to have
to cut you off there.
Thank you for the effort in creating what you have called a
vibrant environment for information sharing. I would love to
see how that MLETC model can be implemented at all of our
ports, including Ontario Airport, which is very dear and close
to me, since I represent that airport.
But also our ports, Oakland, San Diego, and moving on north
within California.
To our Coast Guard partners, I want to thank you for all
the work that you do.
I was recently in South America and saw some the work that
you are doing there in bringing foreign partners to help you
see and intercept the narco trafficking that is coming through
the Pacific side.
So thank you for your effort.
I understand that you have issues and problems with aging
craft. Not just the ships that you have, but other aircraft
that you have.
Thank you for doing everything that you are doing with
limited resources.
Maybe giving us an appointment to, you know, a Coast Guard
academy might help in that.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Ranking Member is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
statement from the National Treasury Employees Union.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]
Prepared Statement of Anthony M. Reardon, National President, National
Treasury Employees Union
October 30, 2017
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, distinguished Members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement
on Customs and Border Protection (CBP) staffing issues on behalf of the
25,000 CBP Officers, Agriculture Specialists and trade enforcement
personnel stationed at 328 land, sea, and air ports of entry across the
United States (U.S.) and at preclearance stations currently in Ireland,
the Caribbean, Canada, and United Arab Emirates airports represented by
the National Treasury Employees Union (NTEU).
As of September 2017, CBP's Office of Field Operations (OFO) had
1,200 CBP Officer vacancies. The fiscal year House appropriations bill
includes funding to fill the current vacancies to meet the fiscal year
CBP Officer on-board target of 24,214, but provides no new funding to
address the current CBP Officer staffing shortage of at least 2,500
additional CBP Officers as stipulated by CBP's recently-released
Workload Staffing Model and to fund an additional 720 CBP Agriculture
Specialists as stipulated by CBP most recent Agriculture Resource
Allocation Model.
cbp at the ports of entry staffing shortage
With the existing vacancy rate of nearly 1,200 funded CBP Officers
and, according to CBP's analytic workload staffing model, the need to
hire and fund an additional 2,500 CBP Officers to meet fiscal year
staffing needs--there is a total CBP Officer staffing shortage of 3,700
today.
The economic cost of this shortage is staggering. For every 33
additional CBP Officers hired, the United States can potentially gain
over 1,000 private-sector jobs. If Congress fully staffed the ports
with the needed 3,700 additional CBP Officers, 106,000 private-sector
jobs could be created. Understaffed ports lead to long delays in travel
and cargo lanes and also create a significant hardship for front-line
employees. Both involuntary overtime and involuntary work assignments
far from home disrupt CBP Officers' family life and destroy morale.
Notably, on-going CBP staffing shortages directly contribute to CBP's
perennial low ranking in Federal employee workforce satisfaction
surveys.
In addition to CBP's trade and travel security, processing and
facilitation mission, CBP employees at the ports of entry are the
second-largest source of revenue collection for the U.S. Government. In
2016, CBP processed more than $2.2 trillion in imports and collected
more than $44 billion in duties, taxes, and other fees.
As you know, the President's January Executive Order calls for
hiring 5,000 additional Border Patrol agents and 10,000 new Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) agents, but does not ask for one
additional CBP Officer new hire, despite the fact that CBP Officers at
the ports of entry in 2016 encountered over 274,000 undocumented
immigrants and seized over 600,000 pounds of illegal drugs, and over
$62 million in illicit currency, while processing over 390 million
travelers and $2.2 trillion in imports through the ports.
cbp staffing at the ports of los angeles and long beach
The Port of Los Angeles is the No. 1 port by container volume and
cargo value in the United States and, along with the Port of Long
Beach, is part of the biggest port complex in the United States. NTEU
represents approximately 800 CBP frontline employees at the Ports of
Los Angeles and Long Beach (LA/LB). In addition to CBP Officers and
Agriculture Specialists, these 800 employees also include non-uniformed
trade specialists in the LA/LB based Electronics Center for Excellence
and Expertise (CEE) along with trade specialists screening incoming
commodities represented by all ten CEEs. Since April 2017, the number
of front-line employees at LA/LB has been reduced by approximately 45
positions. Staffing shortages at seaports Nation-wide are especially
acute. Of the 2,000 CBP Officer new hires funded in fiscal year 2014,
fewer than 20, or 1 percent, were assigned to seaports.
The staffing shortage at the CBP San Diego Field Office, that
includes the San Ysidro land port, the LA/LB seaport and the Los
Angeles International Airport, is indeed critical. In March 2017, there
were 350 CBP Officers vacancies at the ports within the San Diego Field
Office. Because of the on-going staffing shortages at the Nations'
ports, CBP Officers at some ports work up to 16 hours a day and since
2015, CBP OFO has had to divert several hundred CBP Officers from
already short-staffed sea, air, and land ports to the critically short-
staffed land ports at San Ysidro and Tucson for 90-day stints.
recommendations
Delays at the U.S. ports of entry result in real losses to the U.S.
economy. Understaffed ports lead to long delays in travel and cargo
lanes, hurting businesses and consumers, and also create a significant
hardship for front-line employees. The 1,200 existing vacancies at U.S.
ports of entry must be filled first and 2,500 new CBP Officer and 720
CBP Agriculture Specialists positions need to be funded by Congress.
We ask Congress to reconsider CBP's funding priorities as it
finalizes its fiscal year appropriations bills. Unlike other DHS
components operating between the ports of entry and at ICE, both of
which received significant increases in personnel funding in the fiscal
year appropriation bill recently approved by the House, CBP at the
ports of entry has established and documented Workload Staffing Models
that justify the need to hire 2,500 CBP Officers and 720 Agriculture
Specialists today.
If Congress is serious about improving port security, as well as
facilitate legal international trade and travel, there is an
opportunity to address the justified and documented need to fund
additional CBP staffing at the ports in the Omnibus bill that will be
considered later this year. On behalf of the men and women represented
by NTEU at the Nation's ports of entry, I urge you to authorize and
fund CBP Officers and Agriculture Specialists at least to the levels
that Border Patrol and ICE agents are funded in the recently approved
fiscal year House appropriations bill.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this statement to the
committee.

Chairman McCaul. Let me thank all the witnesses for your
testimony. It is very valuable.
I want to thank both the Long Beach and L.A. Port Authority
for the tours that we received today.
Want to thank everybody who is attending and for your
service day in and day out to protect America's largest port.
It is very important to me. That is why I am here.
But as a Texan, I must say, in closing, go Astros.
May not be too popular here.
The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:06 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Letter From the National Association of Waterfront Employers
October 24, 2017.
The Honorable Michael McCaul,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Ranking Minority Member, Committee on Homeland Security.
Dear Chairman and Ranking Member: I am writing on behalf of the
National Association of Waterfront Employers (NAWE) to provide comments
pertinent to the House Committee on Homeland Security's field hearing
on ``Examining Physical Security and Cyber Security at our Nation's
Ports.'' NAWE is the voice of marine terminal operators (MTO) and
stevedores and has participated in discussions of these issues since
the enactment of the Maritime Transportation and Security Act of 2002
and its implementation by the United States Coast Guard (CG). Marine
terminal operators buy and operate equipment and hire labor to act as
the master link in the global intermodal marine transportation system.
The oft characterized importance of the economic contribution by this
system cannot be underestimated.
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) under the Authority of
the Congress and the leadership of successive Presidents has
orchestrated a system of layered physical security in addressing
threats made apparent following 9/11. This layered security includes
international port assessments and container inspections by the CG and
United States Customs and Border Protection (CBP). It includes advanced
notices of arrival and offshore boarding by the CG and CBP. And it
includes compliance with CG and CBP regulations by marine terminal
operators who form the membership of NAWE. Specifically, it is the
marine terminal operator who must have an approved Facility Security
Plan (FSP), a designated Facility Security Officer (FSO) and obtain
releases for cargo from CBP's Automated Customs Environment (ACE).
Recently, NAWE was deeply involved in the planning for a Transportation
Workers Identification Card biometric reader and response to the CG's
request for comments to its draft Navigation and Vessel Inspection
Circular. It is also the MTO that is singularly focused on the success
of the business, attending to the diverse objectives of productivity
and safety/security. Today's safety/security preserves tomorrow's
productivity. NAWE and its members are committed to ensuring that our
port's physical and cyber security remain the best in the world.
physical security
Following 9/11, NAWE and it members partnered in the formulation
the layered physical security for the global maritime supply chain
through the various public forum including local Area Maritime Security
Committees. NAWE's members are today a significant investor in and
integral component of this system. Efforts in foreign ports and on the
high seas/customs waters go relatively unnoticed. However, the
continued efforts of the marine terminal operator to be most productive
in transferring cargo as the master link in our Nation's cargo chain
receive continuous review as necessary to meet their responsibilities
under MTSA, the FSP, and the goals of layered security for our ports.
The marine terminal operator must evolve and improve while CG and CBP
regulations remain constant. The question is whether CG and CBP
regulations are able to blend the need for strong security and
commercial efficiency.
NAWE applauds the CG's and other agencies current efforts to review
its security regulations. However, NAWE seeks continued cooperation
with the CG and CBP to develop a unified DHS port security approach
including developing a ``one-DHS'' approach to the FSP and Customer
Trade Partnership (CTPAT) as indicators of our collective commitment to
the Nation's maritime security. With this much-needed review of
regulations and the potential for Congress to act to reauthorize DHS,
we see an opportunity to not only improve security at our Nation's
ports, but to also improve on the public-private partnerships that are
key to that security. NAWE hopes these actions can result in improved
security that works seamlessly with much-needed advancements in
commercial efficiencies. If changes to laws and regulations governing
our Nation's physical port security are made with input from private-
sector partners, NAWE believes both goals can be achieved.
cybersecurity
One need only review the morning news to understand the critical
role of strong cybersecurity in our Nation's ports. To understand NAWE
commitment to cybersecurity, I refer the committee to NAWE's published
response to the CG NVIC 05-17. The NVIC describes the CG interpretation
of MTSA to include Cyber requirements throughout the FSP as well as
forecasting a ``governance'' process for the future. Two underlying
principles are contained in this response: (1) While MTSA provides
clear authority over physical security in protection against kinetic
threats, it does not do so over the broad cyber spectrum and (2) NAWE
and its members strongly endorse vigorous and vigilant attention to
cybersecurity.
First, a few comments on the nature of cyber and cyber systems at
port operating facilities. Cyber as something of value is not likely to
be the servers and various data terminals, it is likely to be the
``information'' or ``data.'' Further, the real value is not solely in
the information or data, it is in the capability to distribute the
information or data within and beyond the facility. It is this
distribution capability, especially beyond the facility, which also
becomes its vulnerability. This capability is called the World Wide
Web--it's the global cyber space.
At port operating facilities you will find the HR, finance, and
scheduling capabilities existing at every business of similar size and
sophistication around the country. Unique cargo moving systems include
load planning, terminal operating systems (TOS), and customs' release
authority. Load planning if not on a white board is often done at a
centralized location and customs' release is done by the government.
The piece of cyber most key to port operations are the TOS. Various
terminal operators do not use the same system or even a consistent
level of capability. Some operators might be able to function
adequately without a technology solution, some could no longer. Higher-
end TOS often represents proprietary software and included security
measures from the start.
Regarding the record of cyber ``incidents,'' there have been
several examples: Releasing cargo (contraband) to the wrong recipient
at a European facility, ship-to-shore cranes losing GPS feed, and
recently malware which shut down operations at a global operating
company. What were the impacts, the causes, the vulnerabilities, and
the threats? Was data or cargo compromised? Did they impact the
Nation's marine transportation system or even the port-wide system? Are
there unifying recovery actions available? What actions, if taken by
the Congress or DHS, would have prevented them? These are important
questions. MTSA sets out a requirement for assessments such as these
questions prior to formulating responsive plans.
As a unifying theme connecting NAWE's first two observations and
the following cyber basics, significant public-private partnerships
occurred in the development of MTSA physical security in protection
from kinetic events. Out of that partnership came the articulation of a
``transportation security incident (TSI).'' No such discourse or set of
definitions exist today with respect to cyber. In fact, NAWE members
observe disparate characterizations by the CG of last summer's port
cybersecurity event impacting several U.S. port operations. Some have
not even recognized that the ``event'' occurred outside the United
States. At a minimum, the Nation and DHS is not prepared to establish
policy to provide security from cyber intrusions. Although not able to
substantiate its assertion, NAWE believes its members (particularly
those most dependent on cargo cyber systems) have as good of
understanding of and response to cybersecurity imperatives as the DHS
components. NAWE's members are certainly incentivized. This raises the
question of whether there is a value-add in governmental well-intended
efforts or whether the marketplace is the better incentivizing arena
for the port operator's sector. As we develop further technology
solutions NAWE members continue to spur better cybersecurity.
NAWE observes recent discussions of the importance of ``personal''
actions in vulnerabilities and protective measures in cybersecurity. It
is interesting that ``people'' have been raised as more important than
technology to cybersecurity at the same time that the full anticipated
value of TWIC biometric readers to physical security at marine terminal
operations has been reduced.
NAWE's members acknowledge the existence of the NIST framework for
cybersecurity. It has value, but is its value in having a lockstep
citation within a facility security plan as presented in the recent
NVIC or is it a means for the growing cybersecurity industry to be
guaranteed work. NAWE members and their cybersecurity teams go beyond
frameworks and look for the best practices to assure protection of
their data and business practices from unwanted intrusions. Are best
practices an effort that the Congress and DHS can contribute to and
how? Is it one that even the disparate terminal operators can gain from
working together? These are important questions, yet hard to answer.
NAWE is available to continue this discussion.
NAWE members value the CG's protection of SSI information and CBP's
efforts to maintain ACE in the face of cyber attacks. Members also
value Nationally-accessed information not commercially available which
might stimulate the most valuable cybersecurity measures. Like the
physical security realm, NAWE members would value National efforts to
defeat global criminal and terrorist networks which are the source of
many attacks. These efforts might extend to foreign shores but at least
should preserve the use of the global cyber space (also known as the
World Wide Web) for peaceful and economic purposes as is done for
commerce on the high seas. Following events, NAWE members recognize the
value of the CG, CBP, and Port Authorities in recovery efforts. These
are the kind of efforts DHS (specifically the CG) addressed
contemporaneously in developing MTSA and FSP requirements.
NAWE asks that Congress support these efforts of DHS mission focus
and most important to the safety and security of our Nation's ports,
support the direct involvement of the marine terminal operators in the
development, implementation, and execution of port security policies.
For NAWE and its members to be effective partners, they need to know
that the agencies we work with are empowered to be partners at every
step. NAWE members are committed to their contributions to the global
marine transportation system, the stimulation of the best productivity
possible and the preservation of businesses, jobs, and lives through
state-of-the-art safety and security practices.
Sincerely,
John Crowley
President, National Association of Waterfront Employers (NAWE).

[all]
