- VA MAIL MANAGEMENT: THE CASE OF THE $11,257 PACKAGE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VA MAIL MANAGEMENT: THE CASE OF THE $11,257 PACKAGE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

of the

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-28

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

30-374                      WASHINGTON : 2018

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Chairman

GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-     TIM WALZ, Minnesota, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               MARK TAKANO, California
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American    ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
Samoa                            BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  KATHLEEN RICE, New York
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                J. LUIS CORREA, California
NEAL DUNN, Florida                   KILILI SABLAN, Northern Mariana
JODEY ARRINGTON, Texas                   Islands
JOHN RUTHERFORD, Florida             ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CLAY HIGGINS, Louisiana              SCOTT PETERS, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto
Rico
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND INVESTIGATIONS

JACK BERGMAN, Michigan, Chairman

MIKE BOST, Illinois                  ANN MCLANE KUSTER, New Hampshire,
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                    Ranking Member
NEAL DUNN, Florida                   KATHLEEN RICE, New York
JODEY ARRINGTON, Texas               SCOTT PETERS, California
JENNIFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto      KILILI SABLAN, Northern Mariana
Rico                                 Islands

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of Rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.

C O N T E N T S

----------

Tuesday, September 12, 2017

Page

VA Mail Management: The Case of The $11,257 Package..............     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Jack Bergman, Chairman.................................     1
Honorable Ann Kuster, Ranking Member.............................     3

WITNESSES

Mr. John Oswalt, Executive Director for Privacy, Office of
Information and Technology, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs     4
Prepared Statement...........................................    24

Ms. Lori Rectanus, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office...............................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    25

VA MAIL MANAGEMENT: THE CASE OF THE $11,257 PACKAGE

----------

Tuesday, September 12, 2017

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
Subcommittee on Disability Assistance
and Memorial Affairs,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:34 a.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jack Bergman
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Bergman, Poliquin, Arrington,
Kuster, and Sablan.
Also Present: Representative Roe.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JACK BERGMAN, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Bergman. Good morning. This hearing will come to order.
I want to welcome everyone to today's hearing examinating--
``examinating,'' that is a new word. We come up with one every
time here. We are not going to examinate. We will just examine
today VA's management of its mail operations.
VA reports spending by far the most in the Federal
Government on mail, $355 million in fiscal year 2016. That is
more than the Social Security Administration or the Treasury
Department, including the IRS.
Considering the magnitude of spending, the Subcommittee
looked into where the money goes. What we found surprised us.
Every large agency reports its mail spending to the General
Services Administration in great detail through what is called
the SMART database. GSA posts the numbers on its public Web
site. The general idea is transparency drives efficiency and
savings. Let me repeat that. The general idea is that
transparency drives efficiency and savings.
In reality, after a look at the facility-by-facility data
VA reported, bizarre and anomalous numbers immediately jumped
out. It begged the question of whether anyone had ever reviewed
and questioned the information.
Here are some of the highlights:
The VBA office in Huntington, West Virginia, reported
sending Priority Mail for 3 cents each, while the Memphis
medical center reported spending $39 per piece of Priority
Mail.
The Alexandria, Louisiana, medical center reported sending
First-Class letters for 8 cents each, while the Decatur,
Georgia, medical center reported sending the same letters for
$58.29 each.
The Denver medical center reported sending nearly 10,000
airmail packages and nearly 65,000 UPS Ground packages at no
cost.
The VHA facilities in Temple and Waco, Texas, reported
spending $40,000 to mail just 16 business reply letters.
And, finally, the Decatur, Georgia, medical center also
reported sending one FedEx Ground package at a cost of $11,257.
These numbers are hard to believe. In a letter to former
Chairman Miller, VA explained them as data entry errors by
mailroom employees. For example, VA wrote that Priority Mail in
Memphis actually cost $3.90 each. The business reply letters in
Temple and Waco cost a total of $40. The FedEx package in
Decatur was really $112. And the First-Class letters in Decatur
never existed.
These explanations were not very reassuring. More on that a
little later.
Recognizing the scope of the problem in the mail operation,
we turned to GAO to conduct a wide-ranging review, and it
released its report last month.
VA seems to have a circular problem on its hands. The mail
operation is bureaucratically fractured and governed by a 20-
year-old policy. Hundreds of VA facilities are mailing using a
hodgepodge of different meters, software, and other equipment.
No one seems to be firmly in charge, and the extensive data
collected every year is completely unreliable. The data is
supposed to inform managerial improvements, but the managerial
shortcomings seem to be corrupting the data.
It is not clear to me that anyone truly knows how much VA
really spends on mail. As big as the reported $355 million
total is, it apparently does not include over 1,000 clinics,
300 vet centers, and the entire National Cemetery
Administration, among others. Some facilities report nothing,
while other facilities inflated their spending by a factor of
10 or 100, as VA explained.
Patterns in VA's reported spending are just as perplexing.
After being roughly in line with Social Security and Treasury's
mail spending for a number of years, VA's reported spending
abruptly spiked by over $100 million in fiscal year 2014 and
has stayed at that level. In some years, expenditures crept up
while the number of mailings dropped. In other years, the
number of mailings climbed but the expenditures barely budged.
Notably, despite the spending spike beginning in 2014, the
number of mailings is actually down.
Perhaps what is most concerning is, from the outside,
before scrutiny, this all appears to be a model of efficiency
and open government--a Federal management regulation, detailed
policy, and interactive data available to the public in an
online dashboard. In reality, it is an intractable mess, a
classic case of garbage in, garbage out.
We are here today to shine a light on the problem and begin
charting a course to fix it. While mail may not be the most
exciting issue, these inefficiencies are clearly wasting real
money. Veterans all over the country have pressing needs, and
we simply cannot afford to operate this way anymore.
I now yield to Ranking Member Kuster for her opening
statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF ANN KUSTER, RANKING MEMBER

Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Chairman Bergman.
And thank you to our witnesses and to all of you who have
joined us today.
While ``The Case of the $11,257 Package'' is a catchy
title, it is actually one example of inaccurate data reporting
by the VA. In this case, a decimal was forgotten during manual
data entry, so a package costing $112.57 was reported
incorrectly to the General Services Administration.
Unfortunately, we observe this all too often. VA struggles
with cost accounting and the management of its finances in part
due to outdated systems requiring manual data entry, increasing
the risk of human error. Inconsistent procedures, policy, and
oversight lead to a lack of accountability and increased cost
to the taxpayer.
Employees lack the training and resources they need and
modern IT systems to ensure directives and policies are
followed. Programs lack goals and measures of performance to
gauge their effectiveness and efficiency. And data are
inaccurately reported, this time to the GSA.
These are the same root causes that resulted in the
Veterans Health Administration's placement on the GAO High Risk
List. These issues place VA's mail program at risk and cause me
to question whether the physical security and accurate tracking
of packages, some of those packages containing opioids and
controlled substances, are at higher risk of diversion.
In comparison to VA's other challenges, like addressing the
opioid epidemic or ending veteran suicide, management of VA's
mail expenditures and volume should be the least of its
worries. However, I believe this is indicative of a larger
problem.
Military leaders often say that when troops are failing to
do simple, routine tasks, such as keeping their uniforms in
order or maintaining clean barracks--and I think General
Bergman would agree--that this is a sign of a larger problem.
In the same way, I think failure to manage mail is one sign of
a larger problem at the VA.
The VA must thoroughly examine the root causes of GAO
studies and IG investigations and take serious steps to address
them so that it can transform itself into the world-class
veteran-centric organization that we have all come to expect.
I hope this hearing will give us a chance to have a broader
discussion on some of these challenges that the VA faces and
the solutions and resources that are needed to ensure that our
veterans receive the health care and benefits they deserve.
Thank you, General Bergman. I yield back.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Ranking Member Kuster.
I would now like to welcome our panel, who is seated at the
witness table.
On the panel, we have Mr. John Oswalt, Executive Director
for Privacy in the VA Office of Information and Technology. We
also have Ms. Lori Rectanus, Director for Physical
Infrastructure Issues at GAO.
Mr. Oswalt, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JOHN OSWALT

Mr. Oswalt. Good morning, Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member
Kuster, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee. Thank
you for this opportunity to participate in your hearing on
GAO's mail management report entitled ``Actions Needed to More
Effectively Manage Outgoing Mail'' and discuss what actions VA
is taking to implement the resulting recommendations and
improve VA's mail management program.
Before addressing the GAO findings, I would like to
emphasize again what was said in your opening statements, that
VA has not paid the exorbitant amounts previously reported to
mail individual packages and letters. For example, the $11,257
package reported to GSA was never translated into an actual
purchase or expense for VA. The actual cost, as indicated, was
$112.57. In this case and others, human error, such as omitting
a decimal point, resulted in widely inaccurate reporting on our
part.
Mail operations in VA are largely decentralized, with each
administration executing their program to meet their unique and
diverse needs. While these unique requirements require some
degree of customization, there is a strong need for a robust
enterprise-wide strategy.
VA accepts and understands the need for immediate and
decisive action, and we are acting accordingly. We have
developed and undertaken a comprehensive remediation plan that
addresses GAO's recommendations and to make VA a best practice
across government in mail management. To better meet our
mission, we must eliminate inefficiency that impedes serving
our veterans that--the inefficiency siphons off valuable
resources.
As an organization that is primarily field-based, VA mail
operations have evolved to meet the unique needs of our various
components with limited central oversight. In the past, this
homegrown approach may have worked to meet mailing
requirements. However, the growth in mail volume over the past
two decades, such as the shift to mail-out prescriptions, have
rendered these homegrown mailing practices obsolete. VA has not
kept up with new technologies and business practices.
VA is working to create a more effective and efficient
program and is using the GAO recommendations as our starting
point. VA has established a department-wide integrated project
team, or IPT, sponsored by the VA's Deputy Chief of Staff, with
membership from all relevant stakeholders. The IPT is charged
with formulating plans and actions that address and satisfy the
GAO recommendations and to build the administrative
infrastructure to govern the mail management program at an
enterprise level.
Actions include but are not limited to: the comprehensive
assessment and inventory of existing mail equipment and
supporting software; conducting market research to determine
what approach is best for VA, whether it is new capital
investment, leasing, or obtaining mail operations as a managed
service; conducting a cost-benefit analysis of all of these
options identified, and we will make a determination on what
approach best meets the needs of VA.
VA has updated and has published a revised VA Directive
6340 that incorporates all new regulations and requirements. VA
is currently updating VA Handbook 6340 that contains
enterprise-wide operating specifications on how to implement
the now-revised policy.
Individual administrations will write their own standard
operating procedures, SOPs that incorporate the unique mission
requirements specific to their mailing operations. VA will
report on a semiannual basis the results of established goals
and performance measures.
VA is currently writing and classifying position
descriptions for a dedicated VA mail manager position at an
enterprise level and one supporting staff position.
All mail managers will have to take annual mandatory
training in accordance with Directive and Handbook 6340 and
individual SOPs for their respective office.
VA faces many challenges in meeting these goals, but we are
up to the challenge. The men and woman of VA are unique in
government in their commitment and dedication to fulfilling the
mission of VA: serving veterans and their beneficiaries. It is
this dedication that will make our efforts here successful.
There is a great deal of work to be done, and we are
already making progress toward addressing GAO's concerns and
are implementing their recommendations.
This concludes my testimony, and I am prepared to answer
any questions you or other Members of the Committee may have.
Thank you.

[The prepared statement of John Oswalt appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Oswalt.
Ms. Rectanus, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LORI RECTANUS

Ms. Rectanus. Thank you.
Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Kuster, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to be here today to
discuss VA's mail program.
VA reports that it sends more than 200 million pieces of
mail per year to veterans and their dependents, and it reported
that it spent over $350 million to do that, nearly double what
it did in 2009.
In July, we reported that VA needs to take actions to more
effectively manage this program. Specifically, we found
improvements were needed in how it tracks mail data, how it
measures program performance, and how it provides authority for
key program officials. We are pleased that VA agreed to take
action in response to our recommendations.
The biggest issue is that, currently, VA cannot reliably
demonstrate what it spends on mail or what volume it handles.
This is because it does not consistently track mail volume and
costs across its facilities and administrations. Instead, every
facility essentially does its own thing. For example, some
facilities use manual spreadsheets to track mail activity,
while others have purchased equipment, such as postage meters,
that track the volume and costs.
However, even when the facilities had equipment, because
the equipment had varying capabilities, the type of information
provided by the equipment varied. This occurs because VA's
administrations and facilities procure mailroom equipment
independently. For example, each of VBA's 56 regional benefit
offices negotiates their own contracts, and VHA reported that
the contracts can be established either by the VISN or at the
medical centers themselves. As a result, what you get is a
department-wide rollup that has little meaning.
This is before you even consider the unreported,
incomplete, or questionable data. While there are about 200
individual entities who report data to SMART, some key entities
are not accounted for. We found the National Cemetery
Administration hasn't reported its mail volume or costs, and,
when questioned, these officials did not know they were
supposed to report. Additionally, VA's 1,000-plus community-
based outpatient clinics do not report, and officials did not
know if they were accounted for in others' reports.
In other cases, those who did report missed critical items,
such as volume, expenditures, or undeliverable mail. Others
reported data that were clearly inaccurate, as you have
referred to--as another example, spending $9,000 to mail 29
pieces of mail.
If VA strategically sourced equipment that consistently
obtained and tracked mail activity, it would have complete,
accurate, and reliable data, and it would likely save money by
negotiating fewer contracts at higher levels of the Department.
While VBA is trying to establish a blanket purchase
agreement, these efforts have not included other
administrations in a way that would maximize cost savings as
well as help ensure a valid understanding of mail costs and
volume.
Regarding performance measures, VA cannot show that its
mail operations are efficient and effective because it has not
established department-wide goals and performance measures for
operations. Instead, we found facilities, again, were doing
their own thing for measures. Some facilities judged their
performance based on customer service, while others reported
using efficiency, cost, volume handled, or timeliness as
measures.
In the absence of department-wide measures that everyone
works towards, VA can't assess how administrations or
facilities are doing. Only through having performance measures
and holding facilities accountable to those measures can VA
show that it is effectively carrying out the program.
Finally, we found that the officials responsible for
managing VA's program likely have insufficient authority to do
their jobs. We found a lack of clarity for who was responsible
for carrying out the requirements in the mail policy. Mail
managers also told us they do not believe they had the
authority to even require basic operations, such as complying
with requirements or ensuring accurate reporting. VA needs to
clarify the authority and responsibilities of the agency and
administration-level mail managers if it is to improve
management and oversight of mail operations.
In conclusion, VA has many critical responsibilities when
it comes to serving our Nation's veterans and their families
and must allocate its resources appropriately and efficiently
and know that its efforts are achieving the intended outcomes.
That includes mail.
We look forward to working with VA as it implements our
recommendations to enhance the effectiveness of its mail
program.
Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Kuster, and Members of the
Subcommittee, that concludes my statement, and I would be
pleased to answer your questions.

[The prepared statement of Lori Rectanus appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Ms. Rectanus.
The written statements of those who have just provided oral
testimony will be entered into the hearing record. We will now
proceed to questioning.
Ranking Member Kuster, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
So this is a question about the GAO investigation. I am
wondering if you found evidence of fraud or waste in the mail
mismanagement.
Ms. Rectanus. Thank you, Ranking Member.
This review was not designed specifically to look for
fraud, waste, or abuse, but, certainly, we did identify that
when every facility orders their own equipment and does things
differently you probably are losing opportunities for cost
savings from more strategic sourcing.
In terms of fraud and abuse, anytime you have self-reported
information and there is no oversight of that, you run the risk
of that potentially happening. However, we did not specifically
find any examples of that.
Ms. Kuster. And it is my understanding that the mail
procedures are based on a directive, 6340, that is at least 20
years old. It might be older than that. Did you get into that
level in your investigation?
Ms. Rectanus. The policy directive that we had at the time
of our review was from 1996, yes. There is a directive, and
then there is a handbook that supports the directive.
Ms. Kuster. Do you know--or maybe for our witness from the
VA: Is there anything underway to revisit the mail directive
and this issue about each of the facilities making their own
decisions about what equipment to purchase without attention to
cost savings?
This is to the VA witness.
Mr. Oswalt. Oh, I am sorry.
Ms. Kuster. Yes.
Mr. Oswalt. Well, as I indicated in my testimony, we have a
cross-VA team now that is--the first step is to do the data
gathering of what we actually have and get our arms around
that, the goal being that we will have a centralized oversight
of this but still allow the field-based operations to tailor
their individual programs to meet those needs.
It is worth mentioning--
Ms. Kuster. But something as basic as mail, why would that
vary? I mean, why would it vary from VISN to VISN or region to
region?
We are just talking about--like, for example, you could
have a volume discount contract with these carriers that would
benefit everyone across the country and certainly benefit the
taxpayers. You are never going to get that if you insist on
doing this region by region in a different way.
Mr. Oswalt. I am sorry if I was confusing. The
Administration, the Veterans Health Administration, the VBA,
Veterans Benefits Administration, they each have their own
programs. But within VHA it is uniform, the way they execute
it, and the same for VBA. So there is--
Ms. Kuster. I would just suggest--
Mr. Oswalt. VHA--excuse me?
Ms. Kuster. I would just suggest we try to go up another
level and, for the entire Veterans Administration, all across
the country, try to use the same equipment, get the same data,
because you could negotiate an even larger discount.
Mr. Oswalt. Right. And that is one of the goals we are
striving for, is VBA currently is--as indicated in the
testimony of my colleague, is that VBA is now implementing a
consolidation of their operations using commercially cloud-
based software that rolls together all the disparate parts of
information that is needed to report to GSA. And it does it for
each carrier, and it puts it all into one place.
Ms. Kuster. I mean, that is the irony; the carriers
certainly know how much you spend.
Mr. Oswalt. Right.
Ms. Kuster. That we have to go the other direction.
So I am just suggesting that, as you are looking into that,
you know, looking for ways of cost saving by getting a handle,
you also have to deal with this issue of manual entry. The more
you are using digital entry, the better off you will be.
Mr. Oswalt. Well--
Ms. Kuster. Because the way the package, let the machine,
you know, enter the information--because you are always going
to have problems with manual entry. You are always going to
have human error.
So my time is short, but I do want to get a question out
there. And you may not be prepared to respond, but I would like
to hear back from the VA.
This goes to a much bigger issue, but my understanding is
that 80 percent of the VA's prescriptions are handled by
Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy. And I would assume that
is a pretty large part of this $355 million if 80 percent of
the packages--now, I would also assume that that is being done
because people feel that mail-order pharmacy is a way to--for
convenience, but primarily to save money.
And I am wondering two questions: One, has the VA taken
into account the cost of the mailing back and forth to
determine if indeed there are cost savings through having this
high a percentage--this seems like an incredibly high
percentage for mail-order pharmacy.
But, secondly, I am much more focused, with the opioid
crisis, on managing controlled substances. We have spoken with
the United States Postal Service, the issues that they are
having with diversion. Do you have any kind of quality control
around diversion?
And my time is up, so I will have to take that--
Mr. Oswalt. I will have to take that for the record--
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
Mr. Oswalt [continued].--and will get back to the Committee
with that.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Ranking Member Kuster.
Dr. Roe, you are recognized for 5 minutes, sir.
Mr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank Chairman Bergman for holding a hearing on this
issue. I also would like to express my appreciation to our
predecessor, Chairman Miller, who is keeping an eye on us from
over my shoulder here, for beginning the investigation.
The mail spending figure we have, $355 million last year,
is enormous. And I understand that there are major
irregularities in the reported numbers, and the real amount
could be even more or it could be less.
First of all, we need to figure out what the accurate total
is. VA should be able to do that. Most businesses can. Maybe
you clean up the SMART data, or maybe the CFO counts
expenditures, or maybe devise another solution.
Then, VA needs to look at waste and inefficiencies. The
Social Security Administrations communicates with 60 million
beneficiaries, most of them seniors who still receive
information via U.S. mail, for about $207 million. The IRS
communicates with 140 million taxpayers by letter for about
$188 million.
I find it hard to believe that all the mail VA sends is
absolutely necessary, which is why I have worked on the RETIRE
Act legislation to encourage electronic delivery of retirement
data for ERISA employees. I am interested if there are barriers
to VA taking a similar approach.
Even given the number of letters and packages that VA now
sends, it appears that potential savings are being left on the
table. Using hundreds of different meters; sorting facilities
are incredibly inefficient. Imagine how much VA could reduce
cost by leveraging economies of scale, as Ms. Kuster just
mentioned. Imagine how much easier it would be if all the
equipment was compatible. Presumably, modern equipment,
software equipment, can track all expenditures that pass
through the meters and interface with the post office and
shipping companies.
As Chairman Bergman said, this problem does have a familiar
theme. There is not enough oversight--there is not an oversight
hearing yet in which IT or contracts do not come up.
With that, just a couple of questions.
Mr. Oswalt, you first. I understand that last year all the
VBA regional offices started working on getting a common
contract in place to buy all their mailing equipment and
software together. It was supposed to be done at the end of
this year. Now VA is telling GAO it will take several more
years. Can you explain why it is taking so long?
And I also like the new strategy that you laid out to
update the mail management. But why did it take a GAO report to
get this done?
Mr. Oswalt. Well, I will answer your first question first,
sir, that VBA has instituted or begun this process. And I was
informed by their officials that in a 3- to 9-month timeframe
this software that they are purchasing and using on all the
compatible equipment will be complete.
And that will, as I indicated earlier, put all the
information in one place. It will interface with GSA SMART and
remove that human interface. It will interface with VA's own
accounting system for more accurate data there.
Mr. Roe. Let me editorialize for just a second. Being in
government space for a long time, in medicine, we billed
Medicaid and Medicare. If we had been this sloppy in reporting
to Medicaid and Medicare, I can promise you, you would be doing
a perp walk somewhere. You would not be able to put this kind
of sloppy data in front of Medicaid and Medicare and expect to
get reimbursed and then expect not to explain this to the
auditors when they came to your practice and looked at this. I
mean, there is no way on this earth it would stand up to
scrutiny, just to editorialize.
Ms. Rectanus, what would a world-class mail operation look
like? And are there any other Federal agencies that stand out
that are doing this very well?
Ms. Rectanus. Thank you, sir.
We did not do a comparative analysis for this review.
Obviously, we did talk to GSA about which entities and
organizations they thought were doing a better job. They were a
little hesitant to identify key ones, but they did say that
some of the challenges VA faces, in terms of having good data
and ensuring accuracy, they struggle with.
But they did identify, again, sort of the best practices
that you would want to see--things like leveraging technology,
things like seeking out the best discounts you can find, things
like training, making sure all your folks have the training,
and having a written policy that clearly lays out who is
responsible and what your goals are. Again, one of the key
requirements is having measures and targets and objectives to
say, this is what we are holding ourselves accountable to.
I can provide you some information for the record in terms
of if there are some agencies we think are really role models
in this area.
Mr. Roe. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired, but I have a
couple of questions I would like to submit for the record.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Dr. Roe.
Mr. Arrington, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Arrington. Mr. Chairman, thank you and Ranking Member
Kuster for holding this hearing. I think, while it may not be
exciting to some people, I think it is incredibly important
that we have effective and efficient operations for the Federal
Government, especially when you are a service organization,
especially when you are serving our heroes.
And I am incredibly discouraged by the consistent feedback
on IT, on union time, disability claim disputes, and the list
goes on and on, with a pattern of lack of management, who is
responsible, do they have the authority, do they have the
resources, are there goals, are there performance measures, are
there reviews to see if we are doing a good job. I feel like
the taxpayer is being fleeced over and over because of the lack
of this not-so-exciting issue of operations and management.
The core issue--and I agree with Ms. Kuster, this is just a
symptom of the root problem, and that is lack of
accountability. Now, I hope and pray to God that this
accountability act that we all passed and was signed by the
President will give the tools to this administration and to
you, Mr. Oswalt, and your colleagues to actually do the job you
were hired to do on behalf of the taxpayer and the veteran,
okay?
So I hope--but, you know, once somebody has the tools and
they are empowered, I think now you can hold them accountable
with a good conscience. That is how I feel about this.
Mr. Oswalt, when did we know about this problem of either
inconsistent, unreliable data collection and data outcome and
just the mismanagement of the mailing operation in general?
Mr. Oswalt. Sir, I don't believe there was any one moment
where there was an a-ha moment. As I indicated, the mail
program has been in place for a long time. I think Chairman
Miller's letter to VA a couple years ago was when it really
started to roll and we really started to gain traction. And
there are individuals within VA who have tried to raise this as
an issue, but the course of events has just overtaken--but
Chairman Miller's letter--
Mr. Arrington. Yeah. So a year ago, when he wrote the
letter. But it seems like this has been going on for many
years. And so I am concerned when it takes the Chairman of a
Congressional Committee to inquire about mailing operations
before somebody wakes up and says, ``We are not managing this
very well. We are wasting a bunch of money.'' So that is number
one.
I assume, Ms. Rectanus, that there are best practices. I
read something about GSA rolling out some best practice
government-wide. Did that best practice initiative have any
effect government-wide? And why didn't VA join that initiative
to make their mailing operations more effective, cost-
effective?
Ms. Rectanus. GSA has put out regulations in the FMR that
are sort of at the fundamental minimum, if you will, of what a
government mail management program should be. However, there is
lots of information out there about best practices.
GSA cannot compel agencies to do more than what is in the
management regulation. And yet they try--they try to encourage.
They provide training. They do some education. They provide
bulletins. But they do not have oversight or enforcement
authority to force agencies to do anything more than kind of
what is the basic information.
Mr. Arrington. Well, because if they are--you know, I think
the school of thought by most folks who have run anything would
be, if you at least compare yourself to others and you are that
far out of whack, somebody ought to probably lose their job,
and then they ought to implement some reforms in that process.
But, clearly, that hasn't happened.
You know, we were talking about improper payments the last
time I sat at this table in an oversight hearing. And my
question was, who is responsible, ultimately, for improper
payments? And they said, seven CFOs. If there is more than one
person, then nobody is responsible. And I asked, when is the
last time somebody lost their job over improper payments? And I
said, get back to the Committee on it. Nobody has lost their
job on that.
Here is my question, and I will leave you some time to
answer it, Mr. Oswalt. Who is responsible for the mailing
operation? Who reports to the Secretary? And then who reports
to that person? Give me that org chart flow.
And then I would ask you to submit to the Committee the
last time somebody was fired on account of not managing the
mailing operation.
Mr. Oswalt. Okay. I will take that for--
Mr. Arrington. Would you respond to the org chart flow? I
want to know--
Mr. Oswalt. Well, as indicated, it is a decentralized
program. So each administration head, each undersecretary has
the authority for their program--or staff office head. And then
there is the need to have a VA enterprise-wide mail manager,
which currently is under the CIO's position. And that is a
coordinating policy role.
Mr. Arrington. I have gone over my time. I yield back.
And if there is time for further questions, Mr. Chairman, I
would be happy to continue down this line of thinking.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Arrington.
Mr. Poliquin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Poliquin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it very
much.
Thank you, Mr. Oswalt, for being here.
And thank you also to the folks from the GAO.
Mr. Oswalt, how long have you been at the VA?
Mr. Oswalt. Thirty-one years.
Mr. Poliquin. I am sorry?
Mr. Oswalt. Thirty-one years.
Mr. Poliquin. Thirty-one years. Okay. Have you been
involved in this part of the VA for 31 years?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. How long have you been in this
position?
Mr. Oswalt. I have been in my current position for just
over 2 years.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. And to follow up with what Mr.
Arrington was saying, does all of the mail operations report to
you?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So what is your relationship with the
mail operations around the country?
Mr. Oswalt. I am an executive in the organization Quality,
Privacy, and Risk, which has responsibility for the enterprise
mail function.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So you are supposed to make sure that
the taxpayers aren't getting ripped off when it comes to the
cost of the mail programs around the country, right?
Mr. Oswalt. As a VA employee in general, yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay, great. So if I understand you
correctly, all the VA facilities around the country operate
autonomously when it comes to mail programs, right?
Mr. Oswalt. They operate within their own administrations.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay, great.
Now, to send a First-Class letter anywhere in the country,
what does it cost? Well, it is your job, right? You should
know. It is 49 cents, isn't it?
Mr. Oswalt. That is--yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. Well, I am surprised you didn't know
that. Okay. It is 49 cents to send a letter from me to Jodey,
from me to the Chairman, or from me to you. Okay.
Now, would someone explain this to me? In Alexandria,
Virginia, they sent 3,713,070 First-Class letters for a cost of
8 cents each. How is that possible?
Oh, wait a minute. In Decatur, Alabama, they sent 712,695
First-Class letters, costing $58.29 each. What is going on
here?
Mr. Oswalt. As I indicated in my testimony, that is
probably, most likely, I would say, due to errors in the manual
entry into the GSA SMART database.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. Who is responsible for overseeing that?
Is that you?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. Who is it?
Mr. Oswalt. The individual mail managers within the
administration.
Mr. Poliquin. Does this make any sense to you over at the
GAO?
Ms. Rectanus. Yes. And I would appreciate if I could get a
chance to comment.
Mr. Poliquin. Please.
Ms. Rectanus. Obviously, if you start to dissect the data
too much, you really don't have a lot of faith, because it is
not just--the rate per piece is a derived figure based on what
has been put in for expenditures and volume. So, if any of
those numbers are wrong in any respect, then the rate per piece
is inaccurate.
Mr. Poliquin. So you are telling us--
Ms. Rectanus. It is important--
Mr. Poliquin [continued].--So you are telling us, ma'am,
that the data that the VA submitted to us in our oversight to
make sure the taxpayers and our veterans aren't getting ripped
off is wrong.
Ms. Rectanus. It is self-reported data.
Mr. Poliquin. It is self-reported data.
Ms. Rectanus. But that doesn't--
Mr. Poliquin. So it doesn't come through you; it comes
through these folks.
Ms. Rectanus. I am sorry?
Mr. Poliquin. It comes not from you but from these folks,
right?
Ms. Rectanus. I am sorry, I still couldn't hear you.
Mr. Poliquin. It does not come through. The data we have
comes through Mr. Oswalt.
Ms. Rectanus. It is directly reported by VA through the GSA
SMART tool.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay.
So, with the data all over the map here--for example, you
folks over at the VA sent out 200---what the heck is it? It
doesn't matter--200,000, 225,000 pieces of mail, 220,000 pieces
of mail, and it cost the taxpayers $355 million a couple years
ago, whereas Treasury and Social Security sends out more mail
but costs a lot less.
So, right off, as a former State treasurer up in Maine and
standing up for our veterans so we make sure we have every
dollar they deserve to take care of them when they come back
from the battlefield, I am looking at this and I am saying, how
could this possibly be? And you are just confirming that. This
is self-reported data. And there is nobody at the top that is
watching this.
Is that right?
Ms. Rectanus. Are you asking--
Mr. Poliquin. Yeah, I am. Well, I will ask Mr. Oswalt.
Mr. Oswalt--
Ms. Rectanus. This self-reported data are made in such a
way that it is impossible for anyone to confirm the accuracy of
that data.
That being said, however, it is possible to have different
prices, because each location works discounts with its service
providers.
Mr. Poliquin. You mean like this price. In Waco, Texas,
$40,000 spent on 16 pieces of business reply mail, or $2,500
per letter. That is what you mean, right?
Ms. Rectanus. That seems a little extreme. Correct.
Mr. Poliquin. So that is 2,500 bucks. Supposed to cost 49
cents. This is 25.
So how in the heck, Mr. Oswalt--you have been there 31
years, 2 years in this job. How in the world can we trust the
data? What in the world is going on there?
Mr. Oswalt. Well, that is the reason we are undertaking
this top-to-bottom reform, sir, because of these problems that
have been identified.
Mr. Poliquin. How long have these problems been identified?
Is this the first you have heard of it?
Mr. Oswalt. When Chairman Miller's letter arrived, that was
the first exposure I had to this issue, yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Well, who had the job before you?
Mr. Oswalt. The job didn't exist.
Mr. Poliquin. The job didn't exist before 2 years ago.
So we are spending $355 million a year on mail throughout
the VA system, and nobody thought that it would be a good idea
to make sure people are looking out for the taxpayer and for
our veterans. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir that is not what I am saying.
Mr. Poliquin. Tell me what you are saying.
Mr. Oswalt. I am saying that each individual administration
has their own appropriation, and they have the stewardship over
those funds, and they, in turn, manage the mail program.
From an enterprise-wide standpoint, the oversight was
lacking. And that is what we are trying to correct now through
various types of actions we are taking.
Mr. Poliquin. Now we are getting somewhere, Mr. Chairman.
Finally, someone who is responsible for this mess and this lack
of information, this inconsistency, and this waste admits that
there has been no oversight. Good. Too bad it took this long to
do it.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Poliquin.
Ms. Rectanus, you have been very clear that the mail data
is still unreliable. In January 2016, the Committee asked VA to
fix some of the most egregious problems with the reported data,
and in March 2016 VA committed to do so. Yet it seems like some
of the problems the Committee staff found continue to exist to
this day.
Can you explain what is going on here, what is still wrong?
Ms. Rectanus. We confirmed for some of the commitments that
VA made in its letter that they carried through on those. They
did provide training to their folks on how to submit data. We
did look at some of the numbers that the Chairman had
identified and saw that they had changed.
Our bigger question was, just because they had changed, it
doesn't mean that they are necessarily correct. Some had not
changed.
So I think what is the problem is that, when every facility
is doing their own thing, they are not operating under
consistent definitions, they have different input data, it is
very difficult for them to go in and fix it, because they don't
even necessarily know whether the new data they are putting in
is any good.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. Do we know, are all the facilities
reporting?
Ms. Rectanus. At this point, we know that there are 200
entities who report. There are 400 authorized users throughout
VA. And if you just start doing the math, you know that there
are 1,000 CBOCs that we can't find in there. There are 170
medical centers, and less than 170 report. So we know that
there are some that are not reporting. What we don't know is
whether they are reporting through some other means.
The CMOPs started to report in 2014. We have some sense
that most of them report. What was happening with them before
2014 and all those prescriptions we don't know?
Mr. Bergman. Okay.
Mr. Oswalt, you have stated that this was--not my words--a
decentralized program.
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Is it time for a centralized program?
Mr. Oswalt. It is time for more central oversight, yes,
sir.
Mr. Bergman. That is not what I asked.
Mr. Oswalt. I would say that, given the disparity in what
each administration handles, you know, mailing prescriptions
versus mailing--
Mr. Bergman. Let me repeat my question. We have seen that
the decentralization has not worked, even from the standpoint
of reporting, regardless of the expenditures. Is it time for a
centralized program?
Because mail is mail. Shipping costs, if you will, through
the mail are pretty much whether you mail it from your house or
mail it from your business or mail it from your government
office.
Is it time for a centralized look?
By the way, I am a big fan of decentralization of
operations. As a Marine, when I am in the field, I don't want
higher headquarters getting in my decision loop because they
are not boots on the ground. But I guarantee you, there are
times that they need to be in the loop because they have the
bigger picture and are going to make sure that I have the
supplies and my Marines have the supplies they need to do the
fight.
So I am going to ask one more time. Is it time for a
centralized approach from the VA?
Mr. Oswalt. I will answer, sir, by saying that, in meeting
the recommendations of GAO, where they are asking us to examine
different ways of procuring information, yes, it is time to
centralize activities like procurement and reporting.
The individual operations, I don't think, as you indicated,
a centralized authority is best for day-to-day operations. But
for procurement--
Mr. Bergman. Well, you mentioned in your statement about
going to a cloud-based approach.
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Is there any entity that you know of at
whatever reporting level within your system that doesn't
understand what the cloud is?
Mr. Oswalt. I think that is fairly well understood.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So we take the tools that we have today,
as opposed to the tools we had 10 years ago or 20 years ago or
even 5 years ago, and utilize them to decide at what level of
centralization, you know, operations should occur.
This is probably leading the witness, but, Mr. Oswalt, do
you truly believe that the mail operations in the VA are
effective and efficient at this point?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir, they are not.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So what is it going to take?
Mr. Oswalt. I think it is going to take a centralization of
oversight and reporting, as we indicated.
Plus, it is also going to take redoing our business
processes and our practices. As I indicated in my testimony, we
let it go to seed. We were asleep at the switch and let this
behemoth just kind of go where it went. But now, you know, we
have seen the light, and, working with our GAO partners and
GSA, we are bringing it back under a centralized authority for
that.
And it is going to take technology. As I indicated, VBA is
currently implementing a 3- to 9-month plan to centralize under
the undersecretary there all of their mail operations and not
have 56 regional offices doing their own thing.
Mr. Bergman. Well, again, there is a difference between
centralized oversight and centralized authority and centralized
execution--centralized execution. And I can't even say that
right.
But, you know, I see my time has expired. I have talked to
the Ranking Member here; I know she does not have any more
questions.
But, Mr. Arrington, you said--and anyone else who would
like to do a second round.
Mr. Arrington. I will defer to the Chairman, because he may
have to go and I have to the time to stay, so--okay.
Mr. Chairman, if I may?
Mr. Bergman. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Arrington. Again, I appreciate you guys being here.
Wasn't there supposed to be an IT person on this panel
today?
Mr. Oswalt. I work in the Office of Information Technology,
sir.
Mr. Arrington. Okay. I thought there was a third panelist,
but maybe I misread that.
So you said that it has been decentralized, the mailing
operations, over the years, and that the enterprise-wide point
of accountability and oversight prior to whatever new plan we
are going to come up with was the IT officer, the CIO?
Mr. Oswalt. The CIO is the ultimate accountable official,
senior agency official.
Mr. Arrington. And how long has the CIO been in his or her
position?
Mr. Oswalt. There is an acting CIO who has been in place
since January.
Mr. Arrington. And prior to that?
Mr. Oswalt. The former CIO, she was in place, I think,
approximately 2 years before the change of administration.
Mr. Arrington. And is that a political position?
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Arrington. And what about the career deputy to the
political? How long has that person been in there, the senior-
most career person?
Mr. Oswalt. The incumbent of that position now, she has
been in that position probably, I would say, for 4 months.
Prior to that, it was--the acting CIO now is technically in
that position.
Mr. Arrington. So how long was the current acting--
Mr. Oswalt. He was in that position for a year. And before
that, the other principal deputy assistant secretary was in the
position for, I think, approximately 8 years.
Mr. Arrington. You know, there is not a lot of continuity.
That is a problem, obviously. Because you would assume somebody
with the pay that they receive as a CIO, career or political,
and their tremendous responsibility to oversee the many aspects
of that job, including in this case the mail operations, that
they would have run some report or asked that question prior to
the Chairman of a Congressional Committee sending a letter and
then uncovering that we have had years of mismanagement or no
management of the mailing operation. So that is extremely
disconcerting to me.
I appreciate what you said, Mr. Oswalt. Sometimes I just
need to hear that the folks at that table are hearing us and
that they agree and that they own it. And to say that you all
have been asleep at the switch is refreshing to me. And I want
to commend you for saying that. We need to hear more people
sort of fess up to the dysfunction at this department.
And, again, I sure hope that our current Secretary will
roll up his sleeves and begin fixing these things.
What is the plan? Do you have a plan?
Mr. Oswalt. As I indicated, right now, we are gathering
what we have--we don't know what we have--in a top-to-bottom
listing of hardware and other assets. We are in the midst of
that right now.
Mr. Arrington. So I think it is wise to gather information
and all that. It has been 2 years. I wouldn't even come to that
table without saying, ``Here is the plan. We are going to
centralize this oversight. We are going to restructure this. We
are going to put controls in place. We are going to have
authority where it didn't exist. We are having performance
measures.'' I wouldn't come to this table without a plan if I
were showing up at an oversight hearing. I wouldn't.
And if I were the Secretary, I would be so embarrassed by
this, I probably would show up and say, ``Guys, I just want you
to know, this preceded me, and I am going to come with a plan,
and let me articulate the framework of that plan.''
Two years, we ought to have a plan. I understand you have
to gather information--
Mr. Oswalt. Well, that is just one aspect of the plan, sir.
Mr. Arrington. Okay. So you feel like you do have a plan.
Mr. Oswalt. Right. We are bound to report back to GSA in 60
days from the issuance of the report, and we will have a
project plan in place with dates at that time.
Mr. Arrington. Okay. And who is going to be accountable to
the Secretary on this?
Mr. Oswalt. The direction or the creation of this
integrated project team came from the VA Chief of Staff
herself, under the sponsorship of the Deputy Chief of Staff. I
am kind of the point person on gathering--
Mr. Arrington. Is the CIO going to continue to be
responsible--
Mr. Oswalt. For the time being--
Mr. Arrington [continued].--to report to the Secretary on
this issue?
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir. As indicated, we just updated our 20-
year-old policy, and that contains that the CIO position, the
Assistant Secretary for IT, is the responsible official.
Mr. Arrington. I love what Peter Drucker says: What gets
measured gets done. And, obviously, the converse is true. If
you are not measuring it, it is not getting done. Too much is
not getting done at the VA, and the taxpayers are being
fleeced, and the veterans aren't being served by that.
I hope the next time we meet the plan is being implemented
and executed, adjustments are being made, and the outcomes are
provable, that we are providing cost-effective mailing
operations.
Thank you.
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bergman. Thanks.
Mr. Poliquin, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Poliquin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you again, Mr. Oswalt, for being so candid. And I
want to follow up with some of what Mr. Arrington said. He is
spot-on.
If I heard you correctly, the CIO is the head banana that
is responsible for reporting to Mr. Shulkin when it comes to
this issue, and that is likely to continue to be the case, from
what I heard a moment ago. Is that correct?
Mr. Oswalt. That is my current understanding of the policy
direction, yes.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. And you named two or three different
individuals--not their names, but two or three individuals who
have been acting CIOs for a period of time.
Mr. Oswalt. Correct.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. What are the names of those people?
Mr. Oswalt. The current acting CIO is Mr. Rob Thomas.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. And before that?
Mr. Oswalt. It was in a political position. Ms. LaVerne
Council.
Mr. Poliquin. And before that?
Mr. Oswalt. The confirmed CIO was Roger Baker. But then,
after he left, there was an interim of Stephen Warren.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So there are four people you mentioned.
It probably goes back 10 years, roughly.
Mr. Oswalt. Yes.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. And are those political appointees? I
didn't---
Mr. Oswalt. It is a political position.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay.
Mr. Oswalt. Two of the individuals were political
appointees, and the other two were career.
Mr. Poliquin. Are those four people that have overseen this
mess still at the VA? Any of them?
Mr. Oswalt. Mr. Thomas is still a VA employee, yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. And he is the acting CIO now, correct?
Mr. Oswalt. Correct.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So he was involved in this, and he is
still at the VA.
Mr. Oswalt. I don't know to what level he was involved in
it, sir. He--
Mr. Poliquin. But he was responsible because he was the
acting CIO, right? And he reports to the Secretary about this
issue. So he was the head person involved in this when nothing
was happening, and he is still at the VA.
Mr. Oswalt. He is currently the official, sir. He has been
in the position since January.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. His name again is?
Mr. Oswalt. Rob Thomas.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. Thank you.
Let me ask you a couple questions, if I can, Mr. Oswalt.
Out of Decatur, Georgia, the VA reported that there was a
package shipped for $11,257, but later the VA explained to us
that it was actually $112. Okay? Is that your understanding?
Mr. Oswalt. Yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. What was in that package? What cost 112
bucks?
Mr. Oswalt. Sir, I do not know. We could try and find
that--
Mr. Poliquin. Would Mr. Thompson know?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir, he would not know.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. But he is responsible.
Mr. Oswalt. He is not responsible for the contents of the
package.
Mr. Poliquin. Are you?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. But if we wrote to Mr. Thompson or to
you, you could find out what was in that package for us.
Mr. Oswalt. I will work with the Veterans Health
Administration to find out, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. In other words, you will get an answer for
us. ``Work with'' means you will get an answer for us, right?
Mr. Oswalt. I will try and find out the contents, yes, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Good. Thank you.
How did you make a mistake from $11,257 to 112 bucks? How
is that possible?
Mr. Oswalt. In the SMART database, it does not
automatically put in the decimal point.
Mr. Poliquin. So it is not that smart, is it?
Mr. Oswalt. That is--
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So you have a system that is supposed
to track all this stuff that doesn't use decimal points.
Mr. Oswalt. It is not like with an ATM, where you are
getting out $400 and at first it is 40 cents, $4--it does not
go--
Mr. Poliquin. Wow. Okay. So is that in your plan to fix?
Mr. Oswalt. With the--oh, sorry.
Mr. Poliquin. Yes?
Ms. Rectanus. Well, I was going to say, that is the GSA
tool. The GSA tool, in the instructions, it says, ``Do not put
in decimal points.''
Mr. Poliquin. Yeah. Are you going to fix this?
Ms. Rectanus. If you put in 1-1-2-4-6, it is going to show
up as a whole number, not--
Mr. Poliquin. Yeah. Are you going to fix this? Who is going
to fix this?
Ms. Rectanus. GSA has provided instructions to people to
not put in decimal points and to round.
Mr. Poliquin. Who is ``people''? At your shop or your shop?
Mr. Oswalt. At GSA.
Ms. Rectanus. GSA.
Mr. Poliquin. At GSA.
Mr. Oswalt. And my understanding, too, is there is a new
version of SMART being--
Mr. Poliquin. I hope it is smarter than the current version
of SMART.
Are you going to fix this or not? GAO, are you going to fix
this or not?
Ms. Rectanus. GSA is--
Mr. Poliquin. GSA.
Ms. Rectanus.--on deck to fix this, yes.
Mr. Poliquin. You are going to fix it. Okay, good. So we
are on the record, you are going to fix it. Good. We are
getting someplace.
All right. Mr. Oswalt, I mentioned this to you earlier
before. In Alexandria, Louisiana, they were sending out First-
Class mail for 8 cents each, but a stamp costs 49 cents. Is
there any bulk mail operation in the country you know about
that can send stuff out for 8 cents?
Mr. Oswalt. I do not know of any right now, sir, but I--
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So how do you explain this?
Mr. Oswalt. Either it was the result of a negotiated
pricing schedule due to volume or, again, it could have been an
error in the SMART database. I do not know, but I will try and
find out for the record, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Yeah, okay. Good.
Kate, we are going to be in touch with Mr. Oswalt's office.
Make sure we get that answer too.
It sounds like there is a real lack of not only
accountability but the ability to track these issues
accurately. And then you come to us and ask for $186 billion to
fund the VA. You come to us for taxpayer money, when the VA is
supposed to be responsible for taking care of our kids that
come back from the battlefield, and you can't tell us where
this money is going, how it is spent, and who is keeping track
of it. And it took us a half-hour to find out who is
responsible.
Let me ask you one more. Denver reported thousands of
airmail and ground packages at no cost. And then I got a letter
here later explaining that--no, actually, confirming this.
Who is Bob Snyder, Chief of Staff?
Mr. Oswalt. He was the former VA Chief of--
Mr. Poliquin. Is he working at the VA now?
Mr. Oswalt. He is retired.
Mr. Poliquin. He is retired. How long was he there?
Mr. Oswalt. In various positions at VA for approximately 7
or 8 years.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay, 7 or 8 years. The Chief of Staff, Bob
Snyder, who is now retired, sent a letter to this Committee
saying that sending out thousands of airmail packages cost
zero. Is that possible?
Mr. Oswalt. No, sir.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay. So there is another problem with your
SMART problem.
Mr. Oswalt. It is obviously an error.
Mr. Poliquin. Okay.
I mean, this Committee hearing, Mr. Chairman, is very
important for all of America to see that we have 265,000 people
at the VA that the taxpayers are funding at the cost of $180
billion, and we have our kids coming back from the battlefield
that need help, and we have no sense of control that I can see
at the VA, confirmed by you folks at the GSA, of spending $355
million per year on mail. So I think this has been very
helpful.
And I appreciate--Mr. Oswalt, I am not picking on you
personally, but you are in the hot seat. And so are you. And so
we appreciate you being here very much. I know you are going to
fix this, and I will be watching and the rest of the people on
this Committee will be watching.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back my time.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Poliquin.
``VA Mail Management: The Case of the $11,257 Package,''
that was the title of this hearing. You know, it kind of sounds
like a sleuthing show you would see on TV. When you peeled the
onion back, it just appeared as though nobody had peeled the
onion back from a management and oversight perspective along to
see what was happening. We didn't spend $11,257 on a package,
but that is a symptom of a root cause, that nobody thought to
see, to check, to wonder. That is unnerving, at best.
Thank you, witnesses, for being with us today and sharing
your testimony. The panel is now excused.
The mail management problems that we have discussed this
morning seem to be symptoms, as I mentioned earlier, of deep-
seated organizational challenges within the VA. We hear about
them all the time: VBA and VHA do not cooperate. Facilities
throughout the country operate dramatically different. The
central office does not know what the field is doing and, I
would suggest to you, vice versa. The contracts, to say the
least, are in disarray but certainly don't represent some kind
of a standard operating procedure and implementation that
allows for best pricing across the spectrum. Policy is
outdated. IT is inadequate.
We are all familiar with the saying that if you have seen
one VA hospital, you have seen one VA hospital. Apparently, it
is also true that if you have seen one VA mailroom, have seen
one VA mailroom.
You know, my background in flying and in Marine Corps
operations--standardized, monitored operations are paramount to
the success of the organization. Standardized starts from
communications from the top down, input from the bottom up, and
then the higher headquarters, in this case those higher levels
of the VA, coming out with standardized operations that can be
executed locally to the best effort and the best outcome. We
don't have that.
If anything should be predictable and efficient, it is a
mailroom. This is not a changing environment every day. The
mailroom workers and the mail managers should know that what
they do is important, that they do serve a purpose of, number
one, literally delivering the mail, but, number two, being
accountable for doing it right. It is one of the building
blocks that the rest of the VA operations rely on.
I expect the Department to devote sufficient talent and
energy to implementing GAO's recommendations and not only
fixing the abysmal situation but looking forward to see how we
create it for the future, because mail delivered today is not
going to be delivered the same way 5 or 10 years from now. We
need to be on the leading edge of the curve, not on the tail
end that is getting whipsawed around by the inefficiencies of a
detached bureaucracy.
Further, I would ask that the VA clean up the SMART data
when it reports this year. I hope the next time someone reports
an $11,257 package or any other bizarre entries mentioned
today, it sends red flags, it sends whatever you want to call
it out, and people start to question it at the lowest level and
say, ``Hey, does this seem right?'' Because if you don't, you
are not making progress.
And as we have talked about in various Oversight and
Investigation hearings here, it is that sense of urgency. I am
still, after this hearing this morning, not feeling that sense
of urgency and--I will add one more turn to it--skin in the
game at all levels of those who draw a paycheck in support of
operations for our veterans and their care and their well-
being.
I want to see the sense of urgency, and I know the whole
panel does, because when you look at all the Committee work we
do here on the Hill, this Committee is absolutely one of the
most bipartisan, singularly focused on doing what is right for
the veterans, of any Committee that exists.
I ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5 legislative
days to revise and extend their remarks and to include
extraneous material.
Without objection, so ordered.
I would like to once again thank our witnesses and audience
members for joining us here this morning.
This hearing is now adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of John D. Oswalt
Good morning, Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Kuster, and
distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to participate in your hearing on the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) mail management report entitled, ``Actions
Needed to More Effectively Manage Outgoing Mail,'' and to discuss the
actions and efforts underway at VA to address those recommendations,
issues, and concerns.

Overview

Before I address directly the GAO findings, I want to provide you
with an overview of VA's Mail Management Program and discuss VA's
commitment to improving the program.
In accordance with Federal regulations and VA policy, VA has an
established policy for Department-wide Mail Management Program.
Although VA does have such a program; it is not what it should be. The
Mail Management Program for VA is in need of an overhaul as evidenced
by the GAO's findings. Mail operations in VA are largely decentralized
programs with each administration and their various sub-components
adapting the execution of these programs to their own unique and
diverse needs. While these unique requirements dictate a great deal of
how VA outgoing mail is managed, there is a need for an enterprise-wide
over-arching strategy to eliminate outdated practices and improve the
program with the goal being better service to Veterans and their
families and a better return on investment for the American taxpayer.
VA accepts and understands the need for action and we have developed
and undertaken a comprehensive remediation plan that not only addresses
the recommendations of GAO but also will make VA a leader across
government in mail management. Our mission is too important and too
critical to allow inefficiency to impede serving our Veterans and
siphon off valuable resources supporting outdated practices.
On an annual basis, VA mails millions of letters and parcels to
Veterans and their families. These range from medications, to documents
on benefits and compensation, to memorial certificates to surviving
family members. Just as every Veteran's needs are unique, so too are
the mailing requirements for the VA offices that serve these Veterans.
As an organization that is primarily field based, VA mail operations
have often evolved to meet these unique needs with limited central
oversite. While in the past this may have worked to meet mailing
requirements, the growth in mail volume over the past two decades, as
evidenced by the shift towards pharmaceutical mailings instead of in-
house pick-up, and the increase in the Veteran population with more
complex benefit and compensation issues, has resulted in making many of
these ``homegrown'' mailing practices obsolete. VA must now take
advantage of new technologies and new business models to effectively
and efficiently manage such a diverse and sprawling mailing
requirement. VA has plans in place that we believe will accomplish this
and we are using the GAO recommendations as our starting point. We will
institute a continuous improvement model to ensure we do not rest on
our accomplishments or allow the program to fall behind again.

GAO Report

To achieve this goal, VA has established a department-wide
Integrated Project Team (IPT) sponsored by the VA Deputy Chief of Staff
and whose membership is comprised of all relevant and appropriate
stakeholders. The IPT is charged with formulating plans and actions
that address GAO recommendations and to put in place the administrative
infrastructure to govern the mail program at an enterprise level.
Specifically, actions to address the recommendations include but are
not limited to:

Recommendation 1: Develop and document a plan to source contracts
for mailing equipment in a more strategic manner. Such strategic
contract sourcing should enable facilities to obtain equipment to track
mail volume and expenditure data more consistently and to maximize cost
savings.
VA is conducting a comprehensive assessment and inventory of
existing mail equipment and supporting software. This includes
identifying end of useful life-cycle for capital equipment, estimates
of sunk costs for equipment still in use, estimating replacement costs
and gathering industry best practices and conducting market research.
We are exploring several options including new capital investment,
leasing equipment/software options and obtaining mail operations as a
managed service. Our future plans include, conducting a cost-benefit
analysis of all options identified and making a determination on what
approach best meets the needs of VA's mission delivery. Following a
selection of a new strategy, we will develop cost estimates, coordinate
this need with the appropriation process, develop an acquisition
strategy, and set up a project management team. We will conduct several
pilot projects and take lessons learned and apply to the enterprise-
wide phase-in and deployment schedule.

Recommendation 2: Update VA Directive 6340 to incorporate agency-
wide goals and performance measures for mail operations.
VA has updated and published a revised VA Directive 6340 that
incorporates all new regulations and requirements. We are currently
updating VA Handbook 6340 that contains enterprise operating
specifications on how to implement the revised policy. The Handbook
will include requirements for agency-wide goals and performance
measures. To account for any specific needs of the administrations, we
are requiring individual administrations to write and publish Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPS) that incorporate the unique mission
requirements specific to their mailing operations. VA is planning to
gather and report on a semi-annual basis the results of established
goals and performance measures and creating protocols for routine
review and updating of Directive, Handbook, and SOPs.

Recommendation 3: Determine and document the authority and
responsibilities of the agency and administration-level mail managers
to enable them to better manage and oversee mail operations.
VA is currently writing and classifying Position Descriptions for a
dedicated Mail Manager position and one supporting staff position. We
will allocate funding for these positions and then advertise, and make
selections to fill them. We will have each facility director with a
mail program identify by name a mail manager with a written assignment
to that facility level person, maintain a database with those names,
and conduct an annual review to ensure assignments are current. Each
SOP will contain clear and unambiguous internal reporting structures
consistent with GSA SMART requirements and all mail managers will take
mandatory training on an annual basis in accordance with Directive and
Handbook 6340 and individual SOPs for the respective office.

Conclusion

VA faces many challenges in meeting these goals (resources,
staffing, acquisitions, and competing priorities) but I believe we are
up to the challenge. The men and women of VA are unique in government
in their commitment and dedication to fulfilling the mission of VA;
serving Veterans and their beneficiaries. It is this dedication that
will make our efforts here successful.
While we acknowledge there is a great deal of work to be done, we
are already making considerable progress towards addressing GAO's
concerns associated with mail management and are in the process of
implementing their recommendations to centralize VA's mail management
operation creating a more efficient and effective program.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the Committee today. I am prepared to
respond to any questions you and Members of the Committee may have.

Prepared Statement of Lori Rectanus
Management and Oversight of Mail Operations Could Be Improved
Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Kuster, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

I am pleased to be here today to discuss our recent report on the
Department of Veterans Affairs' (VA) mail management program. VA sends
more than 200 million pieces of mail per year to veterans and their
dependents who rely on this mail for medications and critical
information about medical appointments, disability compensation,
pension benefits, and more. VA's reported mail costs-approximately $355
million in 2016-are among the highest in the federal government.
Moreover, VA's reported costs have nearly doubled since 2009. In prior
work, GAO has raised concerns about how VA identifies its resource
needs and ensures that resources are efficiently used across the
agency. \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, High-Risk Series: An Update, GAO 15 290 (Washington, D.C.:
Feb. 11, 2015); and GAO, High-Risk Series: Progress on Many High-Risk
Areas, While Substantial Efforts Needed on Others, GAO 17 317
(Washington, D.C.: Feb. 15, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My testimony today summarizes key findings from our July 2017
report on VA's mail management. \2\ Our objective was to examine the
extent to which VA manages its outgoing mail effectively. In that work,
we reported that VA cannot provide assurance that facilities are
managing their mail effectively because VA lacks key elements of an
effective mail management program-namely reliable mail cost and volume
data, agency-wide performance measures, and agency officials with
appropriate authority to manage the program. We made three
recommendations for VA to manage its mail program more effectively. VA
agreed with our recommendations but has not yet provided any
information on what steps it will take to implement them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Veterans Affairs: Actions Needed to More Effectively
Manage Outgoing Mail, GAO 17 581 (Washington, D.C.: August 31, 2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To perform this work, we identified federal mail management
requirements in the Federal Management Regulation, which governs
mailing activities in federal agencies, \3\ and applicable federal
internal control standards. \4\ We interviewed management officials
from VA Central Office, the Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA), the
Veterans Health Administration (VHA), and the Consolidated Mail
Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP) program on mail management practices across
the agency. \5\ We also interviewed officials from the U.S. Postal
Service (USPS) and VA's two primary mailing equipment providers. We
reviewed the reliability of the mail expenditure and volume data VA
reported to the General Services Administration's (GSA) Simplified Mail
Accountability Reporting Tool (SMART) in fiscal years 2015 and 2016.
\6\ In an effort to assess the validity of VA's reported mail volume
and costs, we reviewed VA's reported fiscal year 2015 and 2016
expenditure and volume data with its service providers, USPS, United
Parcel Service (UPS), and FedEx. \7\ We collected information on the
mail practices in place at the 10 VA facilities with the highest mail
volume reported in SMART in fiscal year 2015. \8\ Findings from these
facilities provide examples of VA's mailing practices but are not
generalizable to all VA facilities. Our July 2017 report includes
further details on the scope and methodology of our work, which was
conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing
standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 41 C.F.R. pt. 102-192.
\4\ GAO, Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government,
GAO 14 704G (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 10, 2014).
\5\ We did not interview officials from the National Cemetery
Administration based on the administration's low mail volume relative
to VHA and VBA.
\6\ SMART data are reported annually for the entire fiscal year,
and therefore fiscal year 2016 data are the most current available.
\7\ USPS noted that its revenue and volume data were not comparable
to VA's SMART data for validation purposes.
\8\ Although we found VA's SMART data to be generally unreliable,
we used the data to select VA facilities because VA has no other
centralized data that include mail expenditures and volume. The
reliability of the mail expenditure and volume data is not material to
our findings for the 10 facilities.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Background

In carrying out its mail program, each VA administration-VHA, VBA,
and the National Cemetery Administration-and local facility has
discretion regarding how to handle outgoing mail. For example,
facilities can choose which service provider they use to send the mail,
such as USPS, FedEx, or UPS. In addition to choosing service providers,
VA facilities may enter into contracts to purchase or lease mailing
equipment such as postage meters. See figure 1 for a description of the
services each administration and their associated facilities provide,
and examples of outgoing mail.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

VA, like other federal agencies, is required to follow certain
provisions regulating mail management in the FMR to ensure they have
the policies, procedures, and data to manage their mail operations
efficiently and effectively. \9\ Specifically, large federal agencies
like VA must provide annual mail management reports to GSA using the
web-based SMART application, \10\ which include data on expenditures
paid to mail service providers, mail volume, and volume and
expenditures for mail that was undeliverable as addressed. \11\
Additionally, all federal agencies must have performance measures for
mail operations at the agency level and in all mail facilities and
program levels, \12\ and an agency mail manager who should be at a
managerial level to enable the official to speak for the agency on mail
management. \13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ 41 C.F.R. pt. 102-192. The FMR also includes requirements for
agency mail programs related to payment processes and finance systems
and written mail security policies and plans. Financial and security
requirements are not included in the scope of this review.
\10\ Large agencies are those whose collective total payments to
all mail service providers equal or exceed $1 million per fiscal year.
41 C.F.R. Sec. Sec.  102-192.35, 102-192.85.
\11\ 41 C.F.R. Sec.  102-192.95.
\12\ 41 C.F.R. Sec. Sec.  102-192.110, 102-192.115.
\13\ 41 C.F.R. Sec. Sec.  102-192.120, 102-192.125.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA is Not Managing Its Mail Program Effectively

Fragmented Process for Procuring Mailing Equipment Has Contributed to
VA's Inability to Track and Report Reliable Mail Cost and Volume
Data

We found that the mail data-including volume as well as costs-VA
reports to GSA are unreliable. Specifically, we found problems in VA's
fiscal year 2015 and 2016 SMART data related to unreported, incomplete,
or questionable data. For example, mail data for many facilities-
including VA's 1,055 community-based outpatient clinics and 300 vet
centers-were not accounted for, while other facilities submitted mail
expenditure data without mail volume, or volume data without
expenditures. Facilities also did not consistently report data on mail
that was undeliverable as addressed. Still other facilities submitted
data that were inaccurate due to typographical errors by VA personnel.
VA's mail data are unreliable because individual facilities, which
the department relies on to track mail volume and cost data, use
inconsistent processes to do so. For example, facilities may use
different mailing equipment to track volume and costs, some of which
has the capability to track mail data by service provider and class of
mail, while other facilities' equipment may not be configured or may be
too old to accept the software. Some facilities also rely on manual-
entry methods such as spreadsheets to track mail data, or bills and
receipts. Given the range of tracking methods and capabilities, VA has
no agency-wide system to track mail expenditure and volume data, and
mail managers have limited ability to validate the data before it is
submitted to GSA.
Inconsistent methods and capabilities for tracking mail volume and
cost data exist because VA's procurement of mailing equipment is
fragmented. Different components of VHA and VBA make contracting
decisions for mail room equipment independent of one another; for
example, each of VBA's 56 regional benefit offices negotiates and
purchases its own contract with authorized vendors. VHA reported that
the contracts for mailing equipment at its 170 medical centers are
established at various levels-in some cases, medical centers may
establish their own contracts, while in others, a Veterans Integrated
Service Network (VISN) establishes a contract for all the medical
centers within a region. \14\ VA facilities or other units individually
negotiating contracts is likely not cost effective because this
practice would not benefit from price discounts that might be available
under procurement contracts covering much larger segments of the
agency. \15\ In fact, representatives from one of VA's two primary
mailing equipment providers estimated that it has about 3,000 contracts
with VA facilities and said that VA would almost certainly reap cost
savings if it negotiated fewer contracts at higher levels of the
department.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Each of VHA's VISNs is responsible for overseeing medical
centers within a specified geographic area.
\15\ We have found in the past that the agency has not consistently
taken advantage of its large size in its purchases. See GAO, Veterans
Affairs Contracting: Improvements in Policies and Processes Could Yield
Cost Savings and Efficiency, GAO 16 810 (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 16,
2016). In this report, we recommended that VA conduct a review of VISN-
level strategic sourcing efforts, identify best practices, and, if
needed, issue guidance to facilitate consolidation of similar
requirements and leverage buying power across medical centers within
VISNs. VA agreed with this recommendation, but has not yet implemented
it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VBA has taken preliminary steps to source its mailing equipment
strategically, but VA lacks an overall plan to guide mail equipment
procurement. In July 2016, VBA officials told us that its
administration and field operations offices were collaborating to
establish a blanket purchase agreement for mailing equipment in 56
regional benefit offices, targeting the end of fiscal year 2017 to
finalize the contract. According to VBA, the contract is intended to
provide opportunities to negotiate improved discounts and leverage
buying power through volume purchasing, among other things. Officials
stated that they intend to include software in the contract that would
consolidate data across the regional benefit offices and allow
centralized reporting to SMART. However, in February 2017, officials
told us that it will take several years to establish the blanket
purchase agreement because of current contracts in place at regional
benefit offices. VBA officials stated that they were interested in
including VHA in the contract in order to obtain better prices, but
have not had any detailed discussions with VHA about the contract.
We recommended that VA develop and document a plan to source
contracts for mailing equipment in a more strategic manner. Such
strategic contract sourcing should enable facilities to obtain
equipment to track mail volume and expenditure data more consistently
and to maximize cost savings. VA agreed with this recommendation.

VA's Mail Policy Does Not Include Agency-Wide Goals and Performance
Measures

VA's mail policy does not include agency-wide goals and performance
measures for mail operations; as a result, VA is unable to determine
the extent to which its mail operations are efficient and effective.
The FMR requires that federal facilities have performance measures for
mail operations at the agency level and in all mail facilities and
program levels, \16\ and we have previously found that measuring
performance allows organizations to track progress toward goals and
provides managers with performance data to make management decisions.
\17\ While VA lacks agency-wide goals and performance measures for mail
operations, we found that the 10 facilities we reviewed had developed
performance measures. However, these measures were not consistent
across facilities. For example, the facilities reported using
inconsistent measures of customer service, efficiency, volume, cost,
accuracy, and staff performance. Officials from two regional benefit
offices indicated that they have implemented timeliness standards for
their mail. In addition, VHA's CMOP program has established performance
measures for delivery of prescription medications but these metrics
apply to the program's offsite vendor, rather than a VA facility mail
operation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ 41 C.F.R. Sec.  102-192.110.
\17\ GAO, Federal Protective Service: Preliminary Results on
Efforts to Assess Facility Risks and Oversee Contract Guards, GAO 12
943T (Washington, D.C.: July 24, 2002).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
VA's mail management policy-Directive 6340-does not address the
performance measurement requirement that is in regulation because it
predates the current FMR and has not been updated. Internal control
standards call for agencies to update their policies to be consistent
with changes in federal law and regulation. \18\ VA officials told us
that efforts involving GSA, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services, and USPS were underway to update the policy, but did not
provide documentation of these efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ GAO 14 704G.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommended that VA update VA Directive 6340 to incorporate
agency-wide goals and performance measures for mail operations, and VA
agreed with this recommendation.

VA Has Not Provided Mail Managers with Appropriate Authority and
Responsibilities

The mail managers VA has designated at the agency and
administration levels have limited ability to oversee mail operations
across the agency because VA has not provided them with appropriate
authority and responsibilities. The FMR requires agencies to have an
agency mail manager and outlines the individual's recommended
responsibilities, which include, among others, establishing written
policies and procedures to provide timely and cost-effective dispatch
and delivery of mail and materials, and ensuring that all facility and
program-level mail personnel receive appropriate training and
certifications to successfully perform their assigned duties. According
to VA officials, the responsibilities of the agency mail manager are
limited to oversight of Directive 6340, and do not include operational
mail management responsibilities.
Additionally, according to the agency mail manager, mail operations
in VHA and VBA facilities are the responsibility of the administration-
level mail managers. However, the VHA and VBA mail managers told us
that although they may advise individual facilities on mail management,
they lack authority to direct mail operations at facilities. Further,
while the FMR recommends that the agency mail manager ensure that all
facility and mail program-level personnel receive appropriate training
and certifications, \19\ VHA's mail manager said he has never been
encouraged to attend any training, and both the VHA and VBA mail
managers said that they do not have the authority to require mail
management employees to attend training. Individual facilities are
generally responsible for their own mail operations with limited
direction or guidance. Officials from the 10 facilities we reviewed
stated that they have personnel who are responsible for their
respective mail operations, but most of them had other
responsibilities, such as logistics, warehouse operations, and mailroom
machine maintenance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ 41 C.F.R. Sec.  102-192.130.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommended that VA determine and document the authority and
responsibilities of the agency and administration-level mail managers
to enable them to improve management and oversight of mail operations.
VA agreed with this recommendation.
Chairman Bergman, Ranking Member Kuster, and Members of the
Subcommittee, this concludes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

GAO Contact and Staff Acknowledgments

For questions about this statement, please contact Lori Rectanus at
(202) 512-2834 or
[emailprotected]
. Contact points for our Offices of
Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last
page of this statement. GAO staff who made key contributions to this
testimony are Samer Abbas and Faye Morrison (Assistant Directors),
Justin Reed (Analyst in Charge), Amy Abramowitz, Bonnie Pignatiello
Leer, Malika Rice, Amy Rosewarne, Crystal Wesco, and Elizabeth Wood.

This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to
copyright protection in the United States. The published product may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further permission
from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary
if you wish to reproduce this material separately.

GAO's Mission

The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance
and accountability of the federal government for the American people.
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.

Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony

The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no
cost is through GAO's website (http://www.gao.gov). Each weekday
afternoon, GAO posts on its website newly released reports, testimony,
and correspondence. To have GAO e mail you a list of newly posted
products, go to http://www.gao.gov and select ``E-mail Updates.''

Order by Phone

The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO's actual cost of
production and distribution and depends on the number of pages in the
publication and whether the publication is printed in color or black
and white. Pricing and ordering information is posted on GAO's website,
http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077,
or TDD (202) 512-2537.
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card,
MasterCard, Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional
information.

Connect with GAO

Connect with GAO on Facebook, Flickr, LinkedIn, Twitter, and
YouTube.
Subscribe to our RSS Feeds or E-mail Updates. Listen to our
Podcasts.
Visit GAO on the web at www.gao.gov and read The Watchblog.

To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs

Contact: Website: http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm
E-mail:
[emailprotected]

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470

Congressional Relations

Katherine Siggerud, Managing Director,
[emailprotected]
, (202)
512-4400, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room
7125, Washington, DC 20548

Public Affairs

Chuck Young, Managing Director,
[emailprotected]
, (202) 512-4800,
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149,
Washington, DC 20548

Strategic Planning and External Liaison

James-Christian Blockwood, Managing Director,
[emailprotected]
, (202)
512-4707, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room
7814, Washington, DC 20548
