- IMPROVING THE QUALITY AND TIMELINESS OF GI BILL PROCESSING FOR STUDENT VETERANS

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING THE QUALITY AND TIMELINESS OF GI BILL PROCESSING FOR STUDENT
VETERANS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, JUNE 8, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
29-686                        WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON VETERANS' AFFAIRS

DAVID P. ROE, Tennessee, Chairman

GUS M. BILIRAKIS, Florida, Vice-     TIM WALZ, Minnesota, Ranking
Chairman                             Member
MIKE COFFMAN, Colorado               MARK TAKANO, California
BRAD R. WENSTRUP, Ohio               JULIA BROWNLEY, California
AMATA COLEMAN RADEWAGEN, American    ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
Samoa                            BETO O'ROURKE, Texas
MIKE BOST, Illinois                  KATHLEEN RICE, New York
BRUCE POLIQUIN, Maine                J. LUIS CORREA, California
NEAL DUNN, Florida                   KILILI SABLAN, Northern Mariana
JODEY ARRINGTON, Texas                   Islands
JOHN RUTHERFORD, Florida             ELIZABETH ESTY, Connecticut
CLAY HIGGINS, Louisiana              SCOTT PETERS, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan
JIM BANKS, Indiana
JENNIFFER GONZALEZ-COLON, Puerto
Rico
Jon Towers, Staff Director
Ray Kelley, Democratic Staff Director

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY

JODEY ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman

GUS BILIRAKIS, Florida               BETO O'ROURKE, Texas, Ranking
BRAD WENSTRUP, Ohio                      Member
JOHN RUTHERFORD, Florida             MARK TAKANO, California
JIM BANKS, Indiana                   LUIS CORREA, California
KATHLEEN RICE, New York

Pursuant to clause 2(e)(4) of rule XI of the Rules of the House, public
hearing records of the Committee on Veterans' Affairs are also
published in electronic form. The printed hearing record remains the
official version. Because electronic submissions are used to prepare
both printed and electronic versions of the hearing record, the process
of converting between various electronic formats may introduce
unintentional errors or omissions. Such occurrences are inherent in the
current publication process and should diminish as the process is
further refined.
C O N T E N T S

----------

Thursday, June 8, 2017

Page

Improving The Quality and Timeliness of GI Bill Processing For
Student Veterans...............................................     1

OPENING STATEMENTS

Honorable Jodey Arrington, Chairman..............................     1
Honorable Beto O'Rourke, Ranking Member..........................     2

WITNESSES

MG Robert M. Worley II USAF (Ret.), Director, Education Service,
Veterans Benefit Administration, U.S. Department of Veterans
Affairs........................................................     3
Prepared Statement...........................................    23

Accompanied by:

Mr. Lloyd Thrower, Acting Information Technology Account
Manager, Benefits Portfolio, Office of Information &
Technology,U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Ms. Roberta "Robbie" Lowe, Director, Debt Management Center,
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs

Mr. Lernes J. Hebert, Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Military Personnel Policy, U.S. Department of
Defense........................................................     5
Prepared Statement...........................................    26

Accompanied by:

Mr. Mark Breckenridge, Deputy Director, Defense Manpower Data
Center, U.S. Department of Defense

IMPROVING THE QUALITY AND TIMELINESS OF GI BILL PROCESSING FOR STUDENT
VETERANS

----------

Thursday, June 8, 2017

Committee on Veterans' Affairs,
U. S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
Room 334, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jodey Arrington
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Bilirakis, Wenstrup,
Rutherford, O'Rourke, Takano, Correa, and Rice.

OPENING STATEMENT OF JODEY ARRINGTON, CHAIRMAN

Mr. Arrington. Okay. Let's get this thing started.
Good afternoon, everybody. I want to welcome you all to the
Subcommittee on Economic Opportunity's hearing today entitled,
``Improving the Quality and Timeliness of GI Bill Processing
for Student Veterans.'' I know we can all agree that the Post-
9/11 GI Bill is an extremely generous benefit, and for decades
VA's education and training programs have been credited with
the successful transition and reacclimation of our returning
servicemembers.
However, while VA's administration of GI Bill benefits has
improved over the years, challenges still exist. Oversight of
the GI Bill and how it is administered to the men and women who
have served and their families is the job of this Subcommittee,
and we are here today to discuss ways in which we could improve
the processing of these benefits to ensure that they are
properly developed and administered so that our veterans
receive what they have earned in a timely and accurate manner.
Processing of the GI Bill claims in its entirety isn't
solely the job of the VA. They have to work with their partners
at the Department of Defense to ensure that they are using the
right Active Duty service information when determining GI Bill
eligibility and the benefit amount for each individual applying
for benefits.
This partnership and open communication between the two
Departments is vital to certify that a beneficiary is receiving
their earned benefits in a reasonable timeframe and that they
are receiving a benefit amount that they have earned.
Recently there was an internal audit done by VA where it
found that thousands of already processed claims needed to be
reviewed again and needed additional information from DoD to
verify that the veterans' Active Duty service time, which was
used to process the claim, was accurate and their benefit level
was correct. Unfortunately, this did result in some delays in
individuals receiving their benefits, which causes a negative
impact on the veteran, obviously, or their dependent who is
waiting for these earned benefits.
Today, I hope we can learn more about this audit and
discuss ways to guarantee that there is open communication
between the two Departments going forward so that future
beneficiaries are not impacted by incorrect information being
provided to the VA by the DoD.
I also look forward to examining a 2015 report done by the
Government Accountability Office, which identified 416 million
dollars in post-9/11 GI Bill overpayments in fiscal year 2014
affecting approximately one in four veteran beneficiaries and
about 6,000 schools.
The GAO made eight recommendations to the VA to reduce
these overpayments going forward and to increase collections of
this money. However, many of these recommendations still have
not been implemented, and based on the Department's written
statement, it is unclear when they will be implemented, if
ever.
I do not place all the blame for these issues on the
education service or its employees, as it is clear that in many
ways it is a matter of lack of IT resources and the need for
greater prioritization to be placed on these programs within
VBA. I know that IT resources are tight, but I believe it is
time for the VA to prioritize resources for projects that
provide direct impact to veterans and not other bureaucratic
priorities or projects that are years behind schedule, millions
of dollars over budget.
While I am encouraged by the Secretary's decision to
modernize the electronic health record, I have to wonder how
veterans could have been better served by investing even just a
fraction of the billion dollars that has already been spent
over the past decade to create a unified health record system
between VHA and DoD in modernizing other VA systems like those
that process education claims.
I hope today Members and panelists alike can discuss ways
to ensure the education services get the resources and support
they need to implement GAO's recommendations and to make the
broader improvements necessary to its systems to reduce
overpayments and to improve GI Bill processing overall and
going forward.
By making the appropriate investments we can bring down the
opportunity for overpayments and improve the quality claims
decisions, which will benefit our veterans, the schools, the
Department, and the taxpayers alike.
I look forward to hearing from our panelists, and I
appreciate everybody being here today.
And now I yield to my friend and Ranking Member, Mr.
O'Rourke, for any opening remarks he might have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF BETO O'ROURKE, RANKING MEMBER

Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and before the
arrival of Dr. Wenstrup and Miss. Rice, I thought this was
going to be a hearing restricted only to Members from Texas. I
am glad to see that we have been joined by others. I don't
know.
Mr. Arrington. Big problems, two Texans, you got it solved.
That is how I see it.
Mr. O'Rourke. It is done.
We are glad you are here, as well.
I don't think there is much that I can add to the
Chairman's remarks in outlining the importance of today's
hearing, and what we are about to learn from the panel before
us, but I do just want to ensure that we are fulfilling our
commitments to every veteran who has earned a VA educational
benefit, that that money is going to its intended use and
purpose, and in those instances where it does not, that we do
not unduly or unfairly burden the veteran with trying to recoup
that money.
And we also always, and I know the rest of the Committee
feels the way that I that I do, want to make sure we are
maximizing the taxpayers dollar, that we are good stewards of
that money, and that we are accountable for the money that is
spent. And so, I am hopeful that we are going to get answers to
some of these outstanding questions raised in the GAO report
raised by the Chairman's opening statement and other questions
that the other Committee Members will have.
And lastly, Mr. Chairman, I want to introduce you and the
Committee to Cathy Yu, who is sitting to my right. She is a new
staff director for the minority side of the economic
opportunity Subcommittee for the VA.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Cathy. Welcome to the team, and I
look forward to working with you.
Let's just introduce our guests that are with us today.
Joining us is Major General Robert Worley, Director of VA's
Education Service, who is accompanied by Mr. Thrower, Acting
Information Technology Account Manager for the Benefits
Portfolio in the Office of Information Technology and Ms. Lowe,
Director of the Debt Management Center.
We are also joined by Mr. Hebert, the Acting Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Military Personnel Policy
for the U.S. Department of Defense, and he is accompanied by
Mr. Breckenridge, Deputy Director of the Defense Manpower Data
Center for the U.S. Department of Defense.
General Worley, thank you for being here with us today and
for your many years of service in uniform with the U.S. Air
Force and your service at the VA. You are now recognized for 5
minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF MG ROBERT M. WORLEY II

General Worley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good
afternoon.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member O'Rourke, and other Members of
the Subcommittee. I am pleased to be here today to discuss the
Department of Veterans Affairs Education Benefit Programs and
our ongoing efforts to ensure education benefits are
administered appropriately and accurately.
My testimony will focus on the status of our implementation
of the eight recommendations of the Government Accountability
Office report entitled, ``Post-9/11 GI Bill Additional Actions
Needed to Help Reduce Overpayments and Increase Collections.''
I will also discuss the recent education service internal
quality review audit, as well as resources provided education
service to improve GI Bill processing times and outcomes for
student veterans.
Accompanying me today, as you mentioned, is Mr. Lloyd
Thrower from the VA Office of Information Technology; he is the
benefits portfolio manager, and Ms. Robbie Lowe, Director of
the Debt Management Center for the VA.
With respect to the GAO report, VA is committed to
addressing overpayments under the Post-9/11 GI Bill. The
October 2015 GAO report includes eight recommendations to
improve the administration of the Post-9/11 GI Bill, reduce the
occurrence of overpayments, and increase debt collections. VA
concurred with these recommendations and has been working to
implement them.
Of the eight recommendations we have completed the required
actions and have requested closure of two. Five recommendations
will be addressed in the reengineering of education service IT
solutions currently in progress, and for the remaining
recommendations VA has developed proposed regulatory changes.
With respect to the internal audit education service
identified a need to improve the overall quality in internal
controls of the Post-9/11 GI Bill program due to some trends
that we identified with equitable relief and administrative
error cases. Education service requested an audit from VA's
Office of Internal Controls regarding the determination of
eligibility percentage levels for Post-9/11 GI Bill
beneficiaries.
The Office of Internal Controls reviewed a sample of over
78,000 cases. Of those, approximately 14,000 cases were
referred to education service to review for proper accounting
of the initial Active Duty training and service dates.
Education service was able to quickly resolve approximately
3,000 cases without referring them to the DoD and contacted DoD
to verify the service information on the remaining 11,000
cases. This verification requirement created a hardship on DoD
just due to the volume of the cases and limited DoD resources
to answer these requests.
As we continue to work the situation, the education service
reevaluated those 11,000 cases to reconfirm that we would, in
fact, need information from DoD and then we prioritized the
cases and reallocated our own resources to focus and process
these cases as expeditiously as possible.
Additionally, we put in place new procedures for our field
claims examiners, and all the claims examiners were retrained
to ensure effective, consistent, and standardized claim
development with DoD. As of today there are 466 claims
remaining pending a decision, and 22 of those are actually
related to current enrollments where payments are involved.
Now with respect to IT resources, on September 24th, 2012,
VA successfully activated end-to-end automation of supplemental
claims for the Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits through long-term
solution or LTS.
This calendar year an average of over 5,200 claims per day
are processed automatically without human intervention.
Approximately 85 percent of all Post-9/11 GI Bill supplemental
claims are either partially or fully automated. Since
transitioning to sustainment there has been no significant
development funding for LTS or other supporting systems,
however, there have been six minor releases to add small
improvements to fix defects and install security enhancements.
Additional LTS functionality is needed to further increase
efficiency and effectiveness in education claims processing.
VA is prioritizing replacement of legacy systems due to the
increased costs and risk of maintaining these systems. For
example, the Benefits Delivery Network, BDN, is the claims
processing payment, tracking, and disposition system for
education programs. It consists of antiquated mainframe systems
and is in need of replacement. These and other risks involved
in operating in this environment have made the replacement of
BDN a high priority for VA. There are a number of other legacy
systems that are in need of modernization and further
automation.
VBA and OIT continue to assess these capabilities for
education service. Our goal, as always, is to improve our
service to our servicemembers, veterans, and their families.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement, and we look
forward to responding to your questions.

[The prepared statement of Robert M. Workey, II appears in
the Appendix]

Mr. Arrington. Thank you, General Worley.
Mr. Hebert, you are now recognized for 5 minutes. Do I have
that right, Hebert?
Mr. Hebert. Hebert.
Mr. Arrington. Hebert.
Mr. Hebert. Good French and Cajun name.
Mr. Arrington. Okay. Mr. Hebert, the floor is yours. Five
minutes, sir.

STATEMENT OF LERNES J. HEBERT

Mr. Hebert. Yes, sir. Good afternoon, Chairman Arrington,
Ranking Member O'Rourke, and esteemed Members of the Committee.
I am pleased to be before you today with Mark and my
colleagues from the VA. The Department of Defense takes our
responsibility for ensuring veterans receive their benefits
very seriously. Together with our partners from the VA we work
hard to ensure that accurate and timely information is
processed and available to determine the veteran's eligibility
for education benefits.
Since 2003, the Department of Defense has been providing
daily updates of electronic personnel records to the VA from
the first day a servicemember signs in until the day they
depart. Direct lines of communication are critical, as you
would expect, in an enterprise such as ours. Whether it is a
regional offices contacting the various service components
offices for additional data or information or between our
headquarters, we routinely and almost daily are in contact with
respect to the Post-9/11 GI Bill. DoD monitors the data
reported to the VA, but clearly, there is still additional room
for improvement in this area.
One of the changes that occurred back in 2009 with the
implementation of the Post-9/11 GI Bill was a requirement to
change the certificate of release or discharge from Active Duty
to the DD214 to incorporate an additional data element. This
data element was the initial training end date.
The reason I mention it here is that prior to this point
this date had no specific purpose with respect to policy or
statute, and so it took us a little while to get it
incorporated in many data systems that we have across the
Department so that the VA could receive it in a timely fashion.
Incorporating it in 2009[PL1] was an effort to help
duplicate some of the data flows that were going to the VA so
they would have instant access to this information.
Yet if a veteran applies for benefits and this information
isn't available, we work in an expeditious manner with the VA
to try and clear this up and provide this additional
information.
A second area of focus that we found that was troubling to
us is that several periods of qualifying service for veterans
were not being included in the records that were being passed
to the VA. This primarily dealt with Guard and Reserve Members
and the systems changes that were occurring in trying to align
all the systems up so they could properly receive the
information.
It stemmed from the elimination of the Reserve Education
Assistance Program and their subsequent transfer to the Post-9/
11 GI Bill. As a result, the VA claims examiners are currently
working with the services to ensure all qualifying service is
accounted for.
We are committed to resolving these cases and as
expeditiously as possible. Rest assured the Department remains
committed to taking care of veterans and ensuring the success
of the Post-9/11 GI Bill which aids greatly in military
recruiting and retention efforts. To address gaps in the
current process, my office, along with the Defense Manpower
Data Center, will meet with each of the reserve components to
develop a plan for significant process improvement on our side
of the equation.
Going forward we will also institute a governance process,
a structure that works to make sure that we have quality data
being passed to the VA and to other institutions that require
personnel data.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. I thank you and
the Members of the Subcommittee for your continuing support of
servicemembers, veterans, survivors, and their family members.

[The prepared statement of Lernes J. Hebert appears in the
Appendix]

Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Hebert. I will now yield
myself 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Worley, has what Mr. Hebert suggested he would do to
improve the coordination and sharing of information, is that
going to be sufficient to solve the challenges? And I can
imagine there will always be some challenges in coordinating
two behemoth bureaucracies, quite frankly, and so I want to be
reasonable here.
But what are your thoughts about that, and what would you
emphasize from your perspective from VA's perspective needs to
happen, IT systems, standardizing process, governance, what do
you think? A, how do you react to what he has said, and, B,
what would you emphasize or add?
General Worley. Mr. Chairman, I just like to start off by
saying that we have a very solid relationship with DoD in this
regard. We have had computer matching agreements with them
since at least 1990, if not sooner, earlier than that.
I think the steps that Mr. Hebert has outlined will very
much help as we go forward. We have identified a person in my
staff to be my lead, if you will, on working with the DoD,
whether it be through a working group or this governance
structure, and I think there are a number of areas that we need
to focus on with respect to the data sharing itself, the
sources, and just, you know, basic communications.
I would also just point out to you, sir, that just to give
you a scope, since this fiscal year 2017 we have had about
50,000 or so cases that we have requested information from DoD.
And the timeliness of their response to us is, for the most
part, averages 10 days or less, so it is more issues related to
how quickly their, I think, databases get updated and our
tapping into those. There may be better ways that our people
can tap in more directly to their databases.
Mr. Arrington. That seems to me like a more reasonable and
commonsense solution is to provide access without being able to
alter the data in a way that is secure, obviously, but just to
tap into that database.
I mean, 10 days, I imagine you could shorten that
significantly if you could just tap into it from the VA side
without a lot of moving parts on the DoD side. I mean, am I
wrong about that? That is just an observation.
General Worley. It is something we would want to explore
with DoD as part of this working group.
Mr. Arrington. Is that something DoD would be willing to
consider?
Mr. Hebert. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. We already have an
application out there that is available to the VA. They can log
in and check out all the records of all the military personnel
that they would like to on a case-by-case basis, and we are
also providing the data feed.
The challenge comes in making sure that the records are
complete in a way that is digestible to the VA, and so, but
absolutely, we are willing to work with the VA on additional
opportunities in that regard.
Mr. Arrington. I have in my notes that VA employees have
said that they are still seeing problems receiving needed
information from the services in a timely manner. I don't know,
you know, that is anecdotal. I don't put a lot of stock in
that, quite frankly.
I would like to know what the numbers are. I would like to
know what empirical data from an internal audit or from the
GAO. Is there any numbers, hard numbers, to measure the--
because there are different sides to this equation--but the
component of the DoD coordination, is there empirical data to
suggest that that part is inefficient or broken?
General Worley. Mr. Chairman, we track, and that is where I
got the 10 days from, we track from the time we send the
request to the DoD to their response, and the range is wide.
I mean, it goes from same day to 50 days, but on average it
is about 10 days for them to respond to us with the information
that we are asking for, which is typically either character of
service, but more often it is Guard and Reserve kinds of
information with respect to service dates and the authorities
under which guardsmen and reservists are activated.
Mr. Arrington. Well, I am going to yield to my colleague. I
have got several questions on the IT systems front. They may
cover it for me. So with that I yield 5 minutes to the Ranking
Member, Mr. O'Rourke.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Worley, what
is the total dollar value of outstanding uncollected
overpayments?
General Worley. I think I would have to defer to my debt
management center folks, if I could.
Mr. O'Rourke. That is good with me.
Ms. Lowe. Good afternoon.
Mr. O'Rourke. Hi.
Ms. Lowe. My system at the Debt Management Center retains
the information on debts that veterans owe. For fiscal year
2016 I show an outstanding balance of $107 million. For fiscal
year 2015, an outstanding balance of $49.5 million.
Mr. O'Rourke. Are both those numbers overpayment?
Ms. Lowe. They would be monies that veterans or schools owe
the VA, yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. So, sorry, repeat fiscal year 2016
again for me?
Ms. Lowe. Fiscal year 2016 was $107 million. Fiscal year
2015, $49.5 million. Fiscal year 2014, $31 million. And fiscal
year 2013 and all prior years is $44 million. And I do want to
mention on the--
Mr. O'Rourke. And for each of those years that you gave us,
this is outstanding uncollected overpayment.
Let me ask you this next question. Where does that money
reside? For example, is it with the institution? Is it with the
veteran, or do we know?
Ms. Lowe. I do believe I have those details.
Mr. O'Rourke. And what I am trying to get at is I want to
make sure that if it is with the institution, we are going to
the institution to collect the money, instead of asking the
veteran for the money.
Ms. Lowe. Yes.
Mr. O'Rourke. But see if you can give me the answer to
that.
Ms. Lowe. Yes, sir. For example, in fiscal year 2016
veterans owe us for books and supplies of $3.7 million. The
veterans owe us for housing debts $47.6 million. For tuition
and fees they owe us $49.1 million. And schools owe us
approximately $6.9 million.
Mr. O'Rourke. And in every instance where you said the
veteran owes 3.7, 47.6, 49.1 million, that money has been paid
to the veterans. It was at one point in their possession. It is
not with the institution held in the veteran's name?
Ms. Lowe. Correct. Well, VBA makes the determination on who
owes the money, and, for example, in the area of tuition,
whether the school owes the money, or the veteran owes, it
depends on the reason why. So, for example, if the veteran
dropped the course and never attended it, it might be the
school that owes it, but, again, I would defer that to General
Worley to answer that question.
Mr. O'Rourke. And the way I ask the question is important
to me. I want to know where the money resides, perhaps a
different question than who owes the money. So it may be
legally that the veteran owes that money back, but the money
never flowed through to the veteran is held by the institution
for the credit hours that were never served to the veteran.
So I don't want the collections agency going to the
veteran, I want it going to the institution. And I may not be
making myself clear. Does that make sense?
Ms. Lowe. Yes, it makes sense. Unfortunately, VBA education
service determines the debts, and so they would determine
whether the veteran owes the money or the school, so I would
defer to General Worley.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay.
General Worley. If I could, the way the debts are
established, as she mentioned, has to do with when the change
is made with respect to their rate of pursuit. So if an
individual veteran is taking 12 hours at a school and the term
starts after the start of the term, anything they do with
respect to reducing their rate of pursuit or whatever results
in a debt against the veteran because the school was paid on
behalf of the veteran.
Mr. O'Rourke. Okay. But let me stop you there. So let's use
that example. Let's say that a veteran signed up for 12 hours.
First day of school they are sitting in 12 hours' worth of
classes. Second day of school they say, you know what, for
whatever reason, I am going to take it down to four hours. The
school was paid for the 12 hours. That money never flowed
through to the veteran. Whose door will be knocked on for the
collection for the balance?
General Worley. In that case, the veteran's.
Mr. O'Rourke. Even if the money never came to them?
General Worley. That is correct, sir.
Mr. O'Rourke. And so how do we change that so that it is
the school who actually has the money who pays the money back
instead of the veteran?
General Worley. The reason it is set up the way it is
because the VA does not get in the middle of school refund
policies. There are many different refund policies amongst the
schools.
Mr. O'Rourke. Could you get in the middle of it? I mean,
you have the leverage. You are paying out hundreds of millions
of dollars to these institutions and say a condition for
receiving this money is that if the veteran does not go to the
classes for which that money was paid, you the school are on
the line for it, you will pay it back to us. You have the
facilities and capacity to make that transaction much more
quickly and efficiently than does the individual veterans.
And I have got to think from a collection standpoint that
is a much more effective way to get that money back than
finding thousands of veterans spread out all across the
country.
General Worley. That is the intent of the GAO's
recommendation number eight, which we concurred with. That,
like several of the other ones, is a fairly big lift with
respect to the IT changes we need to make in the system, but,
yes, sir, that is part of the GAO recommendation.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you. I have exceeded my time. I yield
back to the chair.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke. I yield 5 minutes
for questions to Mr. Wenstrup.
Mr. Wenstrup. I would like to yield my time right now to
Mr. Bilirakis.
Mr. Arrington. Mr. Bilirakis, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. I appreciate it very much, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you again for your testimony, as well.
Mr. Worley, VA should be commended for their efforts to
partially automate the supplemental claims through LTS.
However, it is my understanding that the processing of original
GI Bill claims is not automated and still takes just about as
much time as it did back in 2009. What do you see as the
impediment to completing the long-term solution or LTS and
increasing the number of claims that can be processed without
human intervention?
And then what plans does VA have in place to finish the LTS
and finally automate original claims? Again, how much do you
think this would cost, as well? If you can answer those
questions for me, I would appreciate it.
General Worley. Congressman Bilirakis, thank you. Just to
provide a little input on the timeliness. Original claims today
are processed in fiscal year to date in 2017 in about 21 days.
That is actually much better than it was in 2009 when we didn't
have automation of any kind. Much better than even in 2012 when
it was probably 30 plus days.
Supplemental claims with automation on average for all
benefit types is running about 6 or 7 days. So we are pretty
proud of the improvements that we have made with respect to
serving our veterans and timeliness of processing the claims.
You are right. Original claims are not automated, and I
would say it is something that originally when the long-term
solution was being developed, that was something that was
desired. The focus was put on supplemental claims because that,
quite frankly, is 85 or so percent of our business, and that
was going to be the biggest bang for the buck.
As always, it comes down to resources and priorities kinds
of discussions within the VA, and so we have got business
requirements laid out, and I think the estimate that SPAWAR
gave us, which was the original contractor, they are no longer
on contract, and then I will defer to Mr. Thrower, but was I
think 30 million to automate original claims and provide some
of the other functionalities that we needed.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you. Let me ask another question. What
can this Committee do to encourage the Office of Information
and Technology to provide additional funding to the education
service to improve the GI Bill processing? If you can answer
that question, I would appreciate it.
General Worley. What can--
Mr. Bilirakis. Well, what can this Committee do to
encourage OI&T, again, to provide additional funding to the
education service to improve the GI Bill?
General Worley. May I refer to my IT colleague?
Mr. Bilirakis. Yes, what can we do?
Mr. Thrower. Hello. Well, thank you for the question.
Mr. Bilirakis. Sure.
Mr. Thrower. I would say that the first thing I would like
to be clear is that within OI&T we established the priorities
for what our development efforts in any given year in
conjunction with our partners in VBA. We do not do this
unilaterally. It is every year a rack and stack of all of the
challenges that are facing the administration, each individual
administration, and we determine which are the highest
priorities.
Certainly through 2012 getting LTS up and running was one
of our number one priority. In the last 2 to 3 years our
priority has been automating the comp and PIN process. We are
now actually moving to a very different strategy this year with
the constraints that we are dealing with, with funds.
We have put a focus in this particular year on managing
some very important aspects--well, not only focusing on the
electronic health records, but also, the management and the
disposition of quite a few really important legacy systems.
Within the benefits space education systems, well, the Benefits
Delivery Network, BDN, is right at the top of that list. We are
right now in the process of doing an analysis and reengineering
effort on all education systems looking to see where they
stand.
We know that we have some legacy systems--legacy
environment there that needs to be cleaned up in order to make
sure that all of the processes going forward can be uplifted
and modernized very effectively. A lot of the things that the
GAO report has asked for are things that during this process
over the next year, year and-a-half we are going to be
implementing as part of that reengineering effort.
We have about, I think, $31 million in the budget for
fiscal year 2018. We have some residual funds that we are
devoting to that this year. As I say, we are building the
engineering plan and figuring out when we can bring these
individual capabilities online now.
Mr. Bilirakis. Very good. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, could I
have an additional 10 seconds?
Mr. Arrington. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bilirakis. Okay. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
I introduced House Resolution 1994, the Vocational
Education and Training Enhancements for Reintegration
Assistance Act, the Veterans Act, asked Congress to address
this very issue, and we are funding it for IT $30 million. My
bill would direct the secretary of VA to make improvements to
the information technology system, which would surely improve
the quality and timeliness of adjudicating these claims.
So, again, without objection I have a letter I would like
to submit, Mr. Chairman, before the record.
Mr. Arrington. Without objection.
Mr. Bilirakis. Thank you very much, and it is from the
Association of the United States Navy. So and they are
supporting my bill, so I would like to discuss that with you,
and we have got to fix this.
So thank you very much, and I apologize for going over Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Bilirakis. Now I recognize
Ms. Rice and give her 5 minutes for questions.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess this question would be for Mr. Worley. Do you think
that a wider expansion of the VSOC program and educational
institutions could be one supplemental initiative utilized to
further the VA's efforts to ensure that education benefits are
administered appropriately and accurately for student veterans?
We have some VSOCs in our area, but we are still hoping to get
more. I know it is a program that could use some expansion but
would you see that as a benefit?
General Worley. It is difficult for me to comment on it
because I am not responsible for the VSOC program. That falls
under the Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment Service in
VBA. I know there have been many discussions about expanding
VSOC, but I am not the expert on VSOC itself.
Miss Rice. I am wondering if there is any data to show that
schools, where there are VSOCs, where there is an ability for a
student to get some advice and counsel, shows less of a--those
students have less of a likelihood of getting mixed up in this
whole quagmire of, you know, tuition repay and all that kind of
stuff?
General Worley. I understand.
Miss Rice. You don't have any--
General Worley. I understand the question. I think we would
have to take that one for the record, ma'am, if we could, and
we can get back and answer you.
Miss Rice. Yes, I would be interested to see if that has
any--
General Worley. I would say just along those lines, as you
know, the people that deal directly with our beneficiaries at
the schools are the school certifying officials, kind of our
generic term for veteran certifying officials, and we have
extensive training opportunities and resources for them to work
with the veterans, make sure they understand the debt potential
for dropping classes and those types of things.
As well as we work with them on the dual certification
piece that was recommended in the GAO report. So there are many
opportunities, and we see them as kind of the front line in
terms of providing this kind of information to our veterans,
but certainly the VSOC counselors that are on those campuses
can provide that kind of important information, as well.
Miss Rice. So it seems I have heard a lot about the IT, IT,
IT, IT, and what concerns, I am sure, everyone on this
Committee, is that there is no money for IT. I mean, the budget
really kind of--it is not there. So we need to be having
conversations with Secretary Shulkin and things like that, but
it seems to me like a lot of the issues that we are talking
about could be rectified by a bigger investment in IT.
So, Mr. Worley, I guess you would be the right one for me
to talk about joint services transcripts?
General Worley. I am sorry?
Miss Rice. Can I talk to you about joint services
transcripts?
General Worley. Well, I know a little bit about joint
service transcripts. That is really a DoD issue.
Miss Rice. Oh. So maybe I should ask Mr. Hebert? Well,
basically--
General Worley. I can try to answer your question.
Miss Rice [continued].--some members before they start
their outside the military education have actually gotten
credits that are transferable to schools that they plan on
attending using GI funds.
General Worley. Sure.
Miss Rice. And it seems to me that we should try to
coordinate that along with the payment to schools of the
tuition, that we should incorporate some automatic transferal
of joint service transcripts because another avenue for savings
could be if the veteran knows themselves that they actually
have these credits that would only require them to maybe go for
3 years as opposed to four, that is significant savings if you
add that up down the line.
So I would just--I think we have to have a conversation
about that to see if--
General Worley. Yes, ma'am. I would say that is a great
point, and I would say in order to be a GI Bill approved school
you have to have policies that assess prior credits wherever
they come from.
Miss Rice. Right.
General Worley. And there has been a lot of focus on this
in the higher ED community, GI Bill community, if you will,
with respect to providing, you know, it is a school decision
essentially. Individual schools have different policies related
to what credit they will accept, but they have to have a policy
to review prior credit wherever it comes from and apply that so
that our beneficiaries can make more efficient use of their
benefits.
The joint service transcript is a key part of that coming
out of the service when they transition. They might have other,
you know, other credits that they could get just for military
training itself that they go through.
So those things are looked at quite significantly, and,
again, to be a GI Bill-approved school you have to have a
policy that says you review those prior credits and give them
where appropriate.
Miss Rice. So I think if I can just make this one point,
Mr. Chairman, I think that if we require schools to have that
process, we should make sure they get those transcripts, right?
Otherwise, why are we requiring them to have that evaluation of
prior credits? Okay. Thank you.
General Worley. I understand.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Miss Rice, and I would like to
recognize Mr. Rutherford for 5 minutes of questions. Mr.
Rutherford?
Mr. Rutherford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Gentlemen, if you
could, one area that I have heard complaints about in my
district is the VA Work Study Program and the fact that there
is actually no automated or notification system for this
program like there is for the GI Bill processing, and that
means that these students all have to scan or email all of
their documentation. And the lag time in the payment as a
result of that often has some serious impact on these students
who depend on that money.
Can you discuss the challenges with the Work Study Program
and how we can improve that for our student veterans, as well?
General Worley. Yes, Congressman. The Work Study Program,
as you have indicated, is a great program for student veterans
that allow them an opportunity to make some money and do work
that relates to veteran service, if you will, at various
locations, not just even at schools. The system for paying them
is, as you said, it is not automated. It is not part of the
long-term solution automation. It is, you know, it is
computerized, if you will, but, yes, to get the hours that are
worked that comes in either by email, by fax, by through our
ask a question on our Web site, and then is put into our
management or image management system and then the work is done
by a small team to go in and to pay those.
We have been looking at this more closely with respect to
some of the things that you alluded to on some timeliness
problems. First thing we need to do is clean up the way we
actually account for the timing of how we process these claims.
We have made some different decisions 2 or 3 years ago with
respect to the frequency of paying the work-study employees,
and, again, we work to try to do this as quickly as possible,
but we are focusing more on it to ensure the timeliness and
that these individuals are paid quickly. As quickly as we can.
Mr. Rutherford. Just to follow up briefly, are there any
plans to make some type of automation available for submission?
General Worley. It is certainly something--we would like to
have all these little one standalone systems rolled into the
bigger automation, absolutely.
Mr. Rutherford. Okay. And actually that is a good segue
into my next question. I see where Secretary Shulkin has
decided to purchase the DoD a system that is apparently an IT
system that is apparently congruent with the DoD's system
because they use it now. I don't know that that has any--well,
is there any potential there for that to help with the GI Bill
post-GI Bill folks or any tie-in to the schools at all or is it
too early to know that?
General Worley. That has to do with electronic health
records, and it is out of my lane.
Mr. Rutherford. I wasn't sure what the limitations were on
it. Okay. Thank you.
I would like to point out one other issue. According to a
lot of our veteran military folks, our resource service and
universities find it almost impossible to get anyone from the
VA to answer the phone between the third week of August and
mid-September because everybody is, and not that they are not
working hard, in fact, they are probably working incredibly
hard, and that is why they are not answering the phone, is VA
trying to address this?
You know, that is a very critical time obviously. You have
all these registrations going on. Is there any plan to try and
beef up personnel during that time or somehow address that
workload?
General Worley. Congressman, if I can get perhaps a little
more fidelity on what kinds of, you know, what kinds of calls
were being made, I could probably answer that question better,
but we have an education liaison representative in each State
or assigned to each State, and sometimes that is a one-deep
position for all the institutions in a given State, and they
are the usually the first resource a school certified official
will go to try to get an answer to a question.
So in that regard, yes, we are thin, a bit thin on ELRs,
especially, again, during that period of time or if there is a
new school certifying official, it is a complicated benefit,
and there are a lot of nuances to it. So if it is something
more generic with respect to the benefits and that kind of
thing we do have the education call center in Muskogee,
Oklahoma, and they do a great job.
There are sufficient resources there to handle the call
volume. Even, I mean, there are issues during the peak times
like early first part of the month or early September for
example.--
Mr. Rutherford. I think this was specifically about the
ELRs and their accessibility. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Rutherford. And now I would
like to recognize Mr. Correa and give him 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ladies and gentlemen,
welcome today. Thank you for your hard work for all of our
veterans.
Served in the California legislature for a number of years,
and, unfortunately, the last few years we have had very
disturbing developments with private for-profit institutions of
education. Some have closed down leaving a lot of students a
lot of debt, and as you know, student debt is the only debt you
cannot essentially forgive through bankruptcy. Very unfortunate
situation.
So my general question to all of you is, can you do
anything, should we be doing anything to tighten up as to what
educational institutions in this country are eligible to
receive the GI revenues, the GI funds from our students, and I
say that from two perspectives.
Number one, a lot of these institutions promise, you know,
full employment or a great job after you graduate, and they are
not there.
And, number two, related to the reimbursement policy.
Education can be said to be a business. Taxpayer dollars are
being invested in these veterans to educate them. We want to
make sure they are getting a good deal.
And so I am trying to figure out how can we better vet
these educational institutions to make sure that, for example,
policies like automatic reimbursement should the veteran drop
out, you know, before the semester is over is part of their
policy to be part of our system of GI benefits.
General Worley. Thank you, Congressman Correa. As you know,
in order to administer the Post-9/11 GI Bill in accordance with
the statutory requirements, very many types of schools are
eligible, whether they be public, private for-profit, private
not-for-profit, vocational schools, that is the thing, that is
one of the great things about the GI Bill is the breadth and
the magnitude of opportunity there for veterans and
servicemembers and families to use.
I acknowledge your comments about some institutions and
some abrupt closures in recent history, and I think as you are
aware currently--under the current statute the VA has no
authority to either continue paying housing for a little while
in a situation like that or to reinstate entitlement that
someone may have lost or perhaps wasted at an institution that
closes like that. And, again, as you know, many times those
credits don't transfer anywhere.
So what we focused on is not trying to identify a good
school or a bad school and try to be the judge of that as a
Department. What we have tried to do is focus on doing
everything in our power to create informed consumers and
provide information about these things to our veterans who are
making these educational decisions for their future.
Things like articulation agreements with respect to schools
accepting other credits, these debt issues, looking at the
graduation rates of a school and those types of things, trying
to help our beneficiaries make good decisions up front because
as you know you get 36 months, and that is it for the GI Bill.
Mr. Correa. And that is why, sir, I think it is important
to provide education, and I am not trying to have a
paternalistic government here in terms of telling our vets what
to choose and what not to, but some of them these students many
times are victims of having been sold a basket of goods that
actually is not there. It is just a marketing and sales ploy,
and ultimately they get hurt as well as the taxpayer.
So I know you don't have the legislative authority to delve
in this area, but I would ask you to think about coming up with
a system to provide additional safeguards for veterans.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield the remainder of my time.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Correa.
And now I recognize Chairman Wenstrup and give him 5
minutes for questions. Thank you.
Mr. Wenstrup. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
all for being here, and I want to start with you, Mr. Hebert. I
am just curious over the last several years what kind of
technological improvements have we seen when transitioning
information from active duty to VA, especially for guard and
reserves.
I mean, I know 10 years ago when I came home, here is your
DD214, and later I did get a letter from VA saying, hey, you
need to check in with us. Is some of this being automated now,
and maybe you both want to address that somewhat, but is it
being automated at this point where it kind of goes
automatically or how is that working?
Mr. Hebert. It does. As I mentioned earlier, we do send
data flows each day to the VA.
Mr. Wenstrup. What is in that?
Mr. Hebert. If I may, the expert is sitting right to my
left.
Mr. Wenstrup. It works for me.
Mr. Breckenridge. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, since about
2003, the Department of Defense has maintained a DoD and VA
data share with VA so that in realtime we update the data that
is received from the services.
So Defense Manpower Data Center receives personnel data
feeds from the service personnel systems. We process it through
this DoD/VA data share and in realtime update those records in
what is called VADIR, the VA/DoD Information--
Mr. Wenstrup. What is in that?
Mr. Breckenridge [continued]. It is the service personnel
record for all the benefits, including the education benefits
that are required for VA.
So as soon as we get the first day of a servicemember's
personnel record that is available, that is transitioned to VA.
And then we continuously update it until they separate or
retire from the service.
Mr. Wenstrup. And does the troop get access to that data
themselves? Is that something they can see, print out? I mean,
you talk about benefits especially, is that something that is
accessible to them?
Mr. Breckenridge. The veteran?
Mr. Wenstrup. Sure.
Mr. Breckenridge. The veterans do not have direct access to
it, but they do have access to it through the systems, which
are used by VA and within the Department of Defense and
servicemembers, as well.
There is a second system which does provide direct access
to their online service record, the DEPRA system, so they can
also see their online service record as well both during
service and after they have left the service, and that is an
actual image system which has been provided since that same
time period.
Mr. Wenstrup. So what is the process for Guard and Reserve,
they will go active for a year and then they are going home.
Are they aware of what is going over to VA? I mean, how
informed are they? I mean, I just am speaking for me, I was
kind of lost, right, from I got a letter from VA saying come in
and get your physical.
Mr. Hebert. I think depending on the seniority of the
servicemember there have varying degrees of education on
exactly how much we interchange with the VA. I think most
people are not cognizant of it. I think the key, particularly
with the Guard and Reserve, is after they complete their
deployment or mobilization they get back and getting that
updated in the record typically is not something they are very
urgently pursuing.
Mr. Wenstrup. I agree.
Mr. Hebert. I want to get back with mom and the kids, and I
want to get reacclimated with my unit and my family, and
sometimes that gets--there is a delay there. It required some
servicemember intervention. We can do a lot of things on our
own, but they need to validate it so that we can attribute that
service to them.
But the largest problem at least at this point in time that
we have identified is the handoff of the data between all the
systems and being able to transition the data in a way that
each system all the way into the VA systems can recognize and
have the completeness that they need in order to make that
eligibility decision, and that is where we are going to focus
and our efforts in the future because if we can get the right
data to the VA, such that it doesn't require manual
intervention, then they won't have to ask DoD for the data.
And the smaller that population, well, the quicker we can
respond to those requests because we have now whittled down the
number of requests that we are getting for manual intervention,
if that makes sense.
Mr. Wenstrup. Yes, I appreciate that goal, and thank you
very much. I yield back.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And now I want to
recognize Mr. Takano and give him 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Takano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is for Mr.
Worley. Regarding the GAO recommendation that the VA send out
more emails or use e-benefits to communicate with veterans in
addition to snail mail it just seems like that is commonsense.
These days people change their mailing addresses a lot more
often than their emails, and it is just, I think, a better way
to reach people by email in order to communicate about
important information. So I am glad that the VA is trying to
implement supplemental email communication, but I understand
for nondebt collection purposes, the VBA or the Veterans
Benefit Administration does not have to use snail mail at all,
that, in fact, VBA conducted a study that found that using
electronic communication would save a certain amount of money
over a 5-year period if it replaced snail mail.
Do you know how much money the study the study found
electronic communication would save, is that number something
that you know?
General Worley. I don't have that number at my
fingerprints--my fingertips, not my fingerprints--Congressman.
No, we concur with that recommendation. And I think enterprise-
wide in VA, we are moving in that direction. We didn't always
require an email address on applications for GI Bill. That
changed a couple of years ago, but nevertheless, our systems
are not set up to do that easily.
With respect to some of the closures and some of the
schools where there have been negative impacts to veterans, we
have been able to go and collect an email address--it typically
gets a large portion of the students'--and try to communicate
with them proactively that way.
But for regular mail, yes, our notifications need to be in
writing. It can be electronic. And we are, IT and the
Enterprise in VA is working toward that.
Mr. Takano. Well, I understand that fixing these problems
at the VA, like any other problem at the agency, is going to
require dedication and creativity in the budget constraint
environment in which we find ourselves. And nothing is going to
get better if the agency continues to do things like conduct
studies, but then just put them in a drawer someplace and not
try to do anything productive with the study.
So I would like to see the VA commit to revisiting the
results of this study and potential implementation plans. And I
hope you will provide a report back to the Committee, because,
you know, you have already done a study. It already showed you
already have other parts of--do you want to respond? Go ahead.
Ms. Lowe. Yes. I would just like to add that for the Debt
Management Center, 38 CFR 1.911 states that we provide it in
writing, and notification is sufficient when sent by ordinary
mail directed to the debtor's last known address and not
returned as undeliverable by postal authorities.
So, to make email dreams come true, we would need help.
Mr. Takano. But I was asking about nondebt communication.
Ms. Lowe. Oh, just nondebt communication? Okay, my
misunderstanding.
Mr. Takano. I understand that nondebt communication for
purposes--that the VBA does not have to use snail mail. I
understand that in debt collection, you have a different level
of standard there.
But it seems to me that if we are trying to facilitate
communication with our veterans that we have at least your own
study--a previous existing study has shown that there is a
savings to be had. And, you know, I would hope that you would
commit yourselves to moving down that path and then report back
to this Committee your results.
Let me just yield back.
Mr. Arrington. We will make sure and follow up on that.
Mr. Arrington. I think that is a good point. I think it is
a great point, actually.
I will yield any more time that my colleague Mr. O'Rourke
needs for further comments and questions.
Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a quick
question, General Worley.
I think there are a lot of bigger questions that were
raised that I think you are either coming back to us on or we
may need to talk to the Secretary about, especially some really
good questions about IT integration with DoD. And we know every
servicemember and every veteran comes through DoD, and we want
those systems to work more closely, as they will on the health
record sharing side, thanks to the decision Secretary Shulkin
made there.
But--and correct me if I am wrong--I understand that one of
the things that you are working on to make it clearer to
veterans about their obligation is including a line or a
paragraph in the letter that goes out to veterans with their
award saying, you are responsible for the difference if you
drop classes. And that that apparently took a year to approve
that language and that language is still not in the letters
that are going out.
And we hope--and this, again, is my understanding, you
correct me if I am wrong--that the VA is going to be able to
get that in place by August, which is obviously cutting it
really close for this next school year.
Correct me if I have the wrong impression or explain to me
why it takes that long to do that and whether or not we will be
able to get that information, important information out to
veterans before the start of this next school year?
General Worley. The award letters have for a long time,
prior to even I think the GAO report, had a bold box in it that
says, you are responsible for any debt created with respect to
changes in your rate of pursuit, or words to that effect.
I think what the GAO is trying to do, a couple of things
with respect to their recommendations related to letters,
whether they be award letters, debt letters or whatever, is to
give our beneficiaries the total picture in one place: Why the
debt was established, in the case of a debt; and how to pay it
back.
With respect to award letters, it is something that
everybody gets every time they enroll and a certification goes
through. So it is a good means--we will get to the electronic
eventually--to communicate that kind of thing with respect to
the debt. So what they want us to do is put more information in
the letter related to that debt, related to the potential for
debt, you know, incurring debt. So there is more now in those
letters.
It is more complicated, and I could ask Mr. Thrower to
maybe give more detail, but it is not a Word document that we
can just go in and change a few lines and hit, you know, save.
These are letters that are generated as part of the long-term
solution. They have information in them, data in them that
relates to calculations and a whole set of things.
So it is a nontrivial event to try to make significant
changes in these letters. Should it take a year, year and a
half? No, sir, it shouldn't. But nevertheless, it is more
complicated than it looks on the surface.
Mr. O'Rourke. Yeah. Well, I appreciate you addressing it.
And I don't know if I have the answer or you can give the
answer that we are looking for. And I think one of the
challenges we have, and it is not the fault of present company,
but when we have these ancient IT systems, we can just keep
saying, well, we have got this ancient IT system and it is
really hard to update that stuff. So is a year a really long
time? I don't know. Maybe the system is so old, it takes a year
to do this.
It is just hard for us to hold you accountable, hard for
veterans to hold us accountable when we can fall back on that
excuse. And I share the concern raised by others, including
Miss Rice, that we are not seeing the investment in those
systems.
I think a really good conversation would be, you know, hey,
Beto, quit banging on me for not being able to get this stuff
done quickly enough. We are on an old system. What I need you,
as a Member of Congress, to do is authorize X and have the
appropriators appropriate the money for X so that we can
finally get this done.
I would love to have that conversation so that my successor
is not here in 4 years having the same conversation with you or
your successor. So an open request to you and to the Secretary
to tell us what you need as an investment to once and for all
fix the IT system so that that is no longer an excuse. That
would be my request.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
Mr. Arrington. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
I am going to yield myself 5 minutes for additional
comments and take off on what you said.
I couldn't agree more. And so let me start probably where I
should have from the outset. General, what is a goal, what is a
good and reasonable goal for a timeframe? You mentioned 21 days
to process original claims. You are down to 6 days on
supplemental. What is a good goal on the original claim side?
General Worley. Mr. Chairman, my goal would be to model it
similar to loan guarantee. An individual goes into e-Benefits
or perhaps into future vets.gov, loads in their information and
hits send/submit, and within a few seconds they get back a
certificate of eligibility. That would be my dream, then it
would be instantaneous.
I mean, I think, you know, that would take a lot, but that
is the future. No one is complaining to us right now, however,
about 21 days other than the situation that you mention where
there are longer delays because of whatever situation on a
subset of the claims.
So it is hard to know. What do the veterans want? We have
improved timeliness over time. We are not getting a lot of
complaints except, again, unique situations. And the
supplemental claims, again, which is 80, 85 percent of what we
do, are being processed right through the system very, very
quickly.
Mr. Arrington. My understanding is this LTS was being
implemented, and then there was a shift in priorities and so it
wasn't fully implemented, so we didn't realize the full value
of that IT solution. Is that a fair assessment?
General Worley. I think that is a fair assessment. I mean,
again, when you have limited resources, you focus on where you
get the biggest bang for the buck. And at the time, it was
supplemental claims and all that went before that. There were
six major releases, starting from March of 2010 till September
of 2012, to get us to where we are.
And I think I would--you know, as we are talking about
antiquated systems, I would maybe defend LTS as one of the more
recent and effective systems. I mean, I don't know what other
business line can make the claim that half of their claims get
processed untouched by human hands, based on a complicated
benefit and the rules-based system that we have.
So LTS, when that went into effect in 2012, it was truly a
game-changer, in terms of timeliness and service to our
beneficiaries. Was there more we wanted to do? Absolutely. I
mean, there is some small subset of supplemental claims we
don't automate today and then the original claims.
The original claims are 10 to 15 percent of what we do.
Obviously, that is a critical stage in the process, because we
are determining their eligibility level and all of that, and it
is a little more complicated because we need to know service
data and those types of things. But that is very much something
that can be automated, and that is our next big priority I
would say after BDN.
Mr. Arrington. So what specifically--and this may be, Mr.
Thrower, in your bailiwick, but I am happy to have the general
comment as well.
But what specifically--it does sound like LTS did a
tremendous job in improving the timeliness of the process,
processing these claims, but what else, if you had the money,
what would you do to further expedite that or to cut the 21
days into 6 days or cut it in half to 10 or 11 days?
Mr. Thrower. Let me try to answer it this way, as I kind of
have been working with the engineering team to sort of
understand the landscape of the challenge we have ahead of us.
Our first challenge really is to retire the Benefits Delivery
Network, BDN.
That will eliminate a 50-year-old system that is very risky
in terms of its technology underneath of it. It is tied into
all of the various--particularly into the education platforms.
A lot of that retirement, which we will be doing over 2018,
will actually take many of the benefits, things that we have
done with Chapter 30, and make them available for all the other
chapters. It will give us better consistency across the board.
It will actually close off some of these, a couple of these
GAO recommendations: For instance, the one about the monthly
certifications. We will be able to manage certain things in
that. But it will give us a platform that will be much, much
simpler for us to be able to move forward and add on additional
capabilities going forward.
So our sense is that right now for us it is a timing issue
now that we have the priority. You know, the Secretary has
established a priority that education is sort of the area
within the benefits portfolio that is the priority now.
Starting with BDN, let's get the platform up to a certain
level in this year, and then we can start layering new
capabilities that won't just be available for one chapter or
for one subset of veterans, but, as we layer these things on,
they will be available for everyone.
Mr. Arrington. If I recall, you said 10 days, on average,
for DoD to share information when requested.
General Worley. That is correct, Mr. Chairman. That is
correct.
Mr. Arrington. Would you guys work together and report back
on being able to just integrate the system to where they can
access that information without having to pick up the phone and
whatever other manual steps that would need to be taken, and
just access that information as part of their process as long,
again, as it meets the security requirements and, you know,
they can't change the information. I mean, you would know what
you would need to feel comfortable in doing that.
But would you guys work together and tell us if you can do
it. And if you can't do it, please give us a good reason why
you can't. That right there is several days.
Does that seem like a reasonable thing to do and does it
seem like something that you could easily attainable between
the two agencies?
General Worley. I would say so.
Mr. Arrington. I am talking to Mr. Hebert.
Mr. Hebert. Mr. Chairman, yes, absolutely.
Mr. Arrington. It is hard to see my eyes from--
Mr. Hebert. Sure. No problem.
General Worley [continued]. And it is not that there isn't
any of that right now. As you mentioned, the first thing a
claims examiner does is go into the DPRIS system, the Defense
Personnel Information System; and then the VISN, the system by
which we access, the VATER, the DoD system.
But the question is the quality of that data, and then are
there other accesses or things that might be able to expedite
the process.
Mr. Arrington. Okay. Fair point.
Okay. Any questions, anybody else on the Committee? Miss
Rice, do you have any other further questions or comments?
Well, I want to thank the panelists today for coming, and I
appreciate your time and your thoughtful responses to our
questions.
I now ask unanimous consent that all Members have 5
legislative days to revise and extend their remarks and include
extraneous material. Without objection, so ordered.
This hearing is now adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 3:17 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Prepared Statement of Robert M. Worley II
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member O'Rourke, and other
distinguished members of the Subcommittee. I am pleased to be here
today, along with Mr. Lloyd Thrower, Office of Information & Technology
(OI&T) Acting Information Technology Account Manager, Benefits
Portfolio, and VA Debt Management Center Director, Robbie Lowe to
discuss the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) education benefit
programs and our ongoing efforts to ensure education benefits are
administered appropriately and accurately. My testimony will highlight
the status of our implementation of the eight recommendations in the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) report entitled, ``POST-9/11 GI
Bill: Additional Actions Needed to Help Reduce Overpayments and
Increase Collections'' (GAO-16-42). I will also discuss a recent VA
Education Service internal quality review audit, as well as the
resources provided to VA Education Service to improve GI Bill
processing times and outcomes for student Veterans.

Overview

VA's education programs provide education and training benefits to
eligible Servicemembers, Veterans, dependents, and survivors. These
programs are designed to assist Veterans in readjusting to civilian
life, help the Armed Forces both recruit and retain members, and
enhance the Nation's economic competitiveness through the development
of a more highly-educated and productive workforce.

GAO Report

An October 2015 GAO report, ``POST-9/11 GI Bill: Additional Actions
Needed to Help Reduce Overpayments and Increase Collections,'' examined
the extent of Post-9/11 GI Bill overpayments, how effectively VA has
addressed their causes, and the effectiveness of VA's collection
efforts. GAO identified that VA made $416 million in Post-9/11 GI Bill
overpayments in fiscal year 2014. GAO found that most overpayments were
collected quickly, but as of November 2014 (when VA provided data to
GAO), VA was still collecting $152 million in overpayments from fiscal
year 2014, and an additional $110 million from prior years, primarily
owed by Veterans with the remainder owed by schools. The report
includes eight recommendations to improve the administration of the
Post-9/11 GI Bill, reduce the occurrence of overpayments, and increase
debt collections. VA agrees with these recommendations, and has been
working to implement them.

The status of VA's implementation of each recommendation is
provided below.

Recommendation 1: This recommendation calls for VA to improve
program management by expanding monitoring of available information on
overpayment debts and collections. This could include regularly
tracking the number and amount of overpayments created and the
effectiveness of collection efforts.

VA Status: The Veterans Benefits Administration (VBA) worked in
collaboration with VA's Debt Management Center (DMC) and GAO to update
its procedures to track and report overpayments. VBA conducted an
initial analysis on the top 100 student debts, finding approximately 80
percent are related to transfer of entitlement (TOE) issues. To address
these issues, VA created a TOE Fact Sheet for use by the Department of
Defense (DoD). Additionally, VA established procedures for semi-annual
reporting by DMC for both student and school debt data, which VBA will
continue to analyze to identify trends, root causes and mitigation
strategies. VA considers this recommendation fully implemented and is
awaiting closure from GAO.

Recommendation 2: This recommendation calls for VA to address
overpayments resulting from enrollment changes by providing guidance to
educate student Veterans about their benefits and consequences of
changing their enrollment.

VA Status: VBA is taking action to modify the initial and
subsequent award letters issued to students. The modifications would
include: (1) attaching Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) to all award
letters to provide more detailed information on education benefits and
the consequences of changes in enrollment; (2) adding information in
the Choosing the Right School guide; and (3) adding information in the
Accessing Higher Education track of the Transition Assistance Program.
Implementation of this functionality will be addressed in the
reengineering of Education Service solutions currently in progress.

Recommendation 3: The recommendation calls for VA to address
overpayments resulting from enrollment changes by providing guidance to
schools about the benefits of using a dual certification process where
schools wait to certify the actual tuition and fee amounts until after
the school's deadline for adding and dropping classes.

VA Status: VBA has been encouraging schools to use the dual
certification process for several years through direct communication
with schools and through School Certifying Official (SCO) training
conferences. In addition to these efforts, guidance to SCOs about the
benefits of using the dual certification process was presented during a
webinar on June 30, 2016, and guidance was included in the SCO Handbook
update on February 15, 2017. In addition, an official letter from VBA
on dual enrollments was mailed to schools on March 24, 2017. VA
considers the recommendation related to dual certification fully
implemented and has requested closure.

Recommendation 4: This recommendation involves addressing
overpayments resulting from enrollment changes by identifying and
implementing a cost-effective way to allow Post-9/11 GI Bill
beneficiaries to verify their enrollment status each month, and require
monthly reporting.

VA Status: The functionality for monthly certification of
attendance for Post-9/11 GI Bill beneficiaries is similar to the
current practice under the Montgomery GI Bill. This solution will allow
claimants to certify their attendance before releasing a subsequent
monthly housing allowance. Currently, VBA's systems release monthly
housing payments without verification of attendance. Implementation of
this functionality will be addressed in the reengineering of Education
Service solutions currently in progress.

Recommendation 5: This recommendation calls for VBA to improve its
efforts to notify Veterans and schools about overpayment debts by
identifying and implementing other methods of notifying Veterans and
schools about debts to supplement the agency's mailed notices (e.g., e-
mail, eBenefits).

VA Status: VBA has developed business requirements to add
functionality for providing notification to schools via electronic
means. Implementation of this functionality will be addressed in the
reengineering of Education Service solutions currently in progress.

Recommendation 6: This recommendation calls for VA to improve
efforts to notify Veterans and schools about overpayment debts by
including in debt letters information on both the cause of the debt and
how to repay it.

VA Status: DMC has completed modification of their debt letters to
schools to include school term dates. VBA has modified Long Term
Solution (LTS) letters to include both the cause of the debt and how to
repay the debt. Implementation of this functionality will be addressed
in the reengineering of Education Service solutions currently in
progress.

Recommendation 7: This recommendation calls for VA to revise its
policy for calculating overpayments to increase collections by
prorating tuition overpayments when Veterans reduce their enrollment
during the term based on the actual date of the enrollment change
rather than paying additional benefits through the end of the month
during which the reduction occurred.

VA Status: The ``end of month rule'' which requires the payment of
benefits through the end of the month during which a reduction in
enrollment occurred is codified in VA regulations (38 CFR

21.9635(d)). VBA has developed proposed revisions to the existing
regulations which are currently under review.

Recommendation 8: This recommendation calls for VA to ensure it is
recovering the full amount of tuition and fee payments if a school does
not charge a Veteran for any tuition or fees after dropping a class or
withdrawing from school.

VA Status: VBA implemented initial procedural actions to account
for school refund policies. However, modifications to LTS are required
to fully address this issue. Implementation of this functionality will
be addressed in the reengineering of Education Service solutions
currently in progress.

Internal Quality Review Audit

VBA Education Service identified a need to improve the overall
quality and internal controls of the Post-9/11 GI Bill program due to
trends identified with some equitable relief and administrative error
cases. Education Service requested an audit from VBA's Office of
Internal Controls (OIC) regarding the eligibility percentage levels for
Post-9/11 GI Bill beneficiaries. The key area of concern found by OIC
related to the fact that certain active duty service is subject to
exclusion when establishing Post-9/11 GI Bill benefit eligibility and
not considered qualifying service.
OIC reviewed a sample of over 78,000 cases since inception of the
Post-9/11 GI Bill in August of 2009. Of those, approximately 14,000
cases were referred to Education Service to review for proper
accounting of initial active duty training and service dates. Education
Service was able to resolve approximately 3,000 cases without further
information from DoD. To complete this review, VA initially contacted
DoD to verify the service information on the remaining 11,000 cases.
This verification requirement created a hardship on DoD due to the
volume of cases and the lack of DoD resources to answer requests.
To remedy this situation, Education Service informed the point of
contact for each DoD service component that VA would re-evaluate the
11,000 cases to confirm that VA would in fact need DoD's assistance. VA
then prioritized the cases based on claims with pending enrollment
certifications or if a decision could be made with the service
information currently available. Resources have been reallocated to
process the cases as expeditiously as possible, and all VA claims
processors have been retrained to ensure effective and efficient claim
development with DoD. As of May 25, 2017, approximately 1,000 claims
are still pending a decision.

Education Service Information Technology (IT) Resources

In June 2008, Congress passed the Post-9/11 Veterans Educational
Assistance Act, which established a new education benefit program under
chapter 33 of title 38 United States Code, otherwise known as the Post-
9/11 GI Bill. VA OI&T contracted with the Department of the Navy's
Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR) to develop a long-term
solution for education claims processing--an end-to-end claims
processing solution that utilizes rules-based, industry-standard
technologies for the delivery of education benefits. VA has deployed
six major releases for LTS, including several releases of functionality
to implement changes to the Post-9/11 GI Bill required by Public Law
(P.L.) 111-377 (Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Improvements
Act of 2010).
On September 24, 2012, VA successfully activated end-to-end
automation of supplemental claims for Post-9/11 GI Bill benefits, which
are paid to Veterans and schools. During calendar year 2017, an average
of over 5,200 claims per day were processed automatically without human
intervention. Approximately 85 percent of all Post-9/11 GI Bill
supplemental claims are either partially or fully automated.
Since transitioning to sustainment, there has been no significant
development for LTS or other supporting systems. However, VA has
deployed six minor releases to add small improvements, fix defects, and
install security enhancements to LTS.
Additional LTS functionality needed to further increase efficiency
and effectiveness in education claims processing includes: automated
certificates of eligibility for original claims; electronically
generated letters; expanded automation of supplemental claims; issuance
of advance payments; monthly certification of attendance; and improved
business analytics for reporting purposes.
VA is prioritizing replacement of legacy systems due to the
increased cost and risk of maintaining these systems. For example, the
Benefits Delivery Network (BDN) is the claims processing, payment,
tracking, and disposition system for education programs. It consists of
antiquated mainframe systems and is in need of replacement. Support and
maintenance are difficult or impossible to find for 70's-era systems
like BDN - warranties have expired, security best practices that are
common on newer systems cannot be used, integration with newer systems
is increasingly difficult to support, and the knowledge pool for
ongoing support and maintenance is becoming nonexistent as experts
retire. These and other risks involved in operating in this environment
have made the replacement of BDN a high priority for VA.
Additionally, there are a number of other legacy systems such as
the Web Enabled Approval Management System (WEAMS), VA-Online
Certification of Enrollment (VA-ONCE), Electronic Certification
Automated Processing (ECAP), and the Work Study Management System that
are in need of modernization and further automation.
VBA and OI&T continue to assess IT capabilities for Education
Service. Our goal, as always, is to improve our systems in order to
ensure that Servicemembers, Veterans, and their families have every
opportunity to attain personal and economic success.

Conclusion

Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement. We would be pleased to
answer questions from you or other members of the Subcommittee.

Prepared Statement of Mr. Lernes J. Hebert
Good afternoon, Chairman Arrington, Ranking Member O'Rourke, and
esteemed members of the Subcommittee. I am pleased to appear before you
today to discuss improvements to the quality and timeliness of GI Bill
processing for student Veterans.
The Department of Defense (DoD) takes our responsibility for
ensuring Veterans have access to their benefits very seriously.
Together with our partners from the Department of Veterans Affairs
(VA), we work hard to ensure that accurate information is available to
determine a Veteran's eligibility for education benefits. We recognize
that the road to becoming a Veteran is always through service in the
military. Accurate reporting of that service is vital to the
determination of eligibility for all post-service education benefits.
DoD has been providing data on member military service to the VA since
the enactment of the Montgomery GI Bill in 1985; during this time, a
strong and enduring relationship has developed.
For today's hearing, I will focus on the role that DoD plays in
providing data to the VA for the Post-9/11 GI Bill, and how our two
Departments continue to work together to ensure the successful
administration of this program. The strong relationship between DoD and
VA benefits Service members, Veterans, and their families.
Since 2003, the Department has been providing automated daily
updates of Service member and Veteran personnel data to the VA. From
the day someone enlists or is commissioned into the military, DoD sends
that person's electronic record to the VA, and we update this
information as it changes. Since the implementation of the Post-9/11 GI
Bill, whenever a Service member elects to transfer educational benefits
to a family member, we also include those family members in the VA and
DoD Information Repository. This provides the VA with daily updates to
approved Service member transfers of this benefit, and allows the VA to
administer the related payments.
To assist in resolving questions about a Service member's or
Veteran's record, direct lines of communication link the VA Regional
Processing Offices with each of the Service Components. This process
allows VA claims examiners to get quick updates or clarifications for a
Veteran's record of service.
DoD monitors the data reported to the VA to ensure a timely and
efficient process for determining eligibility for Post-9/11 GI Bill
benefits for members and their families. In keeping with this
responsibility, we are focusing on two areas for improvement. The first
area involves missing initial training end dates, which can be crucial
to Post-9/11 GI Bill benefit eligibility in some situations. In August
2009, we added a space on the Certificate of Release or Discharge from
Active Duty (the DD 214) to capture the initial training end dates;
this information is included in the data exchange from DoD to VA.
However, because this information was not captured before 2009,
individuals who entered or separated prior to that time may not have
the requisite data in their records. We have identified approximately
40,000 Regular Component Veterans with less than 24 months total
service time, whose records do not have an Initial Training End
Calendar Date. We are currently working to resolve the missing values,
with a goal of completing this effort by September 30, 2017. If a
Veteran from this population applies for benefits in the interim, we
will work with the VA to expedite resolution on a case-by-case basis.
Our second area of focus involves missing qualifying active service
segments for Reserve and Guard members. The elimination of the Reserve
Education Assistance Program resulted in the transfer of its
participants to the Post-9/11 GI Bill, presenting data challenges,
which we have subsequently addressed. However, the time lag in updating
data requirements resulted in incomplete information on periods of
qualifying active service for members of the Reserve and Guard
Components from September 11, 2001 to 2011. As a result, the VA claims
examiners must work with the their Service counterparts to develop most
Reserve and Guard benefit requests manually, to ensure all qualifying
periods are captured in determining the final Post-9/11 benefit amount.
This manual review creates a burden on the Services in order to report
Reserve and Guard eligibility to the VA, and also adds time for VA
Claims Examiners to administer the benefit. This affects all Service
Veterans and family members applying for their Post-9/11 GI Bill
benefits.
The Department of Defense is absolutely committed to taking care of
Veterans and ensuring the success of the Post-9/11 GI Bill. The Post-9/
11 GI Bill will have major impacts on military recruiting and
retention, and few areas are more important to us. To address the data
shortfall, my office and the Defense Manpower Data Center will meet
with each Reserve Component to develop a plan for significant process
improvement to resolve the missing active service data and address data
quality issues by the end of the year. Going forward, I will institute
a governance structure that includes the VA and other agencies. The
governing body will be responsible for improving the quality and
timeliness of GI Bill processing for student Veterans.
Mr. Chairman this concludes my statement. I thank you and the
members of this Subcommittee for your outstanding and continuing
support of our Service members, Veterans, survivors, and their
families.

[all]
