- ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY: THE FUTURE OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND BEYOND

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY:
THE FUTURE OF UNMANNED
AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS AND BEYOND

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MARCH 23, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-4
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

51-879 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                     Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           PAUL TONKO, New York
TOM KEAN, New Jersey
VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 23, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Presiding Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Written statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    16

Witnesses:

Dr. Jamey Jacob, Executive Director, Oklahoma Institute for
Research and Education; Williams Chair in Energy and Professor
of Aerospace Engineering, Oklahoma State University
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Dr. Parimal Kopardekar, Director, NASA Aeronautics Research
Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    26
Written Statement............................................    28

Ms. Lisa Ellman, Executive Director, Commercial Drone Alliance
Oral Statement...............................................    35
Written Statement............................................    37

Mr. Sean Casey, Chief Research and Development Engineer, AirWise
Solutions; Adjunct Professor, System Safety and Reliability
Analysis at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma State University
Institute of Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    68
Written Statement............................................    71

Discussion.......................................................    76

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Jamey Jacob, Executive Director, Oklahoma Institute for
Research and Education; Williams Chair in Energy and Professor
of Aerospace Engineering, Oklahoma State University............   110

Dr. Parimal Kopardekar, Director, NASA Aeronautics Research
Institute......................................................   116

Ms. Lisa Ellman, Executive Director, Commercial Drone Alliance...   119

Mr. Sean Casey, Chief Research and Development Engineer, AirWise
Solutions; Adjunct Professor, System Safety and Reliability
Analysis at Tinker Air Force Base, Oklahoma State University
Institute of Technology........................................   128

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives

Jeff Grove, Vice President, Global Policy, Cooperation, and
Communications, ASTM International.........................   132

Letter submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives

John Samuelsen, International President, Transport Workers
Union of America...........................................   137

ADVANCED AIR MOBILITY:
THE FUTURE OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT
SYSTEMS AND BEYOND

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brian Babin
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Advanced Air
Mobility: The Future of Unmanned Aircraft Systems and Beyond.''
I'd like to now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
I want to say thank you to all you folks for being here. We
appreciate the witnesses.
Today's hearing will examine research and development (R&D)
of advanced air mobility, also known as AAM, and unmanned
aircraft systems, also known as UAS, and commonly called
drones. The hearing will also provide an overview of how
advanced R&D can enable supply chain security and safe
integration of UAS into the National Airspace System. There are
two challenges for the deployment of next-generation autonomous
systems across the country, the need for more research and
development, and an improved regulatory framework. The Science
Committee has jurisdiction over Federal research and
development, so that will be the focus of our discussion today.
Additionally, the hearing will also serve as a legislative
hearing for the National Drone and Advanced Air Mobility
Initiative Act, a bill to improve research, development,
deployment, and manufacturing of UAS in the United States. As
the name suggests, UAS are complex systems made up not only the
aircraft, but also the supporting ground, air, and
communications infrastructure. Advanced air mobility, or AAM,
integrates new technologies to enable urban and inner city
movement of people in cargo delivery. It can be either manned
or unmanned. Commercial use of UAS and AAM have the potential
to carry out a wide range of missions across a broad range of
sectors including agriculture, weather monitoring, critical
infrastructure, transportation, public safety, and disaster
relief, which can greatly benefit our society.
UAS experimentation and testing at high schools and
universities might also lead to technology breakthroughs, as
well as inspire students to enter the STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) studies. However, due
to the delays in integrating UAS into the National Airspace
System, these technologies are unable to reach their maximum
potential. As a result, U.S. companies are going overseas to
conduct UAS R&D, which directly impacts our national security
and economic competitiveness. Our goal today is to better
understand the research underway to overcome these barriers and
how we can streamline UAS and AAM integration.
We cannot afford to delay much longer. The Chinese
Communist Party (CCP) has made it clear that it wants to
dominate the globe in key technology areas, and drones are
certainly one of them. One CCP-supported Chinese drone company
has a near monopoly of the drone market, providing 90 percent
of the drones used for public safety operations in the United
States. That means that our police, our first responders, and
even border agents are using hardware and software from a
company that is tied to the CCP, which should have everyone
here very concerned. Relying on these drones from China is
putting our privacy and our security at grave risk, and we're
also losing out on the economic benefits of having American
businesses compete in this rapidly growing industry. UAS also
hold great potential for assisting civil agencies. NASA,
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration) NOAA (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) use UAS to conduct
research, and Customs and Border Patrol use UAS to monitor the
border and track smugglers and cartels and those who have
crossed the border illegally.
In addition to the benefits, it is critical that we carry
out R&D to better understand how to mitigate the public safety
challenges posed by UAS. As the United States faces growing
competition from the CCP and other adversaries, it's never been
more important to maximize our Federal R&D resources. The
Federal Government has a long tradition of investing in
fundamental research and having the ability to understand,
control, and manufacture materials that will be essential to
our success in domestically producing these drones.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for taking the time to
participate in today's important hearing. Your expertise will
be invaluable as we continue to look at the future of unmanned
aircraft systems, advanced air mobility, and the
competitiveness of the United States.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Today's hearing will examine research and development of
advanced air mobility, also known as AAM, and unmanned aircraft
systems, also known as UAS and commonly called ``drones.'' The
hearing will also provide an overview of how advanced R&D can
enable supply chain security and safe integration of UAS into
the National Airspace System.
There are two challenges for the deployment of next-
generation autonomous systems across the country: the need for
more research and development, and an improved regulatory
framework.
The Science Committee has jurisdiction over federal
research and development, so that will be the focus of our
discussion today.
Additionally, the hearing will also serve as a legislative
hearing for the National Drone and Advance Air Mobility
Initiative Act, a bill to improve research, development,
deployment, and manufacturing of UAS in the United States.
As the name suggests, UAS are complex systems made up of
not only the aircraft, but also the supporting ground, air, and
communications infrastructure.
Advanced air mobility, or AAM, integrates new technologies
to enable urban and inter-city movement of people and cargo
delivery. It can be manned or unmanned.
Commercial use of UAS and AAM have the potential to carry
out a wide range of missions across a broad range of sectors,
including agriculture, weather monitoring, critical
infrastructure, transportation, public safety, and disaster
relief, which can greatly benefit our society.
UAS experimentation and testing at high schools and
universities might also lead to technology breakthroughs as
well as inspire students to enter STEM fields.
However, due to the delays in integrating UAS into the
National Airspace System, these technologies are unable to
reach their maximum potential. As a result, U.S. companies are
going overseas to conduct UAS R&D, which directly impacts our
national security and economic competitiveness.
Our goal today is to better understand the research
underway to overcome these barriers and how we can streamline
UAS and AAM integration.
We can't afford to delay much longer. The Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) has made it clear that it wants to dominate the
globe in key technology areas, and drones are certainly one of
them.
One CCP-supported Chinese drone company has a near-monopoly
of the drone market, providing 90 percent of the drones used
for public safety operations in the U.S.
That means that our police, first responders, and even
border agents are using hardware and software from a company
tied to the CCP, which should have everyone here concerned.
Relying on these drones from China is putting our privacy
and security at risk. And we're also losing out on the economic
benefits of having American businesses compete in this rapidly
growing industry.
UAS also hold great potential for assisting civil agencies.
NASA and NOAA use UAS to conduct research and Customs and
Border Patrol (CBP) use UAS to monitor the border and track
smugglers, cartels, and those who have crossed the border
illegally.
In addition to the benefits, it is critical that we carry
out R&D to better understand how to mitigate the public safety
challenges posed by UAS.
As the United States faces growing competition from the CCP
and other adversaries, it's never been more important to
maximize our federal R&D resources.
The federal government has a long tradition of investing in
fundamental research, and having the ability to understand,
control and manufacture materials will be essential to our
success in domestically producing drones.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for taking the time to
participate in today's important hearing. Your expertise will
be invaluable as we continue to look at the future of unmanned
aircraft systems, advanced air mobility, and the
competitiveness of the United States.
Thank you, I yield back.

Mr. Babin. Before I recognize Ranking Member Lofgren, I
want to yield just a minute more to myself to recognize some
very special folks in our audience. We have several individuals
from the 147th Attack Wing based out of Ellington Field Joint
Reserve Base, which is in my district the 36th-Texas. The
significance of their presence here in today's hearing is that
the main mission of the wing is the operation of their MQ-9
Reapers. In fact, one of the individuals here today Major Karl
McGarvey is a Reaper pilot. Others here--raise your hand,
Major. Yes, sir.
Others here include Chief Master Sergeant Brandt Spenrath,
wife--his--excuse me, his wife, Amy; Senior Master Sergeant
Jason Howard; and Technical Sergeant Stacy Sanchez all play
critical roles in the support and operation of the MQ-9
mission. I'm very, very proud of each of you and very honored
to have you up here in Washington and coming by my office and
visiting and sitting in on this hearing.
So with that, I'd now like to recognize Ranking Member
Lofgren for her opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, good morning. And I want to thank
Chairman Lucas for this hearing and also thank Chairman Babin
for filling in for Mr. Lucas today. And I'd like to thank our
expert witnesses for appearing before the Committee.
As I said in our Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee hearing
just a couple of weeks ago, aviation is critical to this
country's economy and global leadership. Aviation is also
undergoing a transformation. Today's hearing focuses on a few
transformative systems, uncrewed aircraft systems, also known
as UAS, or drones; and advanced air mobility, as the Chairman
has said, or AAM, and the role of Federal R&D in advancing the
use of these technologies.
In 2018 in the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration)
reauthorization, we directed R&D priorities to enable drone
operations and integration into the National Airspace System.
And reviews and reports conclude that progress has been
lagging. We need to understand why that is because significant
economic and societal benefits are at stake.
Now, both the UAS and AAM are projected to be multibillion
dollar markets, including manufacturing and services.
Unfortunately, the U.S. is not alone in recognizing the
potential of this sector and as some countries are actively
integrating drones into their airspace, and, as the Chairman
has said, others are dominating the drone manufacturing market.
Expanded drone operations and eventual AAM deployment can
improve wildland fire detections and response, a key issue for
California and the rest of the United States; deliver medical
personnel and supplies to rural areas in disaster zones. And
I'll point out that a large part of my district is underwater
as we speak here today. Expand our environmental monitoring,
conduct safer industrial inspections, and a lot more. Federal
R&D investments can and should address these applications.
That's why I'm so pleased to have Dr. Kopardekar--and
you'll help me if I'm mispronouncing your name--here today. He
is a wonderful public servant and NASA's expert in the
integration and management of next-gen air vehicles into the
National Airspace System. In fact, he is the inventor and
patent holder of the NASA UAS Traffic Manager System or UTM,
which makes it possible for small drones to safely conduct
complex operations in the National Airspace System, which NASA
developed and delivered to the FAA in 2020.
Now, of course, I want to also highlight that he's based at
NASA Ames Research Center, which is just a stone's throw away
from my district in California. Ames has been leading an
innovative effort that applies a UTM system to real-word
emergency response operations, and particularly the integration
of drones in wildland detection, and particularly, the
response, the mitigation, the detection of the same.
It's clear that the American public, businesses, and
workers stand much to gain from the utilization and innovation
of UAS and AAM tech and their safe integration into the
Airspace System. We need to understand and mitigate potential
risks associated with that. Today's hearing is an important
step in gaining that insight, and I look forward to hearing
from our witnesses what's needed to support the maturation and
operation of a safe, effective, and innovative civil and
commercial drone system, how research and development,
including counter-UAS technologies, can identify and help
mitigate potential risks.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning. I want to thank Chairman Lucas for holding
this hearing and also thank Chairman Babin for filling in for
Mr. Lucas today. And I would like to thank our expert witnesses
for appearing before the Committee today.
As I said in our Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee hearing
just a couple of weeks ago, aviation is critical to this
country's economy and global leadership. Aviation is also
undergoing a transformation. Today's hearing focuses on a few
transformative systems-Uncrewed Aircraft Systems, also known as
UAS or drones, and Advanced Air Mobility, or AAM-and the role
of Federal R&D in advancing their use. The 2018 FAA
Reauthorization directed R&D priorities to enable drone
operations and integration into the National Airspace System.
Reviews and reports conclude that progress is lagging. We need
to understand why, because significant economic and societal
benefits are at stake.
Both UAS and AAM are projected to be multi-billion-dollar
markets, including manufacturing and services. It is no
surprise that the U.S. is not alone in recognizing the
potential of this sector. Some countries are actively
integrating drones into their airspace, and others are
dominating the drone manufacturing market. Further, the
potential societal benefits are equally compelling. Expanded
drone operations, and eventual AAM deployment, can improve
wildland fire detection and response; deliver medical personnel
and supplies to rural areas and disaster zones; expand
environmental monitoring; conduct safer industrial inspections,
and so much more. Federal R&D investment can, and should,
address these applications.
That is why I am so pleased that we have Dr. Parimal
Kopardekar here today. He is a truly exemplary public servant
and NASA's expert in the integration and management of next-
generation air vehicles into our National Airspace System. In
fact, he is the inventor and patent-holder of the NASA UAS
Traffic Management System, or UTM, which makes it possible for
small drones to safely conduct complex operations in the
National Airspace System, and which NASA developed and
delivered to the FAA in 2020. Of course, I also want to
highlight that he is based at the NASA Ames Research Center,
just a stone's throw away from my district. Ames has also been
leading an innovative effort that applies the UTM system to
real-world emergency response operations, and particularly to
the integration of drones in wildland fire detection, response,
and mitigation, with government and industry partners at the
local, state, and federal levels.
It is clear the American public, businesses, and workers
stand much to gain from the innovation of UAS and AAM
technologies and their safe integration into the national
airspace system. It is also imperative that we understand and
mitigate the potential risks associated with their operations.
Today's hearing is an important step in gaining that
insight, and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on:
1) what is needed to support the maturation and operation of a
safe, effective, and innovative civil and commercial drone
ecosystem; 2) how federal R&D efforts on drones and AAM can be
applied to solve our country's key challenges; and, 3) how
research and development, including on counter-UAS
technologies, can identify and help mitigate potential risks,
including those related to safety, privacy, security,
emissions, and noise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.

Ms. Lofgren. And I'd like to thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I yield back, I'd like unanimous consent to put in
the record a letter from the Transport Workers Union of
America.
Mr. Babin. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Lofgren. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I am looking
forward to seeing how this technology can help mitigate
potential risks, including those related to safety, those
privacy issues, security issues, emissions, noise, and the
rest. And I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren, appreciate
it.
And also, I neglected to say but our Full Chairman is
unable to be here today. As you probably noticed, I'm not 6-
foot-6 like he is, big guy from Oklahoma. We miss him. He had a
funeral and family--of a family member. So keep--we'll keep him
in our prayers as well.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning, and thank you for being here today for this
important discussion about emerging air mobility technologies.
Advanced Air Mobility (AAM) and Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS) are going to be a significant area of focus for this
Committee this year because of the tremendous potential these
technologies hold.
Advanced Air Mobility is quite literally transforming how
we transport people and goods in underserved areas of the U.S.
For instance, Electric Vertical Take-Off and Landing
(eVTOL) vehicles can serve urban areas with limited spaces to
land aircraft. They can transport goods around town or serve
passengers on inter-city trips.
Electric Short Take-Off and Landing (eSTOL) can use short
runways to quickly launch and transport people and cargo
between areas not served by existing airports.
And Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS), often called drones, can
deliver packages, provide photos and videos for public safety,
monitor infrastructure, and increase crop yield in agriculture.
The demand for UAS is growing exponentially. In 2018, the
drone services market was worth less than $5 billion. But it's
predicted to grow to more than $63 billion by 2025. The market
for Advanced Air Mobility is expected to increase to $115
billion by 2035, creating more than 280,000 new jobs.
It is an economic imperative that we expand this industry
in the United States so we can benefit from future market
growth.
That's the idea behind the National Drone and Advance Air
Mobility Initiative Act, a bill I introduced last Congress and
plan to reintroduce.
This legislation will help advance these technologies by
establishing a National Drone and Advanced Air Mobility
Initiative to coordinate UAS activities.
In addition to authorizing R&D at a range of federal
agencies, it will authorize a network of research institutes to
coordinate cross-cutting R&D.
This bill will expand the workforce needed to build out the
UAS industry, as well as address risks to UAS supply chains.
Finally, it will establish a counter-UAS center of
excellence to support the work necessary to improve our
abilities to respond to threats from adversaries using UAS.
Today's hearing will help guide the development of our
legislation and I look forward to working with Ranking Member
Lofgren on that process.
We have already seen great strides in R&D for UAS and AAM
in my home state of Oklahoma. Oklahoma is ranked first in State
readiness for drone commerce for a number of reasons.
Dr. Jamey Jacob--one of our witnesses today--leads a team
at Oklahoma State University, the University of Oklahoma, and
the University of Tulsa that is driving innovative research to
advance next-generation UAS and AAM technologies.
Tribal Nations are leveraging their unique assets to
advance research for safe and responsible drone operations. And
Oklahoma is partnering with neighboring states to position the
region as a hub for AAM.
But there is still more critical R&D that must be done for
the United States to lead in next-generation drones and AAM
technologies.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony on how we can
best support that R&D.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for taking the time to
participate in today's important hearing. Your expertise will
be invaluable as we continue to look at the future of unmanned
aircraft systems, advanced air mobility, and the
competitiveness of the United States.

Mr. Babin. So let me introduce our witnesses. Our first
witness today is Dr. Jamey Jacob, who serves as the Williams
Chair in Energy Technology and Professor of Aerospace
Engineering at Oklahoma State University (OSU). He is also the
Executive Director of the Oklahoma Aerospace Institute for
Research and Education, and the Director of the Unmanned
Systems Research Institute at OSU. He also serves as the Vice
Chair of the Oklahoma Governor's Council on Aerospace and
Autonomous Systems, and previously served as a member of the
Governor's UAS Council. Thank you for being here.
And our next witness is also, as Ms. Lofgren mentioned, Dr.
Parimal Kopardekar. Is that right? Kopardekar. OK. I think he's
better known as Dr. P.K., the Director of NASA Aeronautics
Research Institute and a Senior Leader of the NASA Aeronautics
Research Mission Directorate. He previously served as the NASA
Senior Technologist for Air Transportation Systems, and as the
Manager of NASA's Safe Autonomous Systems Operations Project.
Dr. P.K. also chairs the International Civil Aviation
Organization's Unmanned Aircraft System Advisory Group. Thank
you for being here.
Our next witness is Ms. Lisa Ellman, co-founder and
Executive Director of the Commercial Drone Alliance (CDA). She
is also a partner at the law firm of Hogan Lovells and serves
as the Chair of the firm's Uncrewed Aircraft Systems Practice.
Ms. Ellman also serves on the NASA Advisory Council Aeronautics
Committee, as well as the FAA Beyond Visual Line-of-Sight
Rulemaking Committee. She has held a variety of positions at
the White House, at the DOJ (Department of Justice), including
leading the DOJ's effort to develop policy to govern the use of
UAS in the United States. Thank you for being here.
And our final witness is Mr. Sean Casey, the Chief Research
and Development Engineer for AirWise Solutions. He is also an
Adjunct Professor for System Safety and Reliability Analysis
for the Oklahoma State University Institute for Technology at
Tinker Air Force Base. We have a couple of Oklahomans here, so
that's good. Mr. Casey has also served as a Principal
Investigator and Program Manager on several unclassified DOD
(Department of Defense), UAS, and AAM programs.
I want to thank you all for joining us today.
And so now, I would like to recognize Dr. Jacob for 5
minutes to present his testimony. Dr. Jacobs?

TESTIMONY OF DR. JAMEY JACOB, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
OKLAHOMA INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH AND EDUCATION;
WILLIAMS CHAIR IN ENERGY
AND PROFESSOR OF AEROSPACE ENGINEERING,
OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Jacob. Thank you very much. Chairman Babin and Ranking
Member Lofgren and distinguished Members of the Committee,
thank you for inviting me to testify today. It is an honor to
speak with you about the work we are doing within the State of
Oklahoma and across the U.S. to advance emerging technology in
the United States in advanced air mobility and safe integration
of the national airspace. I can only share with you a sample of
what we are doing today.
Since development of laboratories for autonomous and
remotely piloted aircraft in the 1990's were undergraduate
teaching tools, Oklahoma State University has been a leader in
aerial robotics. As part of our land grant mission, we have
fostered education, research, outreach, and application of
these systems into areas of public use, such as agriculture,
energy, environmental monitoring, and national defense, working
with national labs and industries alike. We have used this
technology to help spur interest in aerospace and other STEM
careers, particularly for K through 12 outreach;
underrepresented minorities, including urban areas and tribal
nations, leveraging programs within the Choctaw, Cherokee, and
Osage nations of Oklahoma; providing new opportunities for
these sovereign nations to use this technology to support their
tribal members and develop new entrepreneurial activities
within their borders and support their Federal customers.
Of critical national importance is OSU's Counter-UAS Center
of Excellence. Supporting the needs of both the Departments of
Defense and Homeland Security (DHS), the Counter-UAS Center of
Excellence works with private companies to evaluate threats of
drones by State and non-State actors using the systems as both
symmetric and asymmetric weapons, threatening U.S. warfighters
and the public, as well as evaluating systems to detect,
identify, and mitigate these threats.
In addition to developing the gold standards to evaluate
these defensive systems, the Counter-UAS Center of Excellence
is currently working with the U.S. Army to develop curriculum
training capabilities for the DOD Joint Counter-UAS University
to train soldiers in counter-UAS technology across all branches
of the military and help bridge the gap in knowledge.
Federal support has been the catalyst to enable this use-
inspired research. Government funding has been a powerful
driver in pushing technology from the laboratories to end user
adoption, crossing the valley of death that many innovations
never bridge. Support from programs such as the NASA University
Leadership Initiative, National Science Foundation National
Robotics Initiative, and projects with the FAA has allowed us
and other universities to push the boundaries in using UAS to
improve aviation weather observations and forecasting, which
will result in adoption of AAM solutions in urban settings and
greatly increase our capability to accurately forecast weather
in disasters such as wildfires, floods, tornadoes, hurricanes,
saving lives and property.
As an example of this, through EDA (Economic Development
Administration) funding and cooperation with private and tribal
partners, we have launched the launchpad AAM Center of
Excellence flight range within the Osage Nation and Tulsa
Innovation Laboratories to develop novel programs to support
small business innovation and provide unique flight testing
solutions, helping to bridge this divide.
Facilities such as the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma test
site, as part of the FAA BEYOND programs, are critical to U.S.
capabilities. Further development and funding to these sites
and other facilities that allow testing of this technology to
evaluate use cases and performance is much needed to provide
crucial safety data for the FAA, such as advancing beyond
visual line-of-sight drone operations in routine cargo
deliveries of critical supplies for first responders, disaster
response, medical emergencies in impoverished regions.
I believe we're in a new golden age of aviation. With the
introduction of new technology--in this case, autonomy and
electrification--that will have a tremendous impact on the U.S.
and how individuals use aerial transportation for travel and
commerce. This era that we are in the process of birthing will
have an even wider reach than the two that went before.
We believe the future of advanced aviation is bright, and
that the quality of life for all Americans can be enhanced by
advancing and exploiting this emerging technology. Research
conducted at land grant and other universities through public-
private partnerships play a critical role in this potential
prosperity, but we need the Federal Government's support to
ensure that these technologies flourish and provide the
benefits to all Americans that we know are possible.
Thank you again for my--inviting me to share my opinions. I
will be happy to answer any questions that you have. I
appreciate the support the Committee has provided for U.S.
research activities throughout its work. And I'd like to wish
Chairman Babin a happy birthday.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Jacob follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Dr. Jacob. I appreciate
that. Thank you for being here, too.
I now recognize Dr. P.K. for 5 minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. PARIMAL KOPARDEKAR,
DIRECTOR, NASA AERONAUTICS RESEARCH INSTITUTE

Dr. Kopardekar. Thank you, Chairman Dr. Babin, and happy
birthday, Ranking Member Lofgren, and distinguished Members of
the Committee. I want to thank you for the opportunity to speak
to you about the future of unmanned aircraft systems, UAS, and
advanced air mobility, AAM. My name is Parimal Kopardekar. I am
the Director of NASA Aeronautics Research Institute, and I am
located at the agency's Ames Research Center in the Silicon
Valley.
A major global aviation transformation is beginning, and we
must innovate in aviation, while maintaining its safety
tradition. NASA is collaborating with government agencies,
academia, and industry to develop UAS and AAM technologies that
will provide many societal benefits. Small UAS are now being
used for applications such as agriculture and infrastructure
inspection, cargo delivery, and emergency responses.
Transformative aircraft design is enabling advanced air
mobility, a market likely to reach $150 billion annually with
280,000 domestic jobs by 2035.
NASA invests in aeronautics research to address the most
critical, pressing challenges by developing and transferring
key technologies to the FAA and industry. In the past, NASA has
transitioned several U.S.-related technologies. We developed
unmanned aircraft system traffic management, referred to as
UTM. NASA had 85 industrial partners, including many startups
that are now market leaders. The UTM will safely enable high-
scale operations of smaller drones in low-altitude airspace.
For advanced air mobility, in collaboration with FAA and
industry, we are researching topics such as airspace
integration, aircraft noise, safety, and community acceptance.
Over the next several years, we will conduct demonstrations
called national campaigns to examine how the entire AAM system
will work. NASA is leveraging the Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) program to advance UAS and AAM. The agency has
given multiple grants through University Leadership
Initiative--one of them is him--Minority University Research
and Education program to build the next-generation workforce.
NASA is working with Department of Defense's Agility Prime
to analyze AAM supply chain needs, gaps, and opportunities to
grow the U.S. domestic manufacturing sector. In short, NASA
aeronautics has committed significant resources to ensure that
UAS and AAM concepts and technologies will mature, scale, and
be safely operationalized. U.S. leadership in this sector
cannot be taken for granted, as other countries are closely
following our progress and seeking to surpass us.
The AAM Leadership and Coordination Act, which was enacted
last year, will further strengthen our collaboration with FAA
and the other agencies. Additionally, NASA is an active member
of the Department of Transportation's recently formed Advanced
Air Mobility Interagency Working Group consisting of 19 Federal
agencies.
As you are aware, there has been a surge in large wildfires
across many States, including California. Top five fires of
2021 cost over $1.7 billion, and each lasted for more than 1
month. NASA is researching how UAS and AAM capabilities can be
applied to the challenge of wildland fire. We've successfully
demonstrated initial capabilities with the United States Forest
Service and CalFire. NASA plans to develop a portable UTM
system to enable 24-hour aerial separation by remotely operated
UAS. As an agency, we will work together with other government
agencies to develop a joint concept of operations to advance
the state-of-the-art.
Thank you again for allowing me to address this Committee.
I would also like to thank this Committee for its continued
support of NASA aeronautics research, and I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kopardekar follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. Thank you, Dr. P.K., appreciate that.
Now, I'd like to recognize Ms. Ellman for 5 minutes to
present her testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. LISA ELLMAN,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, COMMERCIAL DRONE ALLIANCE

Ms. Ellman. Thank you. Chairman Babin, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you
for the opportunity to share my thoughts with you at this
important hearing on how we can safely integrate advanced
aviation technologies into the National Airspace System for the
benefit of all Americans.
My name is Lisa Ellman, and I am the Executive Director of
the Commercial Drone Alliance and Chair of the Global Uncrewed
Aircraft Systems Practice at Hogan Lovells law firm.
The CDA is an independent nonprofit organization made up of
leading entrepreneurs and innovators in the industry. We work
closely with the Federal Government to enable safe, secure, and
timely drone integration. I am honored to provide remarks to
inform your consideration of how the United States can enhance
our role as a global leader in advanced aviation, including
through research and development.
The commercial drone industry is delivering significant
lifesaving societal and economic benefits for all Americans. As
just a few examples, drones are fighting wildfires, responding
to disasters, including recent train derailments, and enhancing
public safety. Drones are enhancing worker safety as well. In
2020, there were 54 accidents, resulting in 13 deaths in the
aerial agricultural industry, including in many States
represented by this Committee. Use of drones for these
operations can prevent such fatalities.
Drones are democratizing aviation by opening the industry
to a broader workforce, creating jobs and boosting our economy.
Drones are promoting infrastructure resilience, providing early
detection of oil and gas leaks, and inspecting our Nation's
railways, bridges, and electrical grid. Drones are expanding
access to medicines and critical supplies, including for
vulnerable populations. Drones are enhancing sustainability and
reducing carbon emissions associated with traditional
transportation methods. Advancing this industry will ensure
America's global competitiveness, our national security, and
our leadership in global aviation.
But these benefits cannot yet be truly realized here in the
United States because regulatory paralysis has limited the
integration of UAS into the national airspace. Congress led the
way in 2012 by mandating UAS integration. In the decades, since
that mandate remains unfulfilled as drones are often subject to
application of incongruous regulations designed for crewed
aircraft.
Despite the best efforts of many, the FAA continues to view
UAS integration as, in its own words, a long road ahead and a
significant challenge. Meanwhile, America is falling behind
other countries, both allies and competitors. In order to
survive, many U.S. companies have had to pursue opportunities
in international markets. This trend will only accelerate so
long as the U.S. Government fails to integrate UAS here at
home.
Bold and decisive congressional leadership is necessary
once again to spur progress. Research and development has a
critical role to play here. But research and development has
been exceedingly difficult for U.S. companies under the current
regulatory framework. To illustrate, consider that a U.S.
company designing an uncrewed aircraft that weighs 55 pounds or
more must currently wait years to begin conducting R&D under--
on its own property due to lengthy approval processes. While
innovative programs like BEYOND and Test Sites try to offer
alternative pathways, these programs are also often plagued by
lengthy regulatory approval processing times.
Congress can fix these challenges. The CDA commends the co-
sponsors of the National Drone and Advanced Air Mobility
Initiative Act for your commitment to accelerate the deployment
of these beneficial technologies. There is much good in the
bill. In line with the spirit and intent of the legislation, we
have several ideas to improve it. I will highlight just a few
of them here.
First, we urge Congress to focus on leveraging existing
resources, such as ASSURE (Alliance for System Safety of UAS
through Research Excellence), the BEYOND program, and UAS Test
Sites, and enable these programs to actually function as they
were meant to, as proving grounds for innovation.
Second, R&D priorities should focus on validating future
UAS capabilities in complex airspace.
Third, Congress should take additional measures to support
the growth of UAS and AAM manufacturing capabilities in the
United States.
And finally, Congress should support the integration of
counter-drone technologies into complex civil environments,
including around busy airports and at mass gathering events.
The absence of a viable UAS regulatory framework continues
to be the most significant barrier to integration, and a robust
R&D program will only succeed if accompanied by a reasonable
regulatory environment.
The CDA appreciates the opportunity to appear before you.
We look forward to continuing to collaborate with you to ensure
America's global leadership in advanced aviation. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ellman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Ms. Ellman.
I'd like to now recognize Mr. Casey for 5 minutes to offer
his--present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. SEAN CASEY, CHIEF RESEARCH
AND DEVELOPMENT ENGINEER, AIRWISE SOLUTIONS;
ADJUNCT PROFESSOR, SYSTEM SAFETY
AND RELIABILITY ANALYSIS AT TINKER AIR FORCE BASE,
OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Casey. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Casey. Honorable Chairman Babin, Honorable Committee
Ranking Member Lofgren, and esteemed Members of the U.S. House
Science, Space, and Technology Committee, without any undue
exaggeration, this is a Sputnik moment. The Chinese high
altitude balloon or HAB, or uncrewed high-altitude system, UHS,
this term chosen purposefully as this is actually a drone by
definition and capability set, or UHS incursions directly over
U.S. continental home space this late January to early February
2023 are historically only rivaled in audacity or encroachment
by the USSR Soviet Sputnik programs of 1957 and beyond. The
wake of such early cold war events and Sputnik air technology
being flown directly over continental U.S. airspace in 1957 led
to an exasperated U.S. public, which in turn led to the
establishment of the Select Committee on Astronautics and Space
Exploration in 1958, which today is this very Committee, the
U.S. Science, Space, and Technology Committee I'm honored to
speak before.
It is important that we are no longer in a cold war to
establish the most elite forms of the best technology in the
world against the USSR, but rather a cool war to establish the
most scalable forms of good-to-great technology against the
People's Republic of China and the ever-domineering Chinese
Communist Party. The CCP has a published Beijing policy such as
the Shashoujian Policy or Strategy, which is also known as
Assassin's Mace or Death by a Million Cuts. This seeks to use
an array of affordable ballistic missiles, cyber attacks, and
commercially produced or copied aerial UAS or AAM technologies
to overwhelm U.S. air superiority by a basis of cost-to-defeat
scenarios.
Much like forcing the United States to spend millions of
dollars to scramble multiple F-22 fifth-gen fighters, deployed
U-2 Lady Bird high-altitude reconnaissance planes, and deploy
additional E-3 Sentry AWACS (airborne warning and control
system) and supporting RC-135 reconnaissance aircraft, then to
further spend potentially several million more in ground-based
radar support and advanced real-time satellite imagery to
ultimately fire a $399,000 ballistic missile, the Aim-9X, to
pop a UHS or balloon.
Today, I testify representing AirWise Solutions, a midscale
UAS startup. AirWise Solutions, Incorporated, is uniquely a
U.S.-based uncrewed aerial system hardware and software
manufacturer with academia backgrounds that exist in the
jurisdictions of Oklahoma, tribal nation, and HUBZone
(Historically Under-utilized Business Zone) allocated lands. We
believe that American small business fully encapsulate the
actual need for U.S. manufacturing development and the
entrepreneurial spirit of the proposed bill. It is
unquestionable this bill will be transformative for the U.S.-
based UAS manufacturing industrial base, and as such, we are
honored to offer our congressional testimony and support for
the concept of the National Drone Advanced Air Mobility
Initiative Act.
I previously had the privilege of serving in Department of
Defense counter-UAS capacities as an active participant in a
multiyear, tri-service advanced autonomous platform activity
when the original concerns of covered foreign nation data
security breaches in turn triggered the sanctions of section
848 of the NDAA (National Defense Authorization Act) for Fiscal
Year 2020. Since January 2021, I have served as the Chief
Research and Development Engineer for the largest Oklahoma
origin U.S. manufacturer. Now on the opposite side of counter-
UAS development in the world of U.S.-based UAS development, I
have the firsthand knowledge of the incredible strain U.S.
industry has gone through to meet NDAA section 848 compliance
and/or Defense Innovation Unit (DIU) Blue List or Blue UAS
compliance.
With the passage of the original NDAA section 848 sanctions
over an estimated 80 percent of the commercial U.S. market in
the United States with DJI, again, a single China origin vendor
accounting for 76.1 percent of the market, was no longer
immediately available for supporting Federal acquisition of
UAS.
The effects of NDAA section 848 were largely twofold. The
United States Government no longer maintained a strong
industrial base to rapidly acquire even basic small UAS, and
thus, a critical supply chain issue exists. And B, U.S.
industrial--U.S. industry largely did not compete with covert
foreign nations, namely the People's Republic of China for
small UAS technology development, and was or is largely
unprepared to match United States Government more advanced
technology needs.
Moreover, with the critical technology and developments in
the ongoing Ukraine invasion, we have seen the emergence of the
small UAS technology becoming a force multiplier, with a
critical supply chain that few analysts could have predicted in
the 21st century battlefield. It is important to note the same
small UAS technology emerging in the recent military events is
the same technology that is really driving a profound
renaissance in our industry. From multispectral cameras in
agriculture, to methane detection in oil and natural gas
safety, to photogrammetry technology in survey grade
construction for infrastructure, to ozone detection and
environmental protection and even last-mile delivery for
medical devices or equipment. To direct science and technology
applications ranging from collecting medical--excuse me, whale
snot or marine data via UAS, monitoring global greenhouse gases
via UAS, and even to flying into active category 4 hurricanes
for atmospheric monitoring data via UAS.
However, currently the NDAA section 848 has actually kind
of put the United States Government in a position where we only
have 15 approved platforms you, as the government, can actually
purchase.
The U.S. UAS industry has a strong history of hobbyists,
tinkerers and garage shops, but ultimately, it's going to be up
to this Committee to accelerate them into a commercial
industry. It's going to be up to this actual bill and this
actual industry involvement this Committee is focused on to
actually catch up globally and further be a U.S. technology
global leader, as is the American way.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Casey follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. Yes, sir, thank you very much.
I'd like--I thank all the witnesses for your testimony, and
we're looking forward to hearing some of your expertise for our
questions.
So the Chair would like to recognize himself for 5 minutes,
and I'll start with Dr. P.K.
Your testimony indicates that NASA is working with
Department of Defense's Agility Prime to analyze AAM supply
chain needs, gaps, and opportunities for the U.S. manufacturing
sector to grow. Can you elaborate on what this entails? As
we've heard from multiple sources, UAS supply chains are
particularly vulnerable to foreign exploitation as a result of
offshoring, design, manufacturing, and R&D.
Dr. Kopardekar. Chairman, very important question for U.S.
competitiveness and domestic jobs in manufacturing. If you look
at the conventional aerospace and defense, there are about 50
percent jobs that are in supply chain and over 50 percent
revenue comes from supply chain, so it's really critical that
we maintain that competency in the United States.
As a result, DOD and NASA, we started a joint working group
as the industry related to advanced air mobility we're just
kicking off. The idea of this working group is to educate the
advanced air mobility new entrants about the need for setting
up supply chains early on, as well as building awareness for
small and medium sized enterprises about the opportunities that
advanced air mobility is going to bring for manufacturing. So
the goal is to try to promote the gaps that exist today and say
that here are the opportunities for small and medium
enterprises to launch businesses related to manufacturing and
supply chain in the aerospace and defense world, particularly
advanced air mobility.
And we continue to do this work in collaboration with the
DOD's Agility Prime. We share with everyone our lessons learn
from the previous experiences, in what happened with the
drones, as well as commercial aerospace and defense and
importance of building a resilient supply chain. So ultimately,
we would like to understand all the needs, identify the gaps
and opportunities so that our domestic manufacturing sector can
continue to grow.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. I've got one more for you,
Dr. P.K., and if I've got time I'm going to go to Ms. Ellman.
As I mentioned, Dr. P.K., at the beginning of this hearing,
I have a unique interest in MQ-9 Reaper operations within our
National Airspace System. In 2018, as part of the UAS-NAS
research project, NASA flew an unmanned aircraft in the NAS
without a chase plane. What is preventing the integration of
our Nation's remotely piloted aircraft into the NAS, whether
for civil or military application? No, this is for Dr.----
Dr. Kopardekar. For me, OK. Yes.
Mr. Babin. Sorry.
Dr. Kopardekar. Thank you again, Chairman, for this very
insightful question, by the way, that NASA uses RQ-4 planes
already for monitoring the launches and collect data in real
time for the health and status monitoring of the launch
systems. In terms of the MQ-9, I'm really delighted to see the
MQ-9 team was here. Those--the MQ-9--some MQ-9s that we
collaborated with have detect and avoid systems, and once you
have detect and avoid, then you don't need the chase. But if
you don't have detect and avoid on board or on the ground base
detect and avoid to maintain the safety of the overall
operation, then you would need a chase core.
Now, NASA done--NASA has done fundamental research on the
detect and avoid technologies to set the minimum operating
performance standards, and that technology has resulted into a
standard so--which we are very happy about.
We--yes, we definitely plan to continue the research, to
streamline the process, and work with FAA and others to ensure
that we have detected our technologies for these emerging
autonomous aircraft operations.
Mr. Babin. OK, thank you very much. Ms. Ellman, your
testimony describes a lengthy, burdensome, and bureaucratic
process for conducting UAS R&D, and you conclude by stating
that U.S.--a U.S. company must wait years to even begin
conducting R&D activities, notwithstanding the fact that the
vast majority of these operations occur over private property
at low altitudes and in low risk rural environments. The FLIGHT
R&D Act, the last piece of legislation this Committee produced
in preparation for the last FAA reauthorization, would have
granted exceptions for conducting R&D below 400 feet in Class G
airspace, 5 miles away from airports and on a noninterference
basis with crewed aircraft.
Unfortunately, this provision was dropped in the final FAA
reauthorization. While exemptions for recreational UAS use
exists, conducting UAS R&D would not qualify because it is
conducted for purposes beyond, quote, ``personal enjoyment.''
So how can Congress refine this provision to accelerate
domestic UAS R&D and preserve American competitiveness as an
attractive location to conduct UAS R&D?
Ms. Ellman. Well, thank you, Chairman, for this very
important question. And thank you for your leadership on this
very important topic. As I did note in our testimony, it is a
very burdensome process for a company to be able to do R&D here
in the United States, including at their own private property.
And this has become a big, large impediment for U.S. companies
looking to refine and develop technology here in the United
States. This is particularly true if you're operating outside
the part 107 framework, so essentially, companies developing
vehicles 55 pounds and heavier.
So I think, you know, we would be--it's clear that the
status quo is broken. I know that there are other efforts out
there like test sites and the BEYOND program that are trying to
provide some paths forward, but even they have some lengthy
approval processes. And, you know, from our perspective, we--
you know, Congress can fix this issue. I think there are a
number of ways that are possible to do it. We'd be happy to
work with you on your proposal. Refining the airspace in which
your proposal would enable R&D activity is one potential way of
doing it, for example, limiting this activity to test sites or
the BEYOND program, for example.
But another idea is to look directly at these approval
processes and simply right-size them for--and not actually
require a rulemaking every time a company wants to be able to
do research and development here in the United States, which
is, you know, a lengthy, burdensome process that does, you
know--most of it--much of it does not actually relate to safety
in any way. So we would be very happy to work with you on that
particular legislation, and thank you for your leadership on
this important topic.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. My time has expired, so I
now recognize Ms. Lofgren for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I want to return to the issue of wildfires in California.
Right now, large parts of the State are underwater because of
the floods. And because of that, when the floods go away, we're
going to have an explosion of vegetation that will pose a fire
risk, so we'll have both the floods and fires this year.
I've been intrigued by NASA Ames' efforts to try and bring
technology to the area of fighting wildfires. Now, I understand
that most of these technologies or a lot of them have been
developed at Ames. Could you expand on the portable UTM system
you mentioned? What does it entail? How would it be deployed?
What would it do?
Dr. Kopardekar. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Congresswoman, for asking this very important question. Just--I
just checked today. There are 10 large fires going on in this
country across three States, so the fires are happening
everywhere. And large fire, by the way, is defined as 300 acres
or more. In 2021 alone, the top five fires costed over $1.7
billion, and each lasted for more than 1 month. And the men and
women fighting these fires do an incredible job, but we can
give them better tools.
And if you look at how the current aerial suppression
efforts occur, there is an air boss that is flying in an
aircraft watching outside the window for the helicopters and
fixed-wing aircraft that are flying underneath that are
dropping water and retardant. As a result, it's all eyeballed
traffic management, so when the smokestacks show up, all the
visibility goes down, they stop the operations. So effectively,
they fight fires through aerial means about 6 to 8 hours a day.
You can imagine if we continue the firefighting to 24 hours a
day how much impact we can generate and how quickly we can
extinguish these fires.
So the goal of using drones and drone traffic management or
UAS and UAS traffic management UTM is to create a second shift
environment where you can continue the operations under low
visibility conditions by remotely operating these drones
outfitted with water and retardant capabilities and managed by
UTM in a box that is basically ensuring that the trajectories
are deconflicted with each other and they're monitoring the
trajectories for safe operations. And you can continue to fight
these operations 24 hours. So that's sort of the idea of using
advantages of UAS and UTM technologies.
Additionally, the electric vertical takeoff landing
vehicles who can go and dispatch basically logistics equipment
the night before when the firefighters go on the job in the
morning, so we have opportunities to use these automated
technologies to drop, dispatch equipment, logistics support, to
basically reduce the burden that they had to carry with all the
equipment. So a lot of opportunities exist.
Also, one last example I'll offer you is the large drone
with--high altitude long endurance drone can be outfitted with
communication support equipment, while the communications are
not available when the--while firefighting is happening. So
really exciting opportunities. And I think we are--NASA is
taking charge of collaborating with industry, as well as other
government agencies to increase the--improve the state-of-the-
art.
Ms. Lofgren. Now these plans would require heavier drones
than we're currently having. The FAA has been identified as a
barrier. Are there other barriers that we need to address to
get to what you've just described? Because this is critical for
the State of California as well as other States.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, this is very important capability and
definitely going to change the game. Fortunately, wildland
firefighting and aerial suppression happens during Temporary
Flight Restrictions (TFRs), so the barriers are less to be able
to try automated systems and automated technology because no
one else flies in that airspace. So I think we get good FAA
support. We have been collaborating with FAA on this concept.
Ms. Lofgren. Have they approved that yet?
Dr. Kopardekar. We are collaborating. Right now, it's still
in the basically conceptual and development phase.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I thank you very much. You're right. Our
firefighters do a tremendous job, but we really need to allow
them to have this force multiplier for their sake, as well as
the public. So thank you very much, Doctor.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. And now I'd like to
introduce the Representative of Florida's Space Coast, Mr.
Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Chairman Babin.
Dr. Kopardekar, given your testimony and experience,
besides our GPS (Global Positioning System) system, what ever--
what other navigation options is NASA looking at for unmanned
aircraft systems and advanced air mobility?
Dr. Kopardekar. It's a very important question, and I
really appreciate the support that we have and collaboration
with Kennedy Space Center team. We have a number of options for
alternatives to--it's called APNT, Alternative Positioning,
Navigation and Timing technologies of GPS, so to speak. One of
them is using low altitude, basically the satellite consortium,
then using geo satellite consortium, as well as fiber optics-
related technologies. And another one that is currently being
tested at a couple of NASA centers is using ground-based
satellites or ground-based beacons to triangulate the
positions, so not depending on the satellite-based GPS, but the
ground-based system. So we have a number of opportunities, and
we are using SBIR, as well as some collaborative research with
industry to figure out how will this be basically taken into
account, right, to mitigate the effects of GPS degradation.
We are also working with the FAA to understand what the
requirements would be for advanced air mobility. This is also a
critical component because if you want to operate in a
multiport in an urban airspace, you would need similar
technologies to ensure foolproof navigation.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Ms. Ellman, you mentioned when talking about unmanned
spacecraft systems or aircraft systems, that American
leadership is at risk. Would you care to elaborate a little
bit?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. And thank you so much,
Representative, for the question. It's an important one.
You know, here--around the world, we've realized the
benefits of this technology. And here in the United States, the
technology has moved quickly ahead while the policies have
somewhat lagged behind. And around the world--you know, so
companies have really struggled to be able to scale here in the
United States, and that's because regulators and policymakers
who are lots of really great people working across the Federal
Government, including at the FAA, trying to fit a square peg
into a round hole, which doesn't fit, not surprisingly. They're
trying to regulate UAS using incongruence regulations designed
for crewed aircraft, and it's simply not working. And so we
need broad regulations here in the United States in order to
really open this industry up and bring these amazing benefits
to the American people.
Around the world, other countries and nations,
jurisdictions, including, you know, Australia, the E.U.,
other--you know, many other countries around the world are
quickly moving forward. And frankly, many, many companies here
in the United States, U.S. companies are having to go abroad in
order to operate.
There is a national security imperative, there is an
economic imperative. We can bring so much money here to the
United States. But it's also a national security issue. If we
do not have this, you know, this industry cannot succeed here
at home. And of course, we've heard a lot about China has their
own plan focusing on the civil drone industry and becoming the
global leader. And we need that same national vision, that same
national plan here in the United States, and Congress can play
a critical role here.
Mr. Posey. What should we do next to accomplish that?
Ms. Ellman. Well, we have lots of ideas, and we'd be happy
to work with you. I think in the short term--I mean, obviously,
R&D is critical. That's what we're here to talk about. But that
said, you can't really unpair the R&D from the regulatory
because the regulatory enables R&D or in this, you know,
instance is getting in the way of R&D. So there does need to be
attention to the regulatory issues both to enable research and
development here in the United States, as well as broad
rulemakings, enabling expanded operations, enabling beyond
visual line-of-sight, moving the--you know, right now, the
approvals here in the U.S. are very limited. Generally, the--
first of all, if you want to fly beyond visual line-of-sight,
in order to, you know, bring these vast benefits to your
community, you have to actually go through a very lengthy
approval process, and the approval itself will likely be site-
specific, geographic-specific, and incredibly limited.
Mr. Posey. We're talking FAA here?
Ms. Ellman. Yes, we're talking FAA here, so----
Mr. Posey. I can't imagine FAA is dragging their feet and
holding up progress.
Ms. Ellman. There are a lot of great people at the FAA
trying to--trying really hard, but it simply hasn't worked thus
far. So, you know, we appreciate--we do think Congress needs to
lead here.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, my
time is about to expire. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
I'd now like to recognize the gentlewoman from North
Carolina, Ms. Ross.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And this
is such an important hearing. Thank you so much to the
panelists for being here to testify.
I'm proud to represent North Carolina's 2nd Congressional
District, and our State's Department of Transportation (NCDOT)
is one of eight lead participants in the FAA's BEYOND program.
The BEYOND program is a 4-year program following the former FAA
Integration Pilot Program (IPP) that aims to achieve
economically viable, scalable, and repeatable beyond visual
line-of-sight uncrewed aircraft system flight operations. I
said that all in one. NCDOT has conducted over 21,000 flight
operations, which exceeds the number of flights conducted in
total, under the FAA IPP program among all lead participants.
There has also been critical work done to enhance the
delivery of medical supplies, as well as install low altitude
weather radars across the State. The work of NCDOT, with its
BEYOND program, illustrates the great strides that are being
made in North Carolina to advanced UAS integration. But as
you've said, so much more can be done.
I know Ms. Ellman, you've been asked a lot of questions,
but I'm going to start with you and then I'll move on. It's my
understanding that the FAA has seven designated test sites
around the country to enable both private sector firms and
public entities to test complex drone operations and conduct
research and drone technology. How has the commercial drone
industry benefited from these test sites?
Ms. Ellman. Thank you, Representative, for that question.
And thank you for your support of the great work that is
happening in North Carolina. Many of our CDA members are
working with the North Carolina DOT. They've been a fantastic
partner. And it really kind of brings into focus one of the
real benefits of the BEYOND program is that it--we have been
able to, in a limited way, bring some of these benefits to
local communities. And of course, North Carolina is one--was
one area.
The test sites as well have been critical partners for the
FAA and critical partners for the commercial drone industry.
That said, their effectiveness has been limited. They're trying
to do a lot. They've gathered a decade's worth of data. It's
unclear at this point kind of where all that data has gone
since we haven't seen the rulemakings that we were hoping for.
But they've also been limited by some of the--you know, the
FAA's kind of interpretation, for example, of public aircraft
operations. For the last several years, companies were able to
work hand-in-hand with test sites to do research and
development. And then over the last year or two, we've been
essentially told by the FAA that, no, you can't--that, you
know, they've changed their interpretation or in any case that
they have this reading of the law that prevents test sites or
any public entity, including public universities or other
public agencies, to collaborate with private industry under the
aeronautical research prong of research and development that's
traditionally regulated.
Ms. Ross. OK. I want to move on actually on that issue to
Dr. Jacob.
And, Dr. Jacob, could you talk a little bit about
universities' use of these test sites and the collaboration
that Ms. Ellman was discussing?
Dr. Jacob. Yes, of course. And thank you, Congresswoman
Ross, for that question. Again, I'd like to reiterate that
North Carolina has been doing really great work and has been a
fantastic example of what you can accomplish with the BEYOND
program. These--access to the BEYOND program capabilities has
been very transformational for university research in that we
can work with these local test sites to be able to push the
limits of what we're developing in the laboratory. So this has
been very impactful for what we've been able to do. But like
Ms. Ellman said, there are limitations in terms of the approval
process in getting access to the airspace to really push the
limits of aviation technology.
If you think about traditionally what we would do with a
manned aircraft, for example, that process is not dissimilar to
what you would have with an uncrewed aerial vehicle, but you'd
have to jump through extra hoops to be able to get that robotic
aircraft in the air and tested even at the test sites. And in
particular, since the test sites tend to be self-funded, they
have to, you know, primarily resource assets and access to
personnel through other nontraditional means.
Ms. Ross. And could you just briefly elaborate on the
disincentives for collaboration that Ms. Ellman discussed?
Dr. Jacob. Well, we still have to go through the same
processes in terms of getting flight approvals. There's just
extra access at the FAA level to be able to provide expertise
to help assist the BEYOND program members in achieving those
permissions.
Ms. Ross. OK, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. And I'd like to recognize the
gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Tenney.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you so much, Chairman Lucas and Acting
Chair Dr. Babin, and happy birthday, and also to Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this hearing. And thank you for all the
witnesses for your time and your expertise on this really
important issue.
And increasingly, these unmanned aerial systems are used by
our law enforcement, border patrol, and military to carry out
our critical homeland and national security operations. As
every American knows, we currently have a crisis at the
southern border, and UAS technologies can be a critical
resource for the Border Patrol agents in addressing the crisis.
This also plays a pivotal role in keeping our service members
out of harm's way. Thank you to the gentlemen who were here
earlier for serving our Nation so honorably.
But while UAS are used in a number of amazing ways, they're
also being leveraged by criminals and our adversaries. And I'm
honored to represent New York's 24th Congressional District,
which includes a large section of our northern border in
upstate New York, and if anyone's ever been there, the
spectacularly beautiful area north of Clayton all the way to
Lockport, including all the Finger Lakes.
And I just recently spent an entire day with the Customs
and Border agents from the Buffalo border sector, which borders
onto the Swanton sector, which is where we're seeing this
massive increase in immigrants. And they were describing to me
how these drug runners are using UAS drones to enhance their
drug trafficking efforts at the U.S.-Canadian border.
Additionally, our Nation watched as the Chinese flew a UAS
sky balloon over our country for a week before President Biden
finally decided to act on taking down the spy craft. So as
such, we need to make further investments in this counter UAS
technology and to help counteract this malign use of these UAS
technologies, particularly when you see the interaction with
the border agents. But with proper investment, we can help our
law enforcement, military, border agents in doing some of the
great things that you guys are all researching and talking
about.
But I want to first ask, Mr. Jacob, in your testimony, and
your role as Director of County--Counter UAS Center of
Excellence at Oklahoma State University in great Oklahoma
State. But as you may be aware, the current Secretary of
Homeland Security must individually authorize each border
sector to perform Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems (CUAS)
operations. This is a major issue in the Buffalo border sector
where it took 3 weeks for Secretary Mayorkas to authorize this
CUAS operation. Do you believe that these counter UAS systems
should be used by the Customs and Border Patrol across the
border, including the southern border I might add as they're
being used now or hopefully to be used soon?
Dr. Jacob. Well, I do think that this technology will
provide a great asset for border protection and monitoring. As
you mentioned, Congresswoman Tenney, this is a serious problem
not only for incursions across the border, but potentially use
of commercial UAS to transport illicit materials such as drugs
across the border.
One of the problems that Federal agencies have is the
limited capability or access to assets, which are commonly
called, you know, blue UAS systems within the U.S. that have
been approved for not only manufacture but also vendors to
provide capabilities and purchasing for Federal agencies to
utilize these systems within the national airspace.
As was mentioned by Chairman Babin earlier, the predominant
manufacturer of UAS across the world are Chinese, which then
does limit our capability to use these systems within the
national borders.
Ms. Tenney. So you think we definitely--you support U.S.
investment--continued investment, and you don't think it's
sufficient?
Dr. Jacob. That--I would agree with that statement, yes.
Ms. Tenney. OK. Can you discuss maybe some of this--the
counter UAS systems for 21st century combat and military
readiness also, and whether--where we are in terms of
investment in that aspect--in that area?
Dr. Jacob. Yes, that's a great question, Congresswoman
Tenney. This is an area where 10 years ago, you know, the
United States essentially ruled the skies. And it was only
through, you know, the advent of commercial systems, which are
readily purchasable by non-State actors such as ISIS (Islamic
State of Iraq and Syria) and allow these systems to be used
against U.S. personnel overseas that we realized that we were
falling behind, primarily in terms of being able to develop
systems that will not only detect and identify these, but
determine a way to defeat them.
This goes back to, you know, some of the concerns we raised
earlier in providing access to test sites, which not only
requires FAA approval, but also approval from other Federal
agencies, such as the FCC (Federal Communications Commission)
for spectrum management.
Ms. Tenney. I want to reclaim my time just 1 second.
Dr. Jacob. Oh, please go ahead.
Ms. Tenney. I want to ask Ms. Ellman. In your testimony,
you said that 70 to 80 percent of the unmanned aerial systems
market is controlled by nine U.S. companies. Can you just tell
us briefly, if Mr. Chairman will allow a couple extra seconds,
how we can increase manufacturing, especially as China uses
these UAS systems for malicious purposes?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thanks for that question. In real--
on the counter UAS challenges, I just want to mention for a
minute because there are lots of legal challenges, it is a
national security imperative that we enable our counter UAS
companies to test and do research and development here in the
United States. The Peters legislation, the Safeguardingthe
Homeland from the Threats posed by Unmanned Aircraft Systems
Act, from last year, hopefully we'll see again this year, but
that would actually create a pilot program to enable States,
localities, and private sector entities to actually do R&D.
Right now, as you noted, it's been limited to just a few
Federal agencies with very, very lengthy approval times even
within those Federal agencies to get approval to use the
technology.
On manufacturing, we absolutely agree it's very important
to bolster the domestic manufacturing industrial base here in
the United States. We think the best way to do that is by
opening up the regulations to allow this activity. Right now,
it's very difficult for U.S. companies to succeed. But there
are other direct and indirect funding ways to bolster the
industrial base, and we'd be happy to work with you on that.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. I appreciate all the witnesses. My
time has expired. But I just want to say we've been trying to
do this. My former colleague, John Katko, and I up in Syracuse
area, we've been trying to develop this region. It's been--
we're ideal location in upstate New York. So thank you so much
to all of you. And unfortunately, my time has expired, but
really appreciate your insights. Thank you.
Ms. Ellman. And NUAIR (Northeast UAS Airspace Integration
Research Alliance, Inc.) in Syracuse are doing great work on
all that.
Ms. Tenney. Yes, absolutely. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you all.
I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms.
Salinas.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and happy birthday to
you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you to our panelists. It's been a great
conversation today.
So, Ms. Ellman, in Oregon and across the West, so teeing
off of my colleague from California's questions, the threats
from wildfires are increasing every year as climate change
leads to drier and hotter weather patterns and more natural
disasters. And in Oregon, fire season lasts longer each year
and the cost of property damage, firefighting, disaster relief
have skyrocketed as fires have become more severe. And in your
testimony you referenced--and, again, we've talked a little bit
about this. You've referenced the potential benefits of UAS to
assist firefighting efforts in States like Oregon. Can you dig
in a little bit more on what are the key research areas we need
to focus on to improve effectiveness and actually accelerate
the deployment of UAS technologies in disaster relief
situations like wildfires?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you, Representative, for that
very important question.
Obviously, disaster relief, firefighting is a critical use
case for UAS, including in Oregon and in other States. And I
want to praise NASA and P.K. and all of the work that is being
done on that topic. There is certainly more that can be done.
From our perspective, additional research and development
is necessary in order to enable complex UAS operations,
including, you know, in congested airspace. When there are
wildfires, there could be helicopters as well in the future,
AAM vehicles, essentially others in the airspace, and we need
to be able to make sure that vehicles are all talking to each
other, avoiding each other. You need to be able to fly over
people. You need to be able to fly with heavy vehicles that can
carry water and other materials. You need to be able to, you
know, what we would describe as expanded operations. And
obviously, in a wildfire situation where there's a TFR in
place, that's one thing.
There's also the benefit of using drones for preventing
wildfires in the first place. And while there are processes in
place, once that wildfire has started, there is a lot more that
can be done on the front end to enable this technology to be
used to prevent these wildfires in the first place. So I'd be
happy to work with you and your office on that.
Ms. Salinas. I would love that. Thank you.
Dr. Kopardekar, thank you so much. You also mentioned wild
firefighting in your testimony and you stressed the importance
of interagency collaboration to ensure high standards of safety
as UAS technology is deployed. So how can this Committee and
what which should we be thinking about to facilitate improved
interagency coordination to allow that faster development and
deployment of UAS technological--technology in critical
lifesaving areas such as disaster relief?
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes. Thank you for very insightful
question, Congresswoman. And this is really important that all
the government agencies work together to develop interagency
concept of operations and technology roadmap to assist the
changes in the firefighting technologies. We are working with
the U.S. Forest Service, National Guard, working with
Department of Defense, FAA, FEMA (Federal Emergency Management
Agency), Department of Interior, and many other government
agencies, CalFire and Colorado fire and--to you understand
really what would it take to change the paradigm of current
wildland firefighting and modernize the firefighting efforts,
as you pointed out, leveraging the UAS and advanced air
mobility type of vehicles and continue the firefighting through
aerial means for 24 hours a day so you--they don't have to stop
based on just visual conditions. So there is a lot that is
ongoing, and we are very excited with the collaboration that we
have with many government agencies to bring forward this mutual
concept of operations.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And then just a quick follow up,
how should Federal research agencies work alongside our first
responders to actually gather data and learn lessons from what
we are seeing now? And it sounds like changing the paradigm
really is, you know, a bigger endeavor, but from these limited
test cases, which might then use to develop strong safety
standards for the broader use of UAS across American airspace.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, so National Interagency Fire Center
that basically currently does many of these coordination
efforts, does a really good job of bringing out the data and
statistics online. In fact, the statistics that I quoted about
the 10 large fires that are ongoing right now in three States
comes from that website. So there is a really ongoing effort
already preestablished. There is interagency working groups for
a number of activities, including aviation and the safety of
the operations. And we would like to continue to do that to
build the next technology front.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you very much. And I'd now
like to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Webster.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Webster. Appreciate it. Happy birthday to you, too.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Mr. Webster. So I have a question and just a general
question to anybody that's there who want to hear about it is
do we have the space for being able to overlay and a growing
unmanned air vehicle system overtop what's already there? I
mean, I have--know there's a regular highway system that we
have. That's roads and bridges and all that. Then there's a
shipping lane highway system. And there's also an in-air
highway system for air traffic. So my general question is are
we going to run out of space?
Dr. Kopardekar. This is a very good--that's a very good and
important question. At NASA we have four transformational
priorities. One is ultraefficient aircraft. Another one is high
speed regime for flight. Third is the future of airspace, and
this is exactly what it relates to. And the fourth is advanced
air mobility. In the future of airspace, we are working on
something called Sky for All. The Sky for All vision is about
accommodating many, many different types of airspace users. As
you can imagine, in 2045 how the airspace may look like, as you
pointed out, shuttle launchers or rocket launchers, small
drones, advanced air mobility, current manned aircraft,
helicopters, general aviation, many types of vehicles. So we
are looking at this.
Inside that Sky for All vision, we want to build a new
architecture, work collaboratively with FAA and industry and
figure out what would be the right architecture that will allow
the scale, diversity, and density that is required to operate
in the future state. So we are going to do research on what
technologies are needed, what automation is necessary, what
were the roles, responsibilities of people and machines, and
how do you maintain all the safety of operations at that scale?
So it's a really important question. It's very much important--
needed for U.S. competitiveness and economic growth.
Mr. Webster. A follow up, I--this just a general question.
Who would--whoever's guiding that--and I'm sure there'll be
someone or some thing or some people or some group or whatever,
who do they talk to in an unmanned craft? I mean, who--what
would you--who would you, hey, change course or whatever? I
don't know. Give me an example.
Ms. Ellman. Sure. Well, at least to date, right, UAS
operations are out--they're not actually uncrewed. They're
remotely piloted, so there is a pilot for the operation.
They're simply not on the aircraft. So it looks a little
different. But to your point, right, it's obviously critical
that we maintain the safety and also the efficiency of the
airspace. That's what the Federal Government is asked to do.
And that's where this unmanned or uncrewed traffic management
UTM system comes--becomes really important for the future and
needs to be implemented. But when you think about where these
UAS are flying compared to traditional aircraft, this is low
altitude airspace where generally commercial crewed aircraft
aren't or shouldn't be flying.
Mr. Webster. OK. My time is going to run out here shortly.
I just thank you all for coming. It's a very informative and
very interesting subject and look forward to the future. I
yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. And now I'd like to recognize the
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Sorensen.
Mr. Sorensen. I would like to wish Mr. Babin a happy
birthday, thank him and Ranking Member Lofgren for convening
this hearing and our witnesses today for their willingness to
appear.
At our Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics hearing--space
a few weeks ago, we heard about the FAA's R&D on drones. I'm
excited that, today, we can all learn more about NASA's R&D
work in this area, as well as critical issues for commercial
industry. So I'd like to ask about the coordination between
NASA and the FAA to make sure that we're focused on safety and
reliability of the network.
Dr. Kopardekar, you've been a leader at NASA on the
development of the UAS traffic management or UTM system. What
does it actually mean for NASA to have handed off the UTM to
the FAA? What has the FAA done with this since then? And I
guess a finer point is how are we ensuring safety to those on
the ground and also lower altitude general aviation?
Dr. Kopardekar. Thank you, Congressman. That's--this is a
very insightful question about safety and tech transition
process between NASA and FAA. So unmanned aircraft system,
basically, the focus is on enabling large scale drone
operations at low altitude, below 400 feet roughly, about 55
pound and below type of vehicles. We have been working with FAA
right from the beginning. We developed initial concept to
operations, and then we had engaging dialog about how would
that work. And FAA also has published the concept of
operations, several actually editions, two editions on the UTM
concept of operations. So that's the first indicator that there
is a willingness to take the technology and the concept.
So it starts with the concept. So we have a mechanism
called research transition team that collaborate--that
basically solidifies the collaboration between NASA and FAA.
Through the research transition team, we develop a joint
management plan and we have clear deliverables that go from
NASA to FAA. FAA is involved every step of the way. So a couple
of examples of what it means to be transitioning technology or
ideas or concepts from NASA to FAA first is the concept of
operations that FAA accepted and put that as their own, which
is really remarkable collaboration example.
Second is the FAA's Low Altitude Authorization and
Notification Capability, LAANC, which is really the first step
toward UTM. So the concepts that we build in UTM--UTM is
basically a collection of services to support the drone
operations. So one of the services is this LAANC, that is
digital, basically, airspace description that allows operators
to get access to that airspace. So FAA has included that. They
have already adopted the construct that we created called USS,
which is unmanned aircraft systems service suppliers. This is
the service using the service-oriented architecture and third
party basically offering these services, so FAA has already
adopted that. So in the concepts and technology in the roadmap,
USS, and a third-party services providing these services as a
critical piece.
Fundamentally, in summary, UTM will provide strategic
deconfliction. It will provide basically digital means of
collaboration across a number of entities, including general
aviation and any other users that want to have access to that
information can be accessed. And then third-party services will
offer services like flight planning, tracking, communication,
weather data, and such. So all of those concepts and constructs
have been adopted widely by FAA, as well as industry. And I'm
also glad to say that it's been adopted by ICH (International
Council for Harmonisation), which is an international body for
harmonization across the globe.
Mr. Sorensen. In my career as a broadcast meteorologist, I
was the person that was out there chasing the tornado. We were
the ones that were putting up a drone into the air because we
knew that if we could show people at home the threat live on
the air that they could make a good decision. But things have
since changed in the past few years where now we have to have
so many people on board to have the line-of-sight, to have the
pilot, and it has become prohibitive for us--or for those
people in broadcasting to do their jobs effectively. How do we
change that?
Dr. Kopardekar. Do you want to answer? OK. I'll go after
you.
Ms. Ellman. Yes, I'm happy----
Mr. Sorensen. Sure. Thank you.
Ms. Ellman [continuing]. To take that, absolutely.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you.
Ms. Ellman. Well, no, absolutely. News gathering, you know,
use cases, there's so many, so many benefits here. And the
reality is, like you said, in order to be able to take
advantage of the many benefits of commercial drones, we need to
be able to fly beyond visual line-of-sight. Imagine if a crewed
aircraft wasn't allowed to leave the airport. That's
essentially what's happening right now with the UAS, and it's
simply not scalable, and it's not possible to have a business
here in the United States under the--you know, the current
rules.
So we've been working over the last several years--you
mentioned I chaired--or I worked as a leader of a working group
on the Beyond Visual Aviation Rulemaking Committee, that we
provided a report to the FAA last year. And we're looking for a
broad rulemaking to actually broadly enable this activity so
that you don't have to go through a lengthy burdensome case-by-
case approval process anymore. That will really, truly help us
scale here in the United States.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you so much for that. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. And the gentlewoman from
Oklahoma, Mrs. Bice?
Mrs. Bice. Well, thank you. First, let me say happy
birthday to Dr. Babin. It's great to be with you here
celebrating.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Mrs. Bice. Second, thank you to our witnesses for being
here and a particular personal point of privilege to Dr. Jacob
and Mr. Casey for their attendance. As an Oklahoma State
graduate and having two children there myself, I'm particularly
excited to see you all here.
My question has to do with how we're comparing to other
countries. In your opinion, how does the United States compare
to other nations on current progress in advanced manufacturing
of UAS? And who would you say are our main competitors in this
space? And this is open to any of the witnesses?
Dr. Jacob. Yes, I'll start with that. And thank you for the
question, Congresswoman Bice, and as well as for your tuition
support to Oklahoma State University.
Mrs. Bice. You're welcome. Times two.
Dr. Jacob. We appreciate that.
Mrs. Bice. Times two.
Dr. Jacob. But, you know, there are areas where we
certainly excel in. We've primarily been focused on the
discussion today with UAS when we expand this and talk about
advanced air mobility, the larger platforms that are really
designed to carry people and larger supplies. You will see
that, you know, primarily through private investment and
venture capital. You know, the United States has many companies
that are really excelling in terms of the development of these
systems.
You know, that said, there are other companies obviously
across the world that are also, you know, trying to chase that
prize to be able to be the first one to really successfully
develop systems that can carry personnel cost effectively so
that we compete with other transportation methods.
If you look across the broad spectrum of not only just
manufacturing, but also research, I would say that the United
States is still at the forefront in terms of how we're using
the autonomous systems, developing the avionics, the
controllers, the flight algorithms, artificial intelligence
that goes into these systems into much broader applications.
I know the previous questions related to meteorology.
That's a great example of that where we have cross-
collaborations between Federal agencies such as NASA, FAA, NOAA
in order to be able to integrate things such as weather
observations from drones into weather forecasting, which is
going to be beneficial not only for severe weather, but also
things such as wildfires. So there are a number of areas where
we're certainly, I would say, still established at the lead.
Mrs. Bice. Any additional----
Ms. Ellman. Yes, sure, I'll just kind of add on there. I
mean, from my perspective and from the perspective of the
Commercial Drone Alliance, you look over the history of the
United States, and our--the first century of aviation was
dominated by the United States. We were clearly a leader from
Kitty Hawk to the Moon and beyond, right? The reality is that
the second century of aviation, which is characterized by
increasingly autonomous uncrewed aircraft, is at risk. And we
do--Congress needs to be a leader here, and we do need to take
steps, including to bolster our manufacturing capabilities. As
we've talked about, a lot of--you know, most of the small
drones flying here in the United States were made in China. So
to the extent that the United States wants to remain the global
leader, which it is clearly in our best interest to do so,
there are, you know, very specific steps that we can take and
we can take now in order to make that happen.
Mrs. Bice. Excellent. And last question, quickly here. What
is the role of research universities like Oklahoma State to
advance innovation in UAS and advanced air mobility?
Dr. Jacob. Well, you know, these really are the sandboxes.
And we think about, you know, one of the areas that the United
States remains the global leader, it is higher education.
People from all across the globe, you know, come to the United
States to get an education at a U.S. university. And the--one
of the unique aspects of, you know, U.S. research laboratories
is the ability to not only conduct research that's funded by
the Federal Government, but also research that's funded by
private companies. For example, half of our work in the
advanced air mobility in the U.S. sphere does not come from
Federal funding directly, but from private companies, helping
them get over that hump, develop that technology with--where
they do not necessarily have that subject matter expertise in-
house. So we're working with a number of companies that are
performing system development for other Federal projects such
as Agility Prime in order to be able to develop those systems
for everything to fight fires to be able to carry people. And
it's that research laboratory, that sandbox that really
provides a unique opportunity to be able to develop the systems
in the lab and immediately go out and take them to test sites,
you know, such as supported by the BEYOND program.
Mrs. Bice. Perfect. My time is about to expire, so I will
say, Go Pokes, and I'll yield back to Dr. Babin.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd like to recognize now the gentlewoman from Michigan,
Ms. Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to our
witnesses.
We--Ms. Ellman, we on this Committee, we talk a lot about
standards. We have oversight of the NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology), and I'm interested in your
perspectives on the standards needed here and work that has
been done to date, particularly as we integrate here. So I was
wondering if you could chime in on standards for us.
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you, Representative Stevens.
Great to be here with you. My home State is Michigan, born and
raised, so great to be here with you. And I appreciate that
question.
And we agree standards are critical. Industry consensus
standards should really kind of drive how the UAS industry is
able to function and scale. And our members are working very
closely with standards by--within the context of existing
standards, bodies like ASTM International. There's been a lot
of great work that has been done by industry. I think one of
the challenges has been that we don't have clarity on the
rulemakings on the regulatory side, and so it's very difficult
to--you know, then the rulemaking comes out later, and then you
have to go back and kind of change up the standards. So the
more information that we can get from the FAA, working closely
with them on the rulemakings I think would be helpful. But
certainly, there's a lot of great work that's being done on the
standards side with ASTM International, as well as other
standards bodies, and we would encourage Congress to really
leverage those.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. And, P.K., I can see you're jumping at
the bit here. And, you know, if you want to chime in on
standards, but it's always the thing, we're balancing, right,
standards and R&D. And it's interesting because when we think
unmanned, you know, all right, no one's flying the drone,
right? No one is actually flying it. But is there ever a
component where someone may be riding, you know, do we get to
that? We've seen that obviously with commercial aircraft, well,
you know, pilots and this and that, but we don't need to get
into that. But I'd love to hear from you on cross-interagency
standards as it relates to--I was going to ask you about R&D as
well and, you know, thank you for the amazing testimony and how
you're working across interagency.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, so a couple of areas we are working
really well. In fact, I was here over the last couple of days
for interagency working group at OSTP (Office of Science and
Technology Policy) and Department of Transportation just kicked
off to coordinate all activities as per the Advanced Air
Mobility Leadership and Coordination Act. So all the 19 Federal
agencies are coming together to make sure that we understand
and respond to the growing needs of advanced air mobility. So
this is really a good testament of collaboration as one
government trying to respond to what's needed. And that's one
of the lessons we learned from drones, that I think it really
helps to have one government, all of us to--working together
right from the innovation, technology, security, safety aspects
considered simultaneously.
Ms. Stevens. Do you think standards would help R&D?
Dr. Kopardekar. In some cases, standards help R&D. In other
cases, it's too early for standard, or sometimes you need just
cooperative guidelines. So some of the examples of standards,
particularly for--would be the detect and avoid technology. If
you want to have detect and avoid, everybody needs to follow
the same standards so that there is a cooperative nature in the
airspace management. So detect and avoid will require a
standard as an example, its capability that's onboard.
Ms. Stevens. Well, and this is where, you know, Ms. Ellman,
we can continue to draw on your coalition and your alliance,
and thank you for your leadership. It's great to see Michigan
launch into such an exciting place.
And, Dr. Jacob, I love that you got EDA funding, right? And
I actually wanted to specifically ask you about the pocket of
EDA funding you got. Was that out of the Office of Innovation
and Entrepreneurship? And how was your process in pursuing that
funding? Are you going for other rounds? Do you see this--in--
I've been to EDA conferences or EDA Align--I've been to one EDA
Align conference in Oklahoma in another life. But I was pleased
to see that you mentioned that because in part, this Committee
works with EDA and has a dotted line to it. And I certainly
want to ask you about the cross-interagency collaboration, but
very specifically about your experience of working with the
Economic Development Administration, as much as you have
purview into the dollars that you are receiving from that
agency.
Dr. Jacob. Sure. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman
Stevens. And, you know, the EDA opportunity has been very
unique, has been part of the Build Back Better programs.
Ms. Stevens. OK, great.
Dr. Jacob. So we're still just in the initial stages of
that. But that is a great example of a public-private
partnership where we have private funders that are providing
part of the--your required cost share from Tulsa Innovation
Laboratories, working with sovereign nations, in this case, the
Osage Nation, and then Oklahoma State University, as well as
other partners across the Tulsa region in order to be able to--
--
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Jacob [continuing]. Make this.
Ms. Stevens. And I am out of time, but we want to applaud
you for how you're working with Indian Country and certainly
keep up with your success on the Build Back Better. We had a
hearing on that right at the end of the last term. So thank you
so much, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Dr. Jacob. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman
from North Carolina, Mrs. Foushee.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and happy birthday.
Mr. Babin. Thank you so much.
Mrs. Foushee. And thank you to our witnesses for appearing
before this Committee today. I certainly appreciate this
productive conversation with you about unmanned aviation sector
and the potential considerations as we do deliberate possible
legislation in this Committee and in the months ahead.
Just last month, I visited Vance-Granville Community
College. They have an aviation program in my congressional
district, which is North Carolina's 4th. That program
specializes in training commercial drone pilots and preparing
students to become FAA part 107-certified. And recently, they
were selected for the FAA's Unmanned Aircraft Systems
Collegiate Training Initiative Program. The 4th Congressional
District is also home to Carolina Drone Lab, which I will talk
a little bit more about in my questioning.
So my first question is for Ms. Ellman and Dr. P.K., if you
can respond also. UNC (University of North Carolina) Chapel
Hills, Carolina Drone lab has partnered with two organizations
Vets to Drones and One Tree Planted to create the Veterans in
the Forest program, a partnership to train veterans and provide
on-the-job experience in drone-based forest monitoring
technology. Can you speak a little bit about the importance of
developing UAS rather training programs and the opportunities
for workforce development with the civil science agencies under
this Committee's jurisdiction?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you, Representative, for that
very important question. It's a very special one for me. My
husband is actually a disabled veteran. And I know that finding
a rewarding career is one of the challenges service members
face when transitioning out of the military. So, you know, from
our perspective, absolutely the UAS industry is democratizing
aviation and opening this industry up, opening doors to a
diverse and new generation of Americans that are incredibly
excited for this new--to use their skill sets, you know, for
the benefit of--so many of the societal benefits that we've
talked about today, including--and as NCDOT and others are
supporting your State, whether forest monitoring or other use
cases.
So we are, you know, very, very supportive of efforts to
promote workforce training programs. You know, I would mention
the Drone Infrastructure Inspection Grant (DIIG) Act, which was
passed by the House last year, and a bipartisan bill that
would--one of the sections of the Act would fund a workforce
development program for community colleges and universities who
are training workers in drone technology. So thank you for
that. You know, so we would urge more support for that bill
this year. Hopefully, it will get through, and we're here to
help. We appreciate the question.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. And, Dr. P.K., can you also share
if NASA is involved in any such effort?
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, thank you. This is a really important
question. And this really--the importance of this question is
to make sure that we ensure that our workforce is ready when
the drones and advanced air mobility industry is going to take
off. So at NASA, we have a number of initiatives. The first one
is Minority University Research and Education program. Through
that, we have given six grants already for building advanced
air mobility-related supply chain, workforce, curriculum, and
internships for students.
There's another program called University Leadership
Initiative that we provide grants for faculty members who focus
on some interesting technical challenge and problems. So one of
them is the weather-related research. Another one is building
this concept of operations at different communities for
advanced air mobility.
And third, a very exciting program is NASA Community of
Aerospace Scholars, which is focused on community colleges. So
we work with community colleges for building the trade and
technical competency of students. On top of that, we have a
very strong internship program. Anybody who's interested in
internships intern.NASA.gov, please ask them to apply. We
really take pride in getting good interns in--at all NASA
centers.
And personally, I have a steady stream of interns every
semester. This semester, we are focusing on wildland fire
application, so I really enjoy working with interns and getting
to know them and mentor them.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, that is my time, but I would like to add
three additional questions for the witnesses into the record.
Mr. Babin. So ordered. Thank you.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. OK. The gentlewoman--or, excuse me, the
gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member.
I'm happy to hear today about NASA's involvement in the
future of American advanced air mobility. As we're all aware,
Chinese companies such as DJI make up overwhelmingly majority
of the global unmanned aircraft system market, including for
American law enforcement and consumers. This is even after the
Department of Defense prohibited DJI products for national
security concerns. Clearly--and clearly, we need to restore
American leadership in this sector, and fast, lightning fast.
My first question is really for any of the witnesses who
would like to take it. As China continues to aggressively
pursue made-in 25 policy to achieve dominance in critical
industries, such as aerospace, what are some of the short-term
and long-term actions the United States should take to promote
American leadership in this space?
Mr. Casey. Thank you, Congressman. I think really one of
the primary things we can do is actually support manufacturers
like my business and actually getting DIU Blue certification.
Specifically what the S&T Committee can do of a high priority
is establish their own equivalent within the scientific and
technology community where we can actually offload vetting from
the DIU, which is actually a group of approximately 5 to 10 PMs
that all the drones in the entire country to give you guys
stabilized system for acquisition. If not currently, we're not
going to have a usable system, and a lot of these higher-end
regulation arguments to manufacturers like myself are like
arguing about highways before we have cars. I mean, really we
need to focus on visual line-of-sight and small platforms that
we have immediately that we need to scale up to counter the CCP
policy that is going after our capabilities. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Miller. Thank you for that answer. And I just want to
underscore the seriousness of where we are and where we're
lacking, how far behind.
My next question is for both Dr. Jacob and Dr. P.K. What
research is being done to assess training needs and future
workforce development to support future advanced air mobility
operations?
Dr. Jacob. I'll take this short. It'd be brief. Thank you
again, Congressman Miller, for your question. Yes, we're really
focused on the training side in terms of being able to provide
the capabilities through, for example, the Counter UAS Center
of Excellence for--to train soldiers and warfighters to be able
to evaluate not only how to use systems to detect, identify,
and defeat UAS, but also the UAS themselves. This is one area
where the technology is changing so rapidly, it becomes very
difficult for Federal agencies to be able to keep up with the
technology. And obviously, that's one area where universities
excel at and are able to rapidly turn that around.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, thank you, Congressman, for that
important question that's focused on the workforce and the
needs of the advanced air mobility industry. Practically every
advanced air mobility industry member is right now hiring. And
we have a number of initiatives inside NASA that basically
allow students, as well as faculty members, to grow the
curriculum and train the next-generation workforce. The first
example is Minority University Research and Education Program
grants. We have--at the moment, we have at least six grants
focused on U.S. manufacturing and supply chain, your prior
question in this area.
Second example is University Leadership Initiative where we
provide grants through faculty members and student
competition--and allow student competitions and participation
from students to push technology frontier forward. So one other
example is the weather.
Third is the NASA Community of Aerospace Scholars Program.
This is working with community colleges to bring them ideas and
nurture them into the aerospace trade. And, as I mentioned
also, we have a strong internship program that allows a lot of
students from all over the United States to be part of the
internships at all NASA centers. And it's really a joy to work
with their interns and mentor them.
Mr. Miller. OK. Doing a wonderful thing. Dr. P.K., in your
testimony, you also discussed how NASA leverages several
programs, including the Small Business Innovative Research
program, University Leadership Initiative, and Minority
University Research, what you just mentioned, education program
toward grants to advance unmanned aircraft systems and advanced
air mobility capabilities. Could you provide us with an example
of how NASA's grant programs have enabled innovation in this
space? And I believe you already just touched on that to some
extent, so.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, and I happy to reiterate that. I mean,
for the minority university research grants, we are focused on
building supply chain, understanding new curriculum for supply
chain, and bringing businesses, entrepreneurs to actually start
supply chain with manufacturing in different parts of the
country, including opportunities for students to do internships
and jobs in this marketplace. So that's one example.
Under University Leadership Initiative, we are working with
faculty members, such as Jamey here, on a number of topics, but
one of them is weather and figuring out the needs of the
weather that are required to support the safe advance air
mobility operations.
Another one related to the University Leadership Initiative
is building concept to operations to enable these vehicles and
their operations in different parts of the community.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Doctor. And I just want to thank all
the witnesses, the Chairman and the Ranking Member, and I yield
back. Thank you all.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. I'm tempted to lead off with a
rousing chorus of ``Happy Birthday'' just to be different from
everybody else. In the interest of all involved, I will keep my
singing to myself. You're welcome.
So thanks so much for this panel. I find myself sitting
here thinking of my--my dad has this--one of his sayings is
that if you found someone's strength, you found their weakness.
The strength of drones is that they're unmanned, they can take
off and land anywhere, they can carry a payload, the--they can
fly in unregulated airspace, and I have, of course, also just
described their weaknesses depending on what that payload is
and where you'd like to travel. As--I realize I'm speaking the
obvious.
I guess I'd like to start, Dr. Kopardekar, with a
philosophical question for you. I know we're considering
various legislation and I'm not asking you to opine on
legislation. But every new transportation technology that's
ever come out has had some balance of device-level regulation
and public-space-level regulation, you know, flight paths,
shipping lanes, the GPS chips that prevent your electric
scooter from getting onto the Capitol grounds, right? You know,
we can think through all this. As you think about a world that
doesn't throw out the baby with the bathwater but, you know,
plays to the strengths of drones and, you know, while
recognizing the vulnerabilities, philosophically, how do you
think we should be thinking about that balance? And I ask the
question philosophically because that also spans a lot of
Committees of jurisdiction in Congress. But is there anything
unique about drones, or is the approach we've taken to the sort
of ad hoc basis that we've done for other technologies the
right way to think about drones as well?
Dr. Kopardekar. I think that's a very insightful question,
and thank you for asking that question. If I may offer an
example from the NASA experience itself. So last year, about
this time, there were 58--all 50 incursions on NASA Kennedy
Space Center near the launch pad. A few months ago, DOD found
about over 200 incursions of unwanted drones over Kennedy Space
Center. And what that does is it actually jeopardizes the
safety of the launch systems and the people and the assets that
we have and the schedule integrity. So it's really important
that we have balance of basically push forward as well as the
right type of legislative authorities. So as a result, we are
requesting--NASA is requesting regulatory authority for detect
and track these drone operators that are operating and should
not be operating on NASA properties. So we have seen similar
things happen at Johnson and Stennis and a few other centers.
So it's really a balance of push forward and at the same time
making sure that it doesn't go into the bad hands or the bad
actors are not able to make damage.
Mr. Casten. So I'd love to open up, Dr. Jacob or Ms.
Ellman, if you have different thoughts on this, we'd love to
hear it as well. And if you could layer on the international
component of this. You know, Ms. Tenney talked about drones
moving, you know, contraband across borders. What we can
regulate in our own airspace is going to be different, but you
know, the devices can move. How would you suggest we think
about that philosophical tradeoff between device-level and
public-space level?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. No. And I really appreciate this
question. As the Chair noted, I previously worked in the
Federal Government. I still remember the first meeting that we
had at the White House where we talked about how--what does it
mean to integrate UAS into the national airspace? Drones can be
used for so much good. They can also be used for harm, as you
know.
And I think the key here is how to--like you ask--you're
asking the right question. How do we enable the good about this
technology while preventing the bad? And there are a few
different aspects to preventing the bad, right? The first is
situational awareness in the airspace. How do we know who is
flying out there? And that's where remote identification comes
in. And----
Mr. Casten. I'm sorry, and when you know who is flying, is
that identify the device or the pilot?
Ms. Ellman. It's essentially a digital drone license plate.
So as--it's a digital drone license plate, so you would be able
to identify the device by a license plate number, and then if
it is--lets--unauthorized flying, for example, over a stadium,
you'd be able to--law enforcement would be able to get access
to who is the operator.
Mr. Casten. So I can get back and see who was actually
flying it at that time?
Ms. Ellman. Exactly.
Mr. Casten. OK.
Ms. Ellman. So it provides a tool to law enforcement to
actually enforce the laws and rules that are out there. But
that's just the first step, right? The second step is what do
you actually do if they're--if you're in a situation where, you
know, a drone is being flown, rogue drone flying where it's not
supposed to be? You can't--right now, under the current laws,
you're not actually allowed to do anything about it. There's no
mitigation authority. And that's where--you know, we see
innovation and security as two sides of the same coin, so we
think there needs to be commonsense steps forward from--to
enable companies that are developing this technology, both to
test that technology here in the United States, as well as to
work with other agencies--right now, it's--only four Federal
agencies have access to this technology, and that needs to
change for our national security.
Mr. Casten. I'm out of time. I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. Now I'd like to recognize the
gentleman from New York, by way of Texas, Mr. Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The--I'd like to welcome our guests as well. And I'm sorry
that--I think Major McGarvey and his crew have left. I would
offer them greetings from their colleagues from the 174th
Attack Wing that is headquartered in Syracuse, New York. We're
very proud to have them there.
There's a lot going on with drones in New York's 22d
District, which I know you're aware, so forgive me for a few
statements here. But we have one of the most significant drone
test sites in the world, run by NUAIR, a 50-mile corridor and
test corridor that connect Rome all the way to Syracuse
Airport, as well as, you know, in other areas. The Syracuse
Airport is also the only FAA-licensed airport that allows un-
escorted, unmanned takeoff and landings, which is critical for
testing of drones. So we invite all participants to join with
us in this exciting innovation, visit, invest, grow with this
amazing community in beautiful central New York.
Mr. Casey, just for a moment, my grandfather worked on B-
24s and B-29s at Tinker Air Force Base and spoke of it, you
know, with great affection his whole life, so Tinker is part of
our family story.
And, Dr. P.K., just one more biographical note. Several
years ago, I was privileged to briefly--to brief your ATM-X
team at NASA Ames. And they were investigating next-generation
technologies that would be essential to manage airspace when
you have a 3-orders-of-magnitude increase in the number of
aircraft, right, 1,000 times increase. How do you deconflict
that? We can't do that with current technologies. And it was a
privilege to talk to the NASA team there. I look forward to
partnering with you on that.
But I just have a couple of questions. Mr. Casey, there are
some domestic concerns about incorporating components--we've
heard about that today--from China, into American drones. To
the extent that you've not covered that, what are some thoughts
about how we can do that? Is this--you know, is it rulemaking?
Is it a demand signal, you know, so that we get outside
investments? You know, are they asking for subsidies? What's
the real solution there?
Mr. Casey. The real solution honestly lies in acquisition.
It--really to me from a manufacturer's point of view, this has
nothing with regulating niche categories of application. We
need to make a domestic capability very quickly. To do so, the
government needs to become a buyer of drones. To do that, the
government needs to actually accelerate NDAA section 848
compliance and actually maybe even support funding to actually
go after that for a lot more small business. It's important to
note that most of the actual U.S. community is entirely small
business, as in less than 500 employees in the SBIR programs--
excuse me, SBIR programs are really impactful for us.
And in general, we need to actually make these components
at home, and we don't need to make them in Europe. We don't
need to make them in not just non-China countries but we also
need to loop in funding from the CHIPS Act to help support this
effort as well. Because really, we're having an issue in the
critical components of semiconductors and chips as well and the
software and the actual command-and-control algorithms that we
run being China origin as well.
Mr. Williams. Great. Thank you. Thank you. I appreciate
that detail. I think that's very helpful.
Mr. Jacob, could you comment about how the FAA currently
uses the data collected by the FAA at these UAS test sites like
in my district? Is there anything the Federal Government, you
know, can leverage from these test site data for our defense
priorities? I love dual-use technologies. So for counter UAS or
advanced air mobility, are we able to repurpose, you know, this
data of what we're learning to meet our national defense needs?
Dr. Jacob. Yes, certainly. Thank you, Congressman Williams.
That's an excellent question.
First off, NUAIR is really doing great work. They've been
really crucial in terms of pushing the boundaries of what we've
been able to do and integrating United States into the
airspace.
In terms of the data that the FAA is acquiring from these
test programs--and it's not just these programs themselves but
all UAS that are operating within the national airspace as part
of the certification process, getting approvals to fly in the
airspace. We're required to port back--report back how those
vehicles are actually operating. And it really comes down to
providing safety data from the use cases. How well are those
vehicles working? Where are the failures at? Really, what's
breaking in the system so that the FAA can then use that data
to determine how best to safely integrate that--those aircraft
in the national airspace.
For the DOD side, that data is just as useful in terms of
determining how those aircraft then can be integrated not only
to the day-to-day operations of the DOD but also then how to
utilize counter UAS systems to be able to evaluate them.
And some of this--this goes back to something that Mr.
Casey mentioned in terms of getting approvals for Blue or
approved U.S. manufactured aircraft to be able to utilize those
more into the airspace, but also that approval process so that
way we can streamline that and have States such as Oklahoma,
which are working on their own Blue UAS approval program to be
able to more rapidly approve aircraft for flight in the United
States.
Mr. Williams. Thank you for your detailed answers. That's
helpful. Come fly with us in central New York. Thank you. I
yield back, sir.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. And now I'd like to call on
the gentlewoman from Ohio, Ms. Sykes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you very much to the Chair and Ranking
Member for this meeting. And, Chair, happy birthday, but next
time, get some cake.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you. As my colleagues and I discussed
last hearing, we all know Ohio is the birthplace of aviation,
and Ohio is the Nation's largest industry supplier in the Air
Force industry. Ohio is one of the first States to release a
market impact study for the Urban Regional Air Mobility
Program, and we are releasing the Nation's first advanced air
mobility framework.
One of the things that is incredibly exciting about the
State that I'm from, particularly in northeast Ohio in Ohio 13,
is that we're seeing an opportunity to be leaders again. And I
heard Ms. Ellman talk about the first generation of aerospace
and flight in aviation, and we have an opportunity--it's the
second time around if we use our opportunities appropriately.
And so to that end, one of the things we hear from every
industry, almost every company that I'm talking to across the
district, is an issue with workforce. And I'm incredibly proud
of my alma mater, Kent State University, that this month just
instituted an unmanned aircraft systems flight management--or
major, excuse me, to help that workforce. And, Dr. P.K., I
heard you talk about this as well because there are a lot of
opportunities from NASA. And, you know, NASA Glenn is a
highlight in our area.
One of the things about this job that I love the most is
the information that I get and how I can help my constituents.
But the thing that's most frustrating is how do we get that
information to our constituents so they can use it? And you
talked about your internships, and I'm talking about college-
level degree programs, but how do we get the workforce
interested before they even step into high school so that their
pathways can get them into the air or in a remote facility
working through this process? So could you talk a little bit
more about those early interventions so we can get those
workforce pipeline issues sorted out?
Dr. Kopardekar. Very astute observation, Mrs. Sykes, and I
really appreciate that. And thank you for the all the great
work that happens at NASA Glenn. You know, they are really the
champions of propulsion, and they've taken a lot of interest in
advanced air mobility, including the Department of
Transportation in Ohio that's setting up, as you mentioned,
advanced air mobility framework.
And by the way, my daughter also goes to Case Western
University, so I have a personal connection there.
But your question is very valid. You know, how do we entice
students at early stage into STEM workforce? And we have
several examples and several programs that--at NASA that
basically go to different colleges and high schools and middle
schools and even some elementary schools. I know I used to
personally go to many schools and give talks and inspire
students to come join and think about space and aeronautics as
future career options and get them excited. I will be more than
happy to take the question back and give you a list of
different programs we have that will allow you to share that
information.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you so much for that question. And so the
second thing we hear a lot about no matter where we are after
workforce is typically regulation and regulatory frameworks.
And the FlyOhio, program specifically identifies that the lack
of Federal Government and the--or the Federal Government
restrictions, I should say, on flight to operate low altitude
air traffic is one of the things that's hindering us. And, Ms.
Ellman, I know you talked about this as an industry leader.
Could you dive into a little bit deeper, more specifically,
what it is that you would like to see, what does the industry
need to see? And I'm saying this particularly for the economic
benefit of those of us in Ohio. This is a billion-dollar
industry that we're not tapping into. What could we do to
harness that, get that money to northeast Ohio, particularly
Ohio's 13th Congressional District?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you so much for that
question, Congresswoman Sykes. It's a critical question for
industry. It's also a critical question for States and
localities like Ohio. You guys are doing great work developing
a corridor. There's--I hear all the time from our member
companies that are looking to do business in Ohio, so we really
appreciate your leadership as well.
From--what we all collectively need is to move the policy
boundaries forward. The technology has moved quickly forward.
The policies have lagged behind, and we're still waiting for
rulemakings, broad rulemakings that would make it--that would
relieve the undue burden that's on these regulatory processes
in order to be able to scale businesses here in the United
States, including in Ohio. And so, you know, we appreciate the
opportunity to be here today.
We also--the regulations also need to move forward even to
enable advanced R&D. So, you know, this is a critically
important issue for all of us, and I'm really--you know, we'd
be very happy to work with you in your office on how we can
bring these benefits to the State of Ohio and across the
country.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Chair, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. I'd like to recognize the gentleman
from Alabama, Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. Happy birthday, Mr. Chairman.
I have the honor of representing a district on the cutting
edge of aerospace and UAS innovation, Huntsville, Alabama.
Alabama's 5th District holds a large contingent of key players
in this space spanning DOD, DOJ, DHS, NASA, and hosting a
thriving ecosystem of universities and contractors. I'm proud
of the continued work and role our entire community plays in
the research and development, detection, and mitigation of the
evolving UAS threats from our adversaries.
North Alabama is a prime example of the success that is
possible when you put everyone in the same room to come up with
solutions to these issues facing our country. In our case, when
you get everyone together in the same region with some of the
brightest minds in the country, it's been very beneficial.
Nowhere else can you find a community more dedicated and well-
positioned to address these problems head-on. Time and again,
we prove the value of a whole-of-government approach to these
threats and, even more so, the value of interagency
partnerships and relationships.
Ms. Ellman, you're doing my job for me. I was glad to see
in your testimony you highlighted the important work of the
universities in my district. The University of Alabama in
Huntsville is currently participating in various UAS-related
projects. They continue to excel in this field and deliver
valuable support and expertise to partners.
I know you mentioned that we have only scratched the
surface of the capabilities and applications of UAS technology.
Can you talk more about the importance of universities in the
future of UAS?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman, for that
question. And thank you as well for the great work that is
being done across the State of Alabama, including University of
Alabama, Huntsville, for the great work that is being done and
the research and development that your State is doing to
advance this industry. And absolutely, universities are a key
partner to industry. We greatly appreciate our relationship,
including with Jamey and his team, you know, as well as the
Federal agencies and others, but universities are doing great
work and trying to do more work, research and development.
Unfortunately, they are limited by the regulatory
frameworks just like industry is. And that's where we really
need to take a risk-appropriate approach. How can we enable
these operations, including for research and development in a
way that allows us to maintain our global leadership and--in
advanced aviation, and so we would be happy to work with you.
We have lots of ideas in that respect. I've mentioned one issue
around public aircraft operations, but there are others as
well, and I'd be happy to work with you in your office on this
important topic.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Specifically, what is needed to
better leverage and benefit the efforts of UAH and other
institutions?
Ms. Ellman. Well, one of the challenges is, as a company,
if I want to work with you in order to do research and
development on, let's say, a vehicle that I don't even have the
ability to do on my own private property, these operations, I
currently--under the current rules I'm not allowed to actually
use that data or have access to that data or use those for
certification processes. So working together so that we're able
to eventually commercialize, which is the purpose of research
and development, to commercialize these technologies is a
where--is an area that I think we could work together on.
Mr. Strong. That's great information.
Dr. Jacob, can you talk about the importance of community
and agency partnerships in the work that you do?
Dr. Jacob. Oh, certainly. Thank you, Congressman Strong,
and I'd like to say really appreciate all my visits to
Huntsville. We work very closely with Redstone Arsenal through
the Counter UAS Center of Excellence and particularly CC-DEVCOM
(Combat Capabilities Development Command) and AvMC (Aviation &
Missile Center), so it's fantastic to be able to come out and
visit your district.
As Lisa had mentioned, you know, the university impact is
really limited by access to the airspace and to be able to test
the systems. And we've certainly found that not only in terms
of what we're evaluating on the counter UAS side, but then how
we take this out to the community. When we engage not only the
community, that's where we start to educate the public about
how UAS can be used for both good and for ill, how they're
going to be integrated in the airspace. And we start to be able
to spark those ideas from community members about not only
acceptance of the technology, but also entrepreneurial ideas
about how they can use the systems to be able to startup new
businesses or engage with their community.
But furthermore, that's a fantastic way to develop
workforce for the future by exciting kids in the K through 12
arena about the possibility of drone technology. When you
combine robots with aircraft, you just really spark
imaginations.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Dr. Jacob. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Sorry, thank you very much. And now the
gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms. Caraveo.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I join everybody in
wishing you a very happy birthday.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
Ms. Caraveo. And thank you to Chair Lucas and Ranking
Member Lofgren for putting this together and to the witnesses
for taking the time to speak to us today.
I am a physician and so view a lot of legislation through
what this is going to do through the world of medicine. There
are--with every new technology is a way to change the way that
medicine and emergency services in particular are delivered.
And sometimes the rollout is slower than we would like. I
think, in particular, with the internet and how long it took
for that power to really be harnessed in terms of telemedicine,
it wasn't really until the COVID-19 pandemic that we really
took full advantage of it. And it has really revolutionized the
way that patients seek medical attention.
And so I'm wondering, with this technology around unmanned
air systems and drones, how you think that these may be applied
to emergency services in particular. Coming from a State like
Colorado, I think in in terms of wildfire response that we have
discussed earlier during the hearing, and in particular, the
access to places that are remote or not accessible because of
emergencies, and then overall to the delivery of medicine and
emergency response in general. And that goes to any of you who
think that--who have something to add.
Dr. Jacob. Yes, but if you don't mind, Congresswoman, I'll
just jump in real quick and provide some examples because this
has been one area that we've been actively participating in
with small businesses to be able to evaluate technology, to be
able to deliver emergency medical supplies to first responders
in the field, both firefighters, emergency medical technicians
such as blood bags for a car accident. And this is one area
where UAS will be able to find really rapid responses that we
don't currently have.
As an example, you know, going back to your comment
regarding COVID-19, we actually were partnering with the
Choctaw Nation to evaluate the implementation of medical
delivery and other emergency aid delivery during the pandemic
that were unable to get approval for that from the--for the
test processes from the FAA. So the Choctaw Nation was
exploring that as part of the BEYOND program. And that just
provides an example where we do think there are opportunities
that are currently being missed.
Ms. Ellman. Sure, and I'll just add to that. First of all,
the medical use case is a fantastic use case. And thank you for
your work as a physician, obviously, incredibly important what
you're doing. And there are companies that are trying to fill
that void. There are pharmacy deserts. There's so many
different use cases in this business. And it's already
happening at scale around the world. So Zipline is already
delivering vaccines, for example, at scale, nationally in
Rwanda and elsewhere and other countries around the world. Wing
is delivering--you know, working to deliver prescriptions and
other critical supplies, so is--you know, Matternet is
delivering blood samples in Zurich. So there are lots of
companies out there that are trying to do this work, again, you
know, and there's so many different--it helps vulnerable
populations in remote areas, like you mentioned, the pharmacy
deserts. So there's so many different applications and so many
different use cases here. The key is really unlocking this
potential with the regulations.
Ms. Caraveo. And any further comments on barriers and
particular challenges? I know that we've talked about research
and the permitting process, for lack of a better word. Anything
in particular to the delivery of medical services that we
should be thinking about when we approach legislation?
Mr. Casey. Sure, Congresswoman. So to be perfectly clear
with the Blue compliance, if you want to be a federally
deployed system, if this payload has a single logic level chip,
that payload can be subject to country-of-origin restriction.
And right now, again, because the government's not really
acquiring systems, there's not an emphasis on
commercialization. The emphasis is on research--excuse me--
without commercialization. But ultimately, right now at this
point in time for these necessary services, we need to
commercialize products, to do so we need the acquisition
support.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you. Ms. Ellman, go ahead.
Ms. Ellman. Yes, I was just going to say for
commercialization of this technology, another area just to be
aware of is hazardous materials. So sometimes if you're
carrying, for example, a vaccine sample that could be
considered hazmat under the rules, that's an area that hasn't
really caught up to the technology, so we'd be happy to work
with you and your office on that important topic.
Ms. Caraveo. Be very interested. Thank you all so much. I
yield back my time.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. And now the gentlewoman from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Lee, thank you.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And happy birthday, of
course.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
Ms. Lee. As many are aware, and one of the things that, you
know, I'm most concerned about is, you know, how marginalized
communities--they face a range of challenges, including limited
access to resources, restricted mobility, and reduced
opportunities for economic and social advancement. So while
unmanned aircraft systems or drones are often associated with
use in war, you know, they have the potential to revolutionize
the way we approach the challenges by providing an innovative
way to provide support to those who need it most.
Drones offer opportunity, as we've learned and as we've
heard, to deliver medical supplies like vaccines to remote and
underserved communities or providing lifelines to those who
might otherwise be unable to access these critical resources. I
think about what access to drones could have meant in relief
efforts such as catastrophes like Katrina and others were
providing a rapid and efficient way to assess damage and
deliver aid to affected communities, as well as to provide
proactive preparedness warnings in the event of extreme weather
occurrences.
But while unmanned aircraft systems have the potential to
help bridge the gaps between marginalized groups and the rest
of our society, we also have to be mindful of the potential
risks and challenges associated with their use. So we must
ensure that drones are used in a safe, responsible, and ethical
manner, and that they don't exacerbate existing inequities,
or--excuse me--existing inequities or create new ones.
With that said, my first question is to Ms. Ellman. What
will U.S. leadership in drones technology look like not solely
in terms of market share, but in reducing socioeconomic
disparities in our country and improving overall standard of
living?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that
very important question. This technology can promote equity and
can promote--you know, you mentioned medical delivery, pharmacy
deserts, bringing--whether it's rural areas, poor areas that
don't have--otherwise have access to medicine, or whether it's
the inner city, and we're trying to make infrastructure
inspections more efficient, for example, make the best use of
taxpayer dollars. This industry has the potential to really
boost our efforts to promoting equity. And so that's something
that this industry is really committed to, and we'd be happy to
work with your office to continue to find areas that this
industry can be supportive.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. And I'm happy when you mentioned, you
know, infrastructure checks. You know, obviously, I come from
Pittsburgh where we had a bridge collapse. And one of the key
concerns is how are we, you know, checking them, how are we
updating them. And one of the proposals from someone in our
district was talking about, you know, equitable access to that
and using drone technology to lead that. So I'm certain that
that one constituent would be really interested in this
research, in this technology as it emerges.
Dr. Kopardekar, how is research and development creating
new opportunities and avenues for domestic manufacturers and
suppliers to become full participants in expanding aviation
value chain--or in this expanding aviation value chain? Excuse
me.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, thank you for that great question. I
think it's really important to ensure that we have a strong
supply chain of--for aerospace and defense to maintain the U.S.
competitiveness, as well as maintain the jobs in the
manufacturing sector in the United States.
So one of the things that we are doing is working with
Department of Defense, Agility Prime initiative, and NASA. We
are collaborating together and informing the advanced air
mobility industry members, as well as small and medium sized
enterprises as to where the jobs are, where the manufacturing
capabilities needed to support the United States and advance
air mobility technologies and manufacturing. So understanding
the needs of the new growing entrants, as well as opportunities
for domestic manufacturing sector to grow is very important.
And we have been successful in getting some new entrants, new
companies to match with some of the advanced air mobility
organizations.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. And thank you so much to the panel for
your time and for the information you've shared today. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you very much. And the
gentleman from California, Mr. Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Happy birthday. I
want to thank Chairman Lucas and the Committee staff for
holding this hearing on a really important topic for me. I'm
the Chairman of the Advanced Air Mobility Caucus here in
Congress, and we have been working to try and raise awareness
of the benefits that advanced air mobility and unmanned aerial
systems can bring to Americans but also some of the
difficulties and the challenges that lie ahead in both of those
sectors of our aviation ecosystem.
So, you know, I think I share the opinion with a lot of
Members of Congress that advanced air mobility is on the cusp
of delivering transformational generation of expansion and
mobility in our airspace system. It's going to bring a whole
host of benefits to American society, and I think it's going to
catalyze not only mobility, but also access to resources for
Americans in ways that haven't been done before.
But before us lies this challenge of, you know, first
adopting the certification standards for a AAS (Advanced
Aircraft Systems) aircraft and then integrating them into the
National Airspace System. And therein lies the difficulty.
We're kind of grappling with the certification problem now, but
next, you know, right on its heels will be this problem of
integration. And we've just been through this with UAS.
And, Ms. Ellman, I was interested when I heard your
testimony about the challenges that we went through. I mean,
Congress was exactly here 11 years ago. In 2012, Congress
passed a legislative mandate that directed the FAA to get going
with respect to the integration of UAS into the airspace
system. And yet, you know, here we are still 11 years later
grappling with these same issues.
And unfortunately, I think this exposes, you know, two
things. First of all, the fact that quite often, the
bureaucratic default stance, when confronted with uncertainty,
is immobility. And second, the role that Congress has to play
in helping the FAA--and it's not an adversarial relationship--
but helping the FAA try and get itself in gear and get past
some of these hurdles, you know, kind of grapple with this
tradeoff between uncertainty and the need to protect public
safety.
So, Ms. Ellman, you'd highlighted this, and I'm interested
in your point of view on integration for AAS. Having gone
through this with UAS, what are the lessons learned, and how do
we avoid making some of those same mistakes?
Ms. Ellman. Absolutely. Well, thank you, Congressman, for
that very important question. And thank you for your leadership
of the AAM Caucus here in Congress. I think that's incredibly
important work and look forward to working with you in that
capacity.
Absolutely, there's--you know, I think of AAM and UAS on a
spectrum of advanced aviation. There are certain things that
they have in common, there are certain things that are
different, but the reality is, there's a lot of things that are
complementary in terms of they are new entrants into the
airspace, in low altitude airspace and trying to figure out
what the technology piece and the policy piece and how it all
fits together.
There are certainly many lessons learned from the UAS space
that the AAM community can kind of take heed of. One, I was
encouraged to see this Federal Government working group that's
been established with the legislation that Congress passed, the
AAM Leadership and Coordination Act that is a positive step
forward. I'm pleased to see that it has been launched and that
the Federal Government is working because it's very important
to have a holistic whole-of-government approach. As you said,
it's not an adversarial relationship with any government
agency. There are very good people trying to fit a square peg
into a round hole. They can't--it's not necessarily their
fault. The challenges are systemic anytime you introduce a new
technology into an existing regulatory environment.
I will mention one thing in particular that challenged the
UAS industry that the AAM industry is kind of keeping its eye
on which is that security issues were not considered early on
in the UAS space. And that ended up pushing back expanded UAS
operations several years as the national security agencies then
came forward and said, wait, we're a stakeholder, too; you need
to consider our concerns. So that's part of why I look at this
interagency working group, and it's a very positive step
forward. And we need the national security agencies to
participate and be active participants in not only identifying
challenges, but also providing solutions.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, great, thank you. I agree with you.
Dr. Kopardekar, if I could ask because I know you've got
some expertise in this subject. So now we're considering AAM
and UAS kind of in the same sentence because we fail to get
there with UAS. We're still grappling with the same problem.
Does tackling this challenge with both of them put together
either simplify it or does it make it more difficult?
Dr. Kopardekar. First of all, Congressman, thank you for
your leadership of Advanced Air Mobility Caucus and really
appreciate Armstrong--I have fond memories of visiting
Armstrong, great friends there as well. We are working together
with them on the wildfire activity as well.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. I'm aware.
Dr. Kopardekar. Yes, so thank you for that. But yes, in
terms of combining things and not combining, there are a couple
of things that we can probably combine, for example,
interoperability and operations inside airspace. I think
everybody has to coexist in the same airspace at the same time,
so there are a few things related to advance air mobility that
are similar to drones, particularly larger drones, using
basically the tenets of unmanned aircraft system traffic
management, which are digital systems, cooperative nature,
sharing the intent, and using third-party services to get
faster, basically, acceleration of their introduction. So these
things are common between the United States and advanced air
mobility.
What's not common is advanced air mobility has a series of
basically waves, if you will. Some of them are in the beginning
are going to use piloted operations under clear visibility, VMC
(visual meteorological conditions) conditions, VFR (visual
flight rules) kind of setups, whereas the drones, the smaller
drones, they don't have a pilot onboard, obviously, so you had
to connect with the remote operators or completely autonomous
systems, so it's going to be all digital. So some things are
going to be easy for advanced air mobility in the first wave,
but as they start to push toward highly autonomous advanced air
mobility type of aircraft, then those things will be very
similar. How do we push forward? So there are some things
similar, some things dissimilar, but drones have a different
tolerance for weather and wind and for--wind, whereas advanced
air mobility may have a higher wing loading, and so they will
be able to tolerate wind. So there are some interesting
subtleties, but by and large, the few things, access to
airspace, interoperability in the airspace is common.
Mr. Obernolte. I see we're out of time, but I want to thank
all of you for not only your service here on the panel but also
the work that you're doing in helping us solve these issues and
remain optimistic that we could work together toward a common
solution here.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. And absolutely agree with everything
you just said.
I want to thank the witnesses for their very valuable
testimony and the Members for your good--your great questions.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional comments
and written questions from Members. And we know what we have to
do to advance this new technology so it really has been stuck
in a rut for far too long.
So with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:18 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Jamey Jacob

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Parimal Kopardekar

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Ms. Lisa Ellman

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Sean Casey

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Frank Lucas

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Letter submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
