- AN OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION BUDGET
PROPOSAL FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

=======================================================================
HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 11, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-13

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-137 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. MAX MILLER, Ohio, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina,
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas                  Ranking Member
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                MAXWELL FROST, Florida

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

May 11, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Max Miller, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Deborah Ross, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

The Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Administrator, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Discussion.......................................................    26

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Administrator, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)..................    40

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Bill Posey, Subcommittee on
Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives

To Richard W. Spinrad, Ph.D., Under Secretary of Commerce for
Oceans and Atmosphere, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administrator, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, from Representative Neal P. Dunn, et al....    60

AN OVERVIEW OF THE NATIONAL OCEANIC
AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION
BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 11, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Max Miller
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. This Committee will come to order. With no
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time. Welcome to today's hearing, entitled
``An Overview of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) Budget Proposal for Fiscal Year 2024.'' I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good morning, and welcome to our hearing on NOAA's budget
proposal for Fiscal Year of 2024. I'd like to welcome the Under
Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere, or more simply
known as the NOAA Administrator, Dr. Rick Spinrad, as our sole
witness this morning to discuss the President's proposed budget
for the agency. Economically, we are in unprecedented time.
Everyone might be tired of hearing that word, having been used
countless times during COVID, but there is no other way to
describe the state of our economy right now.
Federal spending is at a record high, while inflation is
nowhere near the Fed's 2 percent target, and prices continue to
rise for American families. We're also rapidly approaching the
debt limit, and the possibility of the Federal Government
defaulting on its debts. All of that to say, any talks around
the budget and spending, even at an agency like NOAA, warrant
careful consideration and calculated decisions. The President
has requested $6.8 billion for NOAA's budget in Fiscal Year
2024, the most in NOAA's history. This request would be a $407
million increase from the discretionary and mandatory money
that NOAA was appropriated last year, and a $1.3 billion
increase from Fiscal Year 2022. It's also worth noting that
NOAA received an additional $2.7 billion from the
infrastructure law that remains available until 2027. NOAA also
received one-time influxes of $3.3 billion in the Inflation
Reduction Act and over $500 million in the Fiscal Year 2023
Disaster Supplemental bill.
So, with some quick back of the napkin math, we can see
NOAA has an additional $8 billion that they didn't have just 2
years ago, and likely didn't prepare for. That is a staggering
number, and prime for waste, fraud, and abuse without proper
oversight. As I have already mentioned, our current economic
outlook clearly tells us that Federal spending isn't
sustainable. I'm not placing the blame on NOAA, nor am I
advocating for drastic cuts at the agency. I'm simply opening
an honest and upfront dialog about what is critically necessary
and what is a luxury within our country. We can't act like
NOAA's coffers are dry. We need to shift from the give me more
mindset to maximize what we've been given.
As the budget request accurately describes, NOAA's--NOAA
provides the environmental science, information, and services
needed to protect lives, lifestyles, and livelihoods for every
single American. Therefore, when making any budget decision, we
should be asking, does this program, activity, or funding
protect lives and property? I'm pleased to see manageable
increases to NOAA's oceanic and atmospheric research and the
National Weather Service. These two offices are at the
forefront of innovation and prediction that can indeed save
lives. On the other hand, I'm perplexed to see a decrease in
the funding for the National Mesonet Program and a long-term
plan to flat fund commercial data purchases in the future.
These two programs are golden examples of how NOAA can
supplement, and even improve, their weather data inventory with
cheaper, flexible industry efforts. If we're looking to save
taxpayer money, it seems logical to bolster these programs,
rather than have NOAA try to collect data on their own through
expensive buildouts and federally owned instruments.
Nonetheless, I remain optimistic about NOAA's future. I have no
doubt Administrator Spinrad had tough conversations of his own
in developing this budget, without question. I'm confident we
can talk civilly through any differences in opinion we have and
work together to best advance NOAA's mission. I look forward to
hearing from Administrator Spinrad today, and in the future, as
we look together to support NOAA's lifesaving activities.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Miller follows:]

Good morning and welcome to our hearing on NOAA's Budget
Proposal for Fiscal Year 2024.
I'd like to welcome the Under Secretary of Commerce for
Oceans and Atmosphere, or more simply known as the NOAA
Administrator, Dr. Rick Spinrad, as our sole witness this
morning to discuss the President's proposed budget for the
agency.
Economically, we are in an unprecedented time. Everyone
might be tired of hearing that word having been used countless
times during COVID, but there is no other way to describe the
state of our economy right now.
Federal spending is at a record high, while inflation is
nowhere near the Fed's 2% target, and prices continue to rise
for American families. We are also rapidly approaching the debt
limit and the possibility of the federal government defaulting
on its debts. All of that to say, any talks around budget and
spending, even at an agency like NOAA, warrant careful
consideration and calculated decisions.
The President has requested $6.8 billion for NOAA's budget
in FY24, the most in NOAA's history. This request would be a
$407 million increase from the discretionary and mandatory
money that NOAA was appropriated last year, and a $1.3 billion
increase from FY22.
It's also worth noting NOAA received an additional $2.7
billion from the Infrastructure Law that remains available
until 2027. NOAA also received one-time influxes of $3.3
billion in the Inflation Reduction Act and over $500 million in
the FY23 Disaster Supplemental bill.
So with some quick, back of the napkin math, we can see
that NOAA has an additional $8 billion that they didn't have
just two years ago, and likely didn't prepare for. That is a
staggering number and prime for waste, fraud, and abuse without
proper oversight.
As I have already mentioned, our current economic outlook
clearly tells us that federal spending isn't sustainable. I'm
not placing the blame on NOAA, nor am I advocating for drastic
cuts at the agency.
I'm simply opening an honest and upfront dialogue about
what is critically necessary and what is a luxury. We can't act
like NOAA's coffers are dry. We need to shift from the ``give
me more'' mindset to ``maximize what we've been given.''
As the budget request accurately describes, NOAA provides
the environmental science, information, and services needed to
protect lives, lifestyles, and livelihoods for all Americans.
Therefore, when making any budget decision we should be asking:
does this program, activity, or funding protect lives and
property?
I'm pleased to see manageable increases to NOAA's Oceanic
and Atmospheric Research and the National Weather Service.
These two offices are at the forefront of innovation and
prediction that can indeed save lives.
On the other hand, I'm perplexed to see a decrease in
funding for the National Mesonet Program and a long-term plan
to flat fund Commercial Data Purchases in the future.
These two programs are golden examples of how NOAA can
supplement and even improve their weather data inventory with
cheaper, flexible industry efforts. If we're looking to save
taxpayer money, it seems logical to bolster these programs
rather than have NOAA try to collect data on their own through
expensive buildouts and federally owned instruments.
Nonetheless I remain optimistic about NOAA's future. I have
no doubt Administrator Spinrad had tough conversations of his
own in developing this budget. I'm confident we can talk
civilly through any differences in opinion we have, and work
together to best advance NOAA's mission.
I look forward to hearing from Administrator Spinrad today
and in the future as we look together to support NOAA's
lifesaving activities.

Chairman Miller. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
Environment Subcommittee, the gentlewoman from North Carolina,
for an opening statement.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Chairman Miller, and we're celebrating
because we got a bill through the House this week, doing a lot
of work together. But thank you for holding this important
hearing on NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request. And thank
you to Administrator Spinrad for joining us this morning to
discuss NOAA's plans for this upcoming year.
NOAA is at the forefront of weather and climate prediction,
research, fisheries management, coastal resilience,
environmental stewardship, economic development, and so much
more. By executing its mission, NOAA is playing a critical role
in protecting the health and well-being of people and the
environment in the United States, and it has been doing this
for decades. Without a doubt, it's paramount for Congress to
continue supporting NOAA's mission through a well-funded
budget.
I was excited to see the focus of NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024
budget is building a climate-ready nation. As we're all aware,
climate change is progressing at breakneck speed, with some
impacts being seen far sooner than models have predicted.
Severe weather events, including drought, flooding, coastal
erosion, and super storms are becoming more common, and their
destructive power is increasing. Climate change threatens our
food system by affecting the productivity of agriculture and
fisheries. The importance and timeliness of NOAA's focus on
building a climate-ready nation cannot be understated.
With more than $450 million increase in discretionary
appropriations from the Fiscal Year 2023 enacted budget, NOAA
is poised to shore up its efforts in key areas critical to the
interests of all Americans. I'd like to highlight a few here.
Building on the investments made in the Inflation Reduction Act
and Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, NOAA's requested funding
will support an Earth system approach to climate products and
services, advance precipitation predictions across weather and
climate timescales, and support a whole-of-government effort to
address the climate crisis.
North Carolina's Second Congressional District, which I
represent, is home to NC State University, and close to other
major research universities on the forefront of addressing the
climate crisis in the United States and beyond. Partnerships
between academic institutions and NOAA, and access to
competitive grants for research, rely on the agency receiving a
robust and reliable funding system. Beyond these grants and
partnerships, agriculture and fisheries are major contributors
to my State's economy. We must ensure NOAA has the support it
needs to provide the science necessary to effectively manage
our food, resources, and economy.
However, NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024 plans for improving its
life-saving products, services, and other capabilities are at
risk. I'm very concerned about the proposed budget cuts led by
Speaker McCarthy that passed the House. Cutting NOAA's budget
by at least 22 percent below Fiscal Year 2023 enacted levels
will be devastating for the progress that NOAA is making to
increase forecast accuracy and support communities becoming
climate resilient. I hope all Members of this Committee can
agree on the importance of NOAA's mission and work together to
support this critical work on behalf of our districts. I look
forward to hearing from Administrator Spinrad today about
NOAA's plans for Fiscal Year 2024 and how Congress can support
you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ross follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Miller, for holding this important
hearing on NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request, and thank
you to the honorable Administrator Spinrad for joining us this
morning to discuss NOAA's plans for this upcoming year.
NOAA is at the forefront of weather and climate prediction
and research, fisheries management, coastal resilience,
environmental stewardship, economic development, and more. By
executing its mission, NOAA is playing a critical role in
protecting the health and wellbeing of people and the
environment in the United States-as it has been doing for
decades. Without a doubt, it is paramount for Congress to
continue supporting NOAA's mission through a well-funded
budget.
I was excited to see that the focus of NOAA's Fiscal Year
2024 budget is building a climate-ready nation. As we are all
aware, climate change is progressing at break-neck pace, with
some impacts being seen far sooner than models have predicted.
Severe weather events including drought, flooding, coastal
erosion, and super storms are becoming more common and their
destructive power is increasing. Climate change threatens our
food system by affecting the productivity of agriculture and
fisheries. The importance and timeliness of NOAA's focus on
building a climate-ready nation cannot be understated.
With a more than 450 million dollar increase in
discretionary appropriations from the Fiscal Year 2023 enacted
budget, NOAA is poised to shore up its efforts in key areas
critical to the interests of Americans. I would like to
specifically highlight a few here. Building on the investments
made in the Inflation Reduction Act and Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, NOAA's requested funding will support an
earth system approach to climate products and services, advance
precipitation predictions across weather and climate
timescales, and support a whole-of-government effort to address
the climate crisis.
North Carolina's 2nd District, which I represent, is home
to NC State University and close to other major research
universities on the forefront of addressing the climate crisis
in the U.S. and beyond.
Partnerships between academic institutions and NOAA-and
access to competitive grants for research- rely on the agency
receiving a robust and reliable funding stream. Beyond these
grants and partnerships, agriculture and fisheries are major
contributors to my state's economy. We must ensure NOAA has the
support it needs to provide the science necessary to
effectively manage our food resources and economy.
However, NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024 plans for improving its
life-saving products, services, and other capabilities are at
risk. I am very concerned about the proposed budget cut led by
Speaker McCarthy that passed the House. Cutting NOAA's budget
by at least 22% below the Fiscal year 2023 enacted levels will
be devastating to the progress NOAA is making to increase
forecast accuracy and support communities in becoming climate
resilient. I hope all Members in this Committee can agree on
the importance of NOAA's mission and work together to support
its critical work.
I look forward to hearing from Administrator Spinrad today
about NOAA's plans for Fiscal Year 2024 and how Congress can
support them.
I yield back.

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Ross. I now recognize the
Chairman of the Full Committee, the gentleman from Oklahoma,
for an opening statement.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Chairman Miller, and I want to
extend my warmest welcome to Administrator Spinrad. It's good
to see you again. When you were in front of this Committee for
the first time as Administrator, I told everyone there's a
picture of you in Oklahoma at the dedication of the National
Weather Center in 2006. Since the Weather Center received $9.5
million last year for an expansion project, which we can
discuss more today, I hope to see you in Norman, Oklahoma, very
soon for a similar celebration and another picture.
While we're only 5 months into this Congress, today's
hearing is already our third involving NOAA-related activities.
That goes to show you how much this Committee, and I
personally, value and appreciate NOAA's role in the Federal
research ecosystem. While the previous two hearings have
focused on the Committee's future legislative efforts, a NOAA
Organic Act and reauthorizing the Weather Act, I hope that
today's hearing will focus more on current activities and the
appropriate funding levels for certain programs. Before we move
forward with any legislative changes, we need to understand
what's already happening, examining what's working and what
isn't.
When it comes to the President's budget request, I've said
many times over many years that this is just that, a request.
Congress controls the purse, and you're here to make the case
for your vision of NOAA. We'll see where we agree, where we
need to work out some difficulties--differences, but I promise
you, we'll get there. NOAA's requesting $6.8 billion for a
broad array of activities arrange--ranging from weather
forecasting and climate prediction to ocean and atmospheric
observations. While I don't doubt the need for these
activities--I've personally advocated for requiring some of
them, I acknowledge that--it's important to put it into
context. This would be an annual budget of $1.4 billion more
than what NOAA was operating with just 5 years ago.
That's a quick growth for any agency, especially for one
that at times has struggled with workforce recruitment and
retention. So while I respect many of NOAA's goals, and
understand that funding is required to achieve them, we must
recognize we are in a time of tough but important
conversations. We can't assume an endless increasing budget,
and must be aware of that fact, that, to be accountable to
taxpayers, even funding increases come with caveats and
reforms. At the end of the day, all of the activities under
NOAA's budget request should have one fundamental end goal,
protecting lives and property. Anything else is window
dressing. I look forward to working with the Administrator to
advance this goal in the best possible ways. And with that,
thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

I want to extend my warmest welcome to Administrator
Spinrad. It's good to see you again.
When you were in front of the Committee for the first time
as Administrator, I told everyone there's a picture of you in
Oklahoma at the dedication of the National Weather Center in
2006. Since the Weather Center received $9.5 million last year
for an expansion project, which we can discuss more today, I
hope to see you in Norman, Oklahoma very soon for a similar
celebration and picture.
While we're only five months into this Congress, today's
hearing is already our third involving NOAA-related activities.
That goes to show you how much this Committee, and I
personally, value and appreciate NOAA's role in the federal
research ecosystem.
While the previous two hearings have focused on the
Committee's future legislative efforts--a NOAA Organic Ac and
reauthorizing the Weather Act--I hope that today's hearing will
focus more on current activities and the appropriate funding
levels for certain programs. Before we move forward with any
legislative changes, we need to understand what's already
happening-examining what's working and what isn't.
When it comes to the President's budget request, I've said
many times over many years that this is just that- a request.
Congress controls the purse, and you are here to make the case
for your vision of NOAA. We'll see where we agree and where we
need to work out some differences, but I promise you, we'll get
there.
NOAA is requesting $6.8 billion for a broad array of
activities ranging from weather forecasting and climate
prediction to ocean and atmospheric observation. While I don't
doubt the need for these activities--I've personally advocated
for legislation requiring some of them--it's important to put
it into context: this would be an annual budget $1.4 billion
more than what NOAA was operating with just five years ago.
That is quick growth for any agency, especially for one
that at times has struggled with workforce recruitment and
retention. So while I respect many of NOAA's goals, and
understand that funding is required to achieve them, we must
recognize we are in a time of tough but important
conversations. We can't assume an endlessly increasing budget
and must be aware of the fact that, to be accountable to
taxpayers, even funding increases may come with caveats and
reforms.
At the end of the day, all of the activities under NOAA's
budget request should have one fundamental end goal: protecting
lives and property. Anything else is window dressing. I look
forward to working with the Administrator to advance this goal
in the best ways possible.

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Chairman Lucas. I now recognize
the Ranking Member of the Full Committee, the gentlewoman from
California, for an opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Chairman Miller and Ranking
Member Ross, for this important hearing. And welcome back,
Doctor. Thank you for your service and leadership at NOAA. I'm
looking forward to today's discussion on NOAA's priorities in
the upcoming year.
I think NOAA is just a critically important scientific
agency, and we all know it has a direct effect on the
livelihoods of all Americans. Tasked with helping our
communities, economy, and ecosystems remain healthy and
resilient, we have to recognize that, in the face of growing
climate change threats, NOAA provides absolutely critical
research products and services necessary to us. I think the
budget request is a positive step, but as the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee has mentioned, in the proposed 22 percent
budget cut that passed the House a couple of weeks ago, I think
that would be pretty--a pretty catastrophic impact on NOAA, and
I'd love to have your thoughts on that when it comes to your
testimony. I'm eager to learn from you, Administrator, about
how the proposed cuts would affect NOAA, and your services.
We learned that one of the primary reasons we lag our
international counterparts in severe weather forecasting is due
to NOAA's lack of access to high-performance computing, as well
as its investment in data assimilation, which is a step behind.
And as we've seen ever more severe weather events, including,
I'll mention, this winter's just devastating flooding and loss
of life in California due to atmospheric rivers, the forecasts
and warnings are needed now more than ever.
I believe that the President's budget request contains a
number of programs and activities to expand NOAA's capabilities
and increase the resiliencies of communities, and one important
investment for the future of NOAA's observational capabilities
that would result from the next generation of weather
satellites. Now, the data collected by NOAA's weather
satellites really make up the backbone of NOAA's weather
prediction capabilities. And although you're working diligently
to update the national civilian weather satellite system to
increase capabilities and the continuity of accuracy, we really
need to support those efforts, as is outlined in the
President's budget.
As we look ahead to the future of NOAA, I look forward to
working with Chairman Lucas and our colleagues on both sides of
the aisle as we sort through the various issues relative to
NOAA, and the President--the Chairman's idea about
restructuring, which we will work on in good faith. I would
just note that, you know, sometimes it's easy to focus on the
cost, and neglect to understand the value. And here's a case
where, with our atmospheric rivers threatening agriculture, the
fire devastation that's occurred not only in California but
throughout the West, we need accurate forecasting. Both to pre-
deploy resources for predicted devastating fires, to help our
farmers prepare for, you know, devastating flooding, and many
other things. So I look forward to hearing from you how the
President's proposed budget would help us better protect
Americans who need your predictions to be accurate, timely.
And, again, thank you for appearing here, Doctor. I look
forward to your testimony, and I would yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Miller and Ranking Member Ross for
holding this important hearing on NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024
budget request. Welcome back Dr. Spinrad, and thank you for
your service and leadership at NOAA. I am looking forward to
today's discussion on NOAA's priorities in the upcoming year.
NOAA is a critically important scientific agency that has a
direct effect on the livelihood of all Americans. NOAA is
tasked with helping our communities, economy, and ecosystems
remain healthy and resilient. This is especially important as
we continue to face the growing threat of climate change. NOAA
provides critical research, products, and services necessary
for our ability to understand, adapt to, and mitigate climate
change effects.
I would say the budget request is a positive step forward
in NOAA's ability to accomplish its mission. However, I would
be remiss to not mention the proposed 22 percent budget cut for
civilian agencies that passed the House a couple of weeks ago
as part of Speaker McCarthy's debt limit scheme. Anything even
approaching that cut, or the 10 year flat-lining of agencies
also proposed, would devastate NOAA's ability to provide life-
saving and economy-saving weather forecasting and climate
services.
I am eager to learn from you, Administrator Spinrad, about
how these irresponsible cuts would affect NOAA and the services
it provides. We have learned that one of the primary reasons
the U.S. lags behind our international counterparts in severe
weather forecasting is due to NOAA's access to high-
performance computing and its investment in data assimilation
being a step behind. Also, as we have seen ever more severe
weather events with significant impacts, including this past
winter's devasting flooding and loss of life in California due
to atmospheric rivers, NOAA's forecasts and warnings are needed
now, more than ever. How would these suggested budget cuts
reduce the progress of bettering our forecasts and preparing
our communities for climate change? These are just a few
questions that need to be answered to understand how these cuts
would affect our communities.
The President's budget request, on the other hand, contains
a number of programs and activities that will expand NOAA's
capabilities and increase the resiliency of communities. One
important investment for the future of NOAA's observational
capabilities is the increased funding request for the next
generation of weather satellites. The data collected by NOAA's
weather satellites make up the backbone of NOAA's weather
prediction capabilities and support weather forecasting
activities around the globe. NOAA is working diligently to
update the national civilian weather satellite system to ensure
increased capabilities and continuity of accurate and reliable
forecasts and warnings. NOAA is actively assessing future
capabilities and working toward a more nimble satellite system
in the Near Earth Orbit Network. I look forward to learning
more about these efforts in today's discussion.
As we look ahead at the future of NOAA, I look forward to
working with Chairman Lucas and colleagues on both sides of the
aisle to continue to focus on identifying and investing in the
necessary solutions to address severe weather and the threat of
climate change.
I yield back.

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. I now want to
recognize the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, to
introduce our witness today.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. It's an
honor to introduce Dr. Rick Spinrad, Administrator of the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA, and an
Oregonian. Dr. Spinrad is a champion of science, ocean health,
and natural resources with a distinguished career spanning more
than four decades. He has made significant contributions to the
field of oceanography and dedicated his life to the advancement
of scientific knowledge, and the protection of the planet's
precious resources.
As an alum of Oregon State University, Dr. Spinrad
understands and deeply appreciates the natural beauty and
economic importance of the country's coastal regions. His
lifelong work as an oceanographer reflects his expertise in
this area, and his dedication to its preservation and
protection.
Before his appointment as NOAA administrator, Dr. Spinrad
held a number of important positions in the field of
oceanography. He served as Chief Scientist of NOAA's National
Ocean Service, and the Assistant Administrator for Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research. He was also the Vice President for
Research at Oregon State University, where he oversaw research
programs in a wide range of scientific disciplines. Dr. Spinrad
has served as a member of numerous scientific advisory
committees, including the Joint Ocean Commission Initiative,
and the National Science Foundation's Advisory Committee for
Geosciences.
As Administrator, Dr. Spinrad has been instrumental in
developing and implementing key policies and programs that
support NOAA's mission to understand and predict changes in
climate, weather, oceans, and coasts. Additionally, his
expertise is vital to implementing important investments from
the Fiscal Year 2024 budget request in research and
development, coastal resilience, and climate adaptation. We're
fortunate to have such a distinguished and accomplished
individual leading NOAA, and I am confident that his--under his
leadership, the Nation's natural resources are in good hands.
Please join me in welcoming NOAA Administrator Dr. Rick
Spinrad. And I yield back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici. I now recognize
Administrator Spinrad for 5 minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE RICHARD W. SPINRAD,

Ph.D., ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL OCEANIC

AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION (NOAA)

Dr. Spinrad. Chair Miller, Ranking Member Ross, Chair
Lucas, and Ranking Member Lofgren, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, NOAA. And,
Congresswoman Bonamici, thank you for that very kind
introduction.
For Fiscal Year 2024, NOAA proposes a budget of $6.8
billion in discretionary appropriations, an increase of $450.5
million from the Fiscal Year 2023 enacted. The Fiscal Year 2024
budget builds on investments in the Inflation Reduction Act and
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law for climate-ready coasts,
climate data and services, and fisheries and protected
resources. This combination of funding will empower us to
address a growing demand for climate information, services, and
products that are needed to build a climate-ready nation.
This budget supports NOAA's goal of scaling up critical
efforts to understand and mitigate impacts of the climate
crisis. Specifically, NOAA will make investments in research,
observations, and forecasting, restoration and resilience,
offshore wind development, and equity both within the agency
and around the Nation. It also includes additional investments
in our fleet and aircraft, satellites and space weather
observations, and predictions to ensure NOAA continues to
provide actionable environmental intelligence that is the basis
for smart policy and decisionmaking in a changing world.
Communities around the country, rural and urban, are
struggling with the effects of high-impact weather, climate,
and water events like hurricanes, floods, droughts, wildfires,
and fisheries collapse. Our partners, including other Federal
agencies, emergency managers, and underserved and vulnerable
communities, rely on NOAA's weather and climate data, tools,
and services to gain insights in order to take decisive action.
Therefore, NOAA's Fiscal Year 2024 request will make
significant investments to optimize the National Weather
Service Integrated Dissemination Program, improve precipitation
forecasts using NOAA's Unified Forecast System, and expand our
service delivery through the capabilities of the Climate
Adaptation Partnerships Program, among other things.
As our weather and climate become increasingly complex,
NOAA's satellite observations, data, and scientific experts are
needed now more than ever. In Fiscal Year 2024, NOAA will
invest in the next generation of satellites, which will allow
us to better observe environmental phenomena so that we can
expand our service delivery to meet the evolving needs of the
American public. In Fiscal Year 2024 NOAA will continue to
optimize advances in science and technology to create value-
added, data-driven, sustainable economic development, with a
particular focus on the new blue economy.
Our request supports the expansion of offshore wind energy,
ocean and coastal mapping and charting, and development of key
information systems in our tsunami, weather, and space
infrastructure. To that end, NOAA will continue to work closely
with the Department of the Interior's Bureau of Ocean Energy
Management to minimize the effects of offshore energy projects
on protected marine resources, fisheries, and important
habitats, as well as mitigate impacts to our fishery surveys.
Additionally, Fiscal Year 2024 funding will support
improvement in the safety of commercial space activities as
Earth's orbits become increasingly congested with space traffic
and debris. Our request will allow the Office of Space Commerce
to continue toward meeting its goal of achieving full operating
capability for space situational awareness services.
NOAA continues to prioritize equity in every facet of our
mission delivery, including how we co-develop and provide
products and services to every community. NOAA is working
internally to create a model agency that draws from the full
diversity of the Nation, where everyone is treated with dignity
and respect. In Fiscal Year 2024, NOAA will expand the use of
social, economic, and climate change metrics that uniquely
characterize a community's vulnerability and resilience to
disturbances. This will in turn enable users to implement
policies that address environmental, climate, and racial equity
and justice considerations.
People know that they can turn to NOAA for reliable climate
and weather information to help make informed decisions that
help save lives and livelihoods. With increased funding in
Fiscal Year 2024, NOAA will ensure continuity from legacy
systems, while providing significant improvements in data and
products, and continue investments aligned with our strategic
vision. I look forward to working closely with you all and
discussing NOAA's mission more with you today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Spinrad follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. Thank you for your testimony. The Chair
recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Administrator Spinrad, in December 2022 NOAA began its work
on its next generation Geostationary Extended Observations,
known as GeoXO, Satellite Program. This is NOAA's largest
procurement ever. Issues with this previous NOAA weather
satellite procurement, such as the Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite R Series (GOES-R) and the Joint Polar
Satellite System (JPSS), are enlisting on GAO's (Government
Accountability Office's) High Risk Series.
Due to significant schedule delays that threaten gaps in
weather monitoring, degraded capabilities from what was
originally promised, and outrageous cost overruns, GOES-R went
from a projection of under $7 billion to costing over $11
billion. JPSS, when originally conceived as the National Polar-
orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite Systems (NPOESS),
was estimated to cost $6.5 billion, but eventually was scrapped
in place of JPSS, which ballooned to nearly $13 billion, not
accounting for $4 billion sunk into NPOESS. Very simply, what
specifically is NOAA doing to ensure history is not repeated on
GeoXO? And I'd like concrete steps and procedures, not broad
goals.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Chair Miller, and I'd start by
saying that obviously this element of our observational
infrastructure is one of the critical components in our being
able to produce even better forecasts--observations for the
breadth of phenomena that were alluded to in the opening
statements, from hurricanes, to atmospheric rivers, to even
some of the fisheries issues that we deal with. So, having a
sustained, reliable, well-managed satellite constellation
activity is critical for NOAA.
To that end, one of the things that I have undertaken in my
role as administrator is to build what I would call a rigorous
acquisition strategy and structure into our satellite program,
which involves a requirements-based approach, a very specific
definition of risk register elements, and mitigation aspects
for that risk register, as well as milestone gates for each
step in the acquisition process. Consequently, the budget that
we've developed goes out several years, builds on lessons
learned and capabilities we have right now, and also has risk
mitigation elements, in terms of technology insertion.
So that alludes to the fact that it takes several years to
design, build, and ultimately launch these satellites. We know
technology changes in that period. Can we design in a way that
we can incorporate, in sort of a spiral development context,
the new technologies to make sure that by the time we launch,
say in the early 2030's, we're using the best, highest, and
most reliable technology available to improve our forecast
capabilities.
Chairman Miller. And do you feel confident in your
approach, in terms of mitigating those costs in the future? As
I know that technology evolves over years, as you had stated,
and costs increase, which we are very aware of, especially now,
in today's economy, but you yourself, are you confident that we
can treat taxpayer money responsibly and use it efficiently
regarding these programs, and not have them balloon like some
of the others that I just referenced?
Dr. Spinrad. I--thank you, Chair Miller. I feel very
confident, largely because I have a lot of confidence in our
own technology, and our own technical expertise, but we also
work very closely with our partners. So we work very closely
with NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) on
the initial design and construction, and launch, obviously, of
these satellites, and we also have ongoing dialog with our--I
would say partners--around the world. The European
Meteorological Satellite Service, for example, the Japanese
Satellite Service. Not so much relying on them but learning
lessons with respect to technology from our partners. And,
obviously, we rely heavily on our defense sector, and the
methods and technologies that they are developing as well.
Chairman Miller. Thank you. I'll try to squeeze this last
one in. Administrator Spinrad, my district, Ohio-7, touches the
southern part of Lake Erie and contains the Cuyahoga River. In
2022, and for the first time in 30 years, NOAA sent one of its
white ships to the Great Lakes with the explicit goal of
mapping. While I appreciate last year's efforts and hope NOAA
will continue to send its ships to the Great Lakes, the stark
reality is that currently over--only 7 percent of the Great
Lakes have been mapped. This leaves a tremendous amount of
information on the table that could help us environmentally and
economically.
With NOAA having a set goal of mapping the entire U.S.
entire Exclusive Economic Zone by 2040, and with NOAA mapping
activities being flat-funded in your proposed budget, will NOAA
be able to realistically meet this mapping trajectory, and is
this a task that you can carry out on your own, and only with
crude assets?
Dr. Spinrad. So thank you for that question. I'm personally
especially noting the work done in the Great Lakes because my
own aide actually came off the Thomas Jefferson, and actually
conducted some of that survey work, so I'm--I've got a personal
guide associated with the work that needs to be done. Mapping
and charting of the Great Lakes and coastal waters is a
critical issue. We are behind the curve, in terms of being able
to get to the full objectives that have been stipulated for
many years. So what do we do about it? Well, one of the first
things is establish, through a strategic design, what are the
priorities, how to get to those goals?
So the national ocean mapping, exploration, and
characterization, which includes the Great Lakes, gives us a
pathway toward reaching the kinds of goals you alluded to, but
also we're looking aggressively at how to work with our private
sector partners to make sure that we can complement our
government capabilities with those industry capabilities to get
to the goals that you've alluded.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Dr. Spinrad. I now recognize
Ranking Member Ross for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Severe weather
is not new to North Carolina. Constituents in my district, and
across the State, have been hit by hurricanes, floods,
tornadoes, ice, and snowstorms. NOAA's Office of Marine
Aviation Operations manages and operates NOAA's specialized
ships and aircraft that are responsible for a range of critical
research and collecting environmental data. This includes the
P-3 aircraft that fly into tropical cyclones, collecting
essential data that improves the intensity and tracks of
hurricane forecasts by 10 to 15 percent, and 15 to 20 percent
respectively.
The two nearly 50-year-old P-3 aircraft will reach their
end of life in 2030. The intended replacement aircraft, the C-
130's, will take at least 6 years to become operational. While
the proposed budget ensures the P-3 aircraft will remain
operational through 2030, I'm concerned with the lack of detail
on the plan to replace those aircraft and acquire the new C-
130's that were highlighted as a priority. As you're aware,
your rather--weather research missions are increasingly put at
risk if the acquisition plan is not on schedule. What's your
plan to ensure that there's no gap in the data that the P-3
planes collect?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you, Ranking Member Ross, for raising
this very important issue. I'll start by saying that you will
see no compromise in our mission capability in the years to
come, especially tied to hurricane reconnaissance and forecast.
As you indicated, we're planning for the replacement of the two
P-3s with up to four aircraft. That's part of an aircraft
recapitalization plan that took several years to develop, is
well thought out, and well justified. We've already started
down that path through the resources provided in the
supplemental appropriation. We have begun contracts for
purchase of the first of those C-130 replacements, and the
intent, as funds are available, is to include options on that
contract for three additional aircraft.
Ms. Ross. And how would any budget cuts affect that?
Dr. Spinrad. Budget cuts obviously--no part of our mission
is optional, and budget cuts would undoubtedly delay or, dare I
say, depending on the specific guidance we get with respect to
cuts, actually defer that kind of acquisition. And the main
point, then, is we will lose that, as you indicated, anywhere
from 15 to 30 percent improvement in our capability to forecast
those storms.
But I also want to point out that we have another
aircraft--so when we talk about the hurricane hunters, we also
have a high altitude aircraft, a Gulfstream 550 right now, that
we use, and we've got resources through the Inflation Reduction
Act to purchase an additional high altitude aircraft, and we
have started that contract negotiation as well. So we're well
on the way, in terms of contracts and acquisitions, to have two
aircraft under construction for purchase by NOAA this year.
Ms. Ross. Great. Next question, the important work being
done across NOAA cannot be done without its workforce, and I
represent some of the workforce. I want to highlight
specifically the National Weather Service in the Raleigh
office, and they--the work they do in providing severe weather
and climate forecasts and warning that help protect lives,
property, and more of constituents in my district and in the
surrounding areas.
Having a robust and diverse workforce is critical for NOAA
to effectively carry out its mission. However, being
competitive with the private sector, recruiting diverse
experts, and strict work policies seem to be challenges that
NOAA faces in recruiting and retaining people. Can you expand
on NOAA's effort to recruit and retain its workforce, as well
as your DEI (diversity, equity, and inclusion) efforts?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for that. I couldn't be prouder
of our workforce, so I love being able to talk about our
ability to recruit and retain. We have, I would argue, one of
the most dedicated and highly professional workforces in the
Federal Government. The challenges of bringing people in,
especially as we come out of COVID, and try to ensure that we
are meeting our mission, but also attending to the work/life
balance requirements that people have, has required us to put
policies in place to make sure that we can accommodate people's
needs and provide real opportunities.
I would start by saying it's our mission that attracts most
people into NOAA. A lot of folks are excited about working on
improvements to weather forecasting, fisheries management,
tsunami warnings, everything we do. We are exploiting--I should
say heavily using--a number of tools like direct hire
authority. So that allows us to use some of our fellowship and
internship programs to bring people on in a much more
accelerated fashion. I've also redoubled our efforts, through
our Human Capital Services Office, to make sure that we can
aggressively work through the Federal hiring process. We are
already more than halfway through this fiscal year, and we are
more than halfway through our goal of hires for this year.
Diversity equity inclusion is of primary importance with
respect to what our workforce looks like. We have some work to
do in that regard, and I'm delighted that we've established a
program of employee resources groups, as well as initiatives to
work with the educational community through historically Black
colleges and universities, and minority-serving institutions,
to help build that--if you will, that workforce that then can
apply to our jobs.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. I see my time's expired, but
it goes without saying that if you have a 22 percent budget
cut, it will affect hiring, is that correct?
Dr. Spinrad. It--again, I think, depending on what
constraints and what guidance we're provided with, we would
undoubtedly be faced with reductions in force with a cut of
that magnitude.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Collins [presiding]. All right. Thank you, Ms. Ross.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Posey from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Dr. Spinrad, could you
clarify how NOAA is working with all stakeholders, including
the recreational and commercial fishermen, concerning its
proposed rules to establish vessel speed measures to protect
whales?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you for that question, Congressman
Posey. So the proposed rulemaking that you've alluded to is
following the procedures associated with rulemaking that--or
dictated to us----
Mr. Posey. OK. But any reason why the Marine Manufacturers'
Association told me they were not consulted before the rule was
published?
Dr. Spinrad. Actually, I believe the National Marine
Manufacturers' Association did provide a comment during the
public comment period.
Mr. Posey. But before it was published?
Dr. Spinrad. Well, the public comment period opens up after
the proposed rulemaking.
Mr. Posey. So there's no consulting before--about the rule
at all?
Dr. Spinrad. The process is one where open----
Mr. Posey. OK.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Up the public comment----
Mr. Posey. Could you tell me what specific statutory
authority that NOAA has to justify the proposed rules?
Dr. Spinrad. This is done under the context of the Marine
Mammal Protection Act (MMPA) and the Endangered Species Act
(ESA).
Mr. Posey. What specific statutory authority to set speed
limits in the ocean?
Dr. Spinrad. I'm going to have to get back to you with
respect to which specific part of the statute is the relevant
one, but it is under the Marine Mammal Protection Act.
Mr. Posey. Well, I would really like to know what specific
authority that Congress said we want you to set speed limits in
the ocean.
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. I want to be careful that I make correct
reference to the component of MMPA and the ESA, so I'll have to
get back to you with that specific answer.
Mr. Posey. OK. Have you completed cost/benefit analysis of
that rule?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, we did do a cost/benefit analysis.
Mr. Posey. OK. Would you send me a copy of that?
Dr. Spinrad. We can certainly.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Chairman, I want to ask for unanimous
consent to include for the record a congressional delegation
letter to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
concerning the published rule.
Mr. Collins. Without objection.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Just out of curiosity, how many
whales have been killed by boats? Do you have any idea?
Dr. Spinrad. All whales?
Mr. Posey. Let's say the right whales.
Dr. Spinrad. The North Atlantic Right Whales, which are the
ones that are under consideration right now in the rulemaking,
the number is--and I'll give you an approximate number of about
13 in the last 15 years.
Mr. Posey. OK. Yes, I mean, is that going to compare with
the windmill dying of the whales in the Northeast?
Dr. Spinrad. There is no scientific evidence that any of
the activity associated with the offshore wind development has
had an impact on the health of the whales.
Mr. Posey. OK. Does NOAA plan to control costs by
developing the Geostationary Extended Observation Sounder
instrument at the same time as the Japanese Sounder?
Dr. Spinrad. We obviously are working very closely with our
Japanese colleagues. In fact, next week I'll be meeting with
the director of the Japanese Meteorological Agency and the
director of the Japanese Space Agency. And in the acquisition
for the sounder and imager, we have coordinated closely with
the Japanese, and made sure that our plans with respect to
acquisition are understood by them. So the answer is yes, we
are coordinating closely with our Japanese colleagues.
Mr. Posey. OK. Any chance that could be delayed, sounder
could be delayed?
Dr. Spinrad. That our acquisition of the sounder, or our--
I'm--I want to make sure I understand----
Mr. Posey. The award.
Dr. Spinrad. Well, at this point we're on track for the
award.
Mr. Posey. OK. Any idea how we could avoid any delays in
it, or----
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. I think the--well, the sounder
acquisition is underway. The imager acquisition, as I recall,
is scheduled for August for announcement, and the way to make
sure we stay on that is to use the rigorous acquisition cycle
and milestone approach that we have been using thus far.
Mr. Posey. And we're on course----
Dr. Spinrad. And we are on course, yes, sir.
Mr. Posey. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Posey. The Chair now recognizes
Ms. Lofgren for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I discussed in my
opening statement, the situation with flooding in California is
pretty severe, and actually probably going to get worse when
the snowpack in the Sierra melts in the Central Valley. But in
my own district of the 18th District, we had just catastrophic
flooding in Pajaro. The levees broke, hundreds of people were
displaced along the Salinas River. Levees were over-breached,
fields were inundated, San Ardo was flooded. That was in
January, and then again in March, and these were described as
atmospheric river events.
So I'm concerned, and maybe you can reassure me, that it
looks like the NOAA budget proposal looks to reduce the
atmospheric river observations. That would be a concern. Can
you explain that to me? Where are we going to be on that
observation--critical observation?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, the--I assure you it's very much front
and center in our minds to improve our capability for
atmospheric river forecasts, and there are various components
of that, most of which are actually seeing increases in budget
requests. And so I would point out that the very early research
on atmospheric rivers was done by a NOAA researcher, Marty
Ralph, who's now at Scripps Institution of----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Oceanography, and I took the
opportunity to get briefed by Marty just a few months ago to
find out exactly what his intent was to do with our colleagues
in Boulder. So there is a small increase for investment in
atmospheric river research. I would also point out that part of
the capability for the forecasts is our detection capability.
So the geostationary satellite investments are intended to
ensure we continue to have observational capabilities. I
alluded to the improvements in our high altitude aircraft. The
Gulfstream 550 is----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Critical observational
capability. And then the last thing I would point out is the--a
large chunk of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law funding is
tied to flooding forecast capabilities, and addressing some of
the precipitation frequency forecasts built out of what we call
the Atlas 15, the precipitation atlas. So there are a number of
different steps that we're undertaking, both in research and
operations----
Ms. Lofgren. OK.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. To ensure improved capability.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much. That's very reassuring. I
know you've discussed the impact of budget reductions. I'd ask
that you--if your budget were cut 22 percent, could you
describe--not here, but later--give us an outline of what are
the various alternatives that you would look at to do a 22
percent reduction in your budget? And if we could get that
after the hearing, I would very much appreciate it. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren. The chair now
recognizes myself for 5 minutes.
Administrator, NOAA has proposed a rule to broaden or add
boats over 35 feet to the current 10 knot rule. It's currently
imposed on boats over 65 foot, and in specific areas for those
boats over 65 foot. So not only does it drop the boat length
down from 65 to 35, but it's also going to expand the zone to
basically the entire East Coast, and as far out as 100 miles,
and that's going to be up to 7 months a year. My question is,
can you tell the Committee just how many registered vessels
there are between 35 and 65 feet long?
Dr. Spinrad. I can't give you an exact number. We can
certainly come back to that. I can tell you that, of the
recreational boats, only about 3 to 4 percent of them are
larger than 35 feet.
Mr. Collins. My numbers are upwards of well over 10,000
that I've been able to find, just so far since you and I
recently talked. You just stated that you approximately think
there may be 13 to 15--out of 15 years, these whales that have
been hit. From what I've read, we've had 24 strikes in 24 years
across 10 States. Out of that, eight were attributed to boats
between 35 and 65 feet. You know what those odds are? That's
one in a million. In light of that, how do you justify this
rule?
Dr. Spinrad. The--I would point out that of those eight
strikes you alluded to, six were actually fatal as well, and I
would say the justification for the rule comes from our
obligation to follow the law of the Marine Mammal Protection
Act.
Mr. Collins. That's one in a million odds to hit that, to
hit a right whale with a boat that size. As a matter of fact,
the strike zone that I think you have is somewhere in the
neighborhood of three meters, or 30 feet? A boat between 35 and
65 feet only drafts around three meters--or three feet, I'm
sorry, one meter. The change will make this mandate--it's going
to be the most consequential maritime regulation that the
recreational boating/fishing sector has ever seen.
And I just want to--I want NOAA to--you need to pause
implementing--implementation of this rule, because it's not
only going to have an effect on commercial and recreation
fishing, but you're going to devastate the maritime industry up
and down the entire East Coast. And so--I don't know how to
express that any plainer to this administration, but NOAA needs
to take an extra hard look at what they're about to do to this
industry. And with that, I yield back. The Chair recognizes Ms.
Bonamici for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. The work of NOAA has been
so critically important in our home State of Oregon, and, as
representative for the--Oregon's North Coast, I'm very pleased
to see that NOAA's budget is increased to expand NOAA's work on
what you refer to climate goods and services. Our constituents
benefit, and we benefit as policymakers, when we have good
information and good science about wildfires, floods, drought,
extreme heat, coasts, mitigation. There's just a lot that's
going to be beneficial in there. Also align myself with the
remarks of Ranking Member Ross on the importance of workforce,
particularly with good weather and climate forecasters, and
then also thank you for the mention of the blue economy.
Tremendous economic potential for our coastal communities with
the right policy.
So, Dr. Spinrad, I want to talk about the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, both of
which I enthusiastically supported. We have seen funding
notices for the infrastructure law, and I'm thrilled about
the--six of the projects now are in Oregon, and our coastal
communities, important infrastructure work there. So we have
not seen a spend plan for the Inflation Reduction Act
implementation. We expected it a few months back, and we're
eager to see more of NOAA's plans, like the Climate-Ready Coast
Initiative. So I appreciate your work to move forward on these
initiatives, but what can I tell my constituents about the
timing of the investments, and when they'll start to see
benefits in their communities?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes, thank you for that, Congresswoman
Bonamici. We're also very excited about what we're going to be
able to do in terms of climate-ready coasts, coastal
resilience, and we're especially delighted to make the
announcement. I personally joined the Vice-President to
announce $561 million worth of investment, including those that
you alluded to in Oregon. That is just the first in what I know
will be many similar announcements.
The Inflation Reduction Act spend plan is moving through
the system right now. We've made some final recommendations,
and specifically wanted to make sure we were attending to needs
of underserved communities and tribal communities, and that, of
course, required a rigorous consultation process. But I can
confidently tell you that it will be up here for consideration
very shortly, within a matter of hopefully a couple of weeks to
months.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific, that's good news. I appreciate
that. So as you're aware, Administrator Spinrad, Oregon's
highly vulnerable to tsunami events. I actually remember, back
in 2011, after the earthquake and tsunami in Japan, we were
bracing on the Oregon coast, but we're very concerned about a
near-shore tsunami, of course, being on the Cascadia Subduction
Zone. So one of the first bills I worked on when I got to this
Committee more than a decade ago was the Tsunami Warning
Education Research Act, that will really help our coastal
communities prepare and update our tsunami warning system.
So I'm glad that the Fiscal Year 2024 budget includes an
increase to unify the tsunami warning centers under a common
analytic system so they can continue to operate smoothly, avoid
operational failures, and invest in information technology and
information security. So how will these additional steps
provide resources to protect our communities and ecosystems
from these natural disasters? And the Tsunami Warning Program
authorization expires this year, so do you have some
suggestions about what we should be considering as we draft
legislation to reauthorize the program?
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you for that question. Tsunamis are, of
course, a looming hazard, and I think, if you look at what
happened in the last couple of years, for example, the Hunga
Tonga earthquake--or mudslide-generated tsunami showed us that
we still have a lot to learn with respect to what will generate
these earthquakes. And I know I don't need to point out to you
that, in the State of Oregon, it's the near zone Cascadia
Subduction Zone threat that means having a tsunami that could
hit the State in less than----
Ms. Bonamici. It would be devastating.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Half an hour. Yes.
Ms. Bonamici. Right, right.
Dr. Spinrad. So, a few thoughts. You alluded to some of
them. Technological solutions through improved observation and
detection capabilities, including what we call the DART (Deep-
ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis) buoys, the next
generation of DART buoys, is one of the things we'll be working
on. We're also looking at a coordinated--even more coordination
with our colleagues at USGS (United States Geological Survey),
because if it's a--an earthquake generated near zone----
Ms. Bonamici. Right.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. How can we use the existing
warning systems as much for the near zone generation as we can
for the distance generated tsunamis? I would also point out
that--I want to emphasize the issue you raised with regard to
unification of services from the two centers in Alaska and
Hawaii. I did visit our Hawaii center, and asked specifically
what do we need to do to make sure that--basically, for the
user communities, they don't care if a warning is coming from
one center or the other. We need to make sure that we have a
standardized approach and process. So I'm delighted----
Ms. Bonamici. OK.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. The head of the Weather Service,
Ken Graham, has taken this as one of his top priorities.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific. That's encouraging, and I'm about
to run out of time, so I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Collins. All right. Thank you. At this time we have no
other questions, unless you all have any follow up that you
would like to address the administrator?
Ms. Ross. Just to thank him for his time.
Dr. Spinrad. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. I know we have a couple of other Members that
were making their back over here. We've got numerous hearings
going on at the same time. But I did have something I wanted to
follow up with you. I had a meeting yesterday, and it was with
Georgia Tech there in Atlanta, and they were very proud of
their weather research that they're doing. And--do you tie into
Georgia Tech, or is there a similarity between what you two do,
or----
Dr. Spinrad. Absolutely. I would say we have a wonderful
relationship with the whole academic community. I can't tell
you chapter and verse of every project we're working with with
our colleagues at Georgia Tech, but I know if I went back to
the office, we'd get a nice list of the specific activities.
We work--in our research office, our Office of Oceanic and
Atmospheric Research, we manage our research two ways. One is
we have our own laboratories, and that is typically where we do
things that we know are going to have to be sustained over many
years, and which are directly tied into our operational
capabilities. And then we have a research--a funded research
program, sponsored research, with our academic colleagues,
including Georgia Tech, where, through competitive grants, not
dissimilar to the way the National Science Foundation conducts
research, we actually provide grants, contracts, cooperative
agreements, to do research on areas where we see particular
expertise. And so a place like Georgia Tech, for example, has
some world-renowned hurricane researchers, where they can bring
special insight, and provide new findings that we can then
advance into our operational capability.
Mr. Collins. Right. So, I mean--and I just wanted to
clarify--so there's really no duplication in what NOAA does,
and maybe what some of these academic universities are doing?
Dr. Spinrad. No, that----
Mr. Collins. It's kind of complementary?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. In fact, when I was the head of NOAA
research, I instituted a rigorous review process for our
research portfolio, including our laboratories, specifically to
ensure there was no duplication of effort. We also have a
Science Advisory Board, which is a Federal advisory committee,
which rigorously reviews our research activities to ensure,
first of all, we're spending the taxpayers' money in the most
appropriate manner, and second of all, that we are not
duplicating effort.
Mr. Collins. Yes, sir. Do you have any idea on what's
coming up on--and I didn't get to ask that of the Georgia Tech
representatives there.
Dr. Spinrad. Specifically at Georgia Tech?
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Dr. Spinrad. I don't off the top of my head. I do know
there is some hurricane research. I don't know if we're
currently doing that right now, but we can certainly get back
to you with a more specific answer.
Mr. Collins. Right. OK. Yes, that'd be great. I'd
appreciate that. Thank you.
Dr. Spinrad. Sure. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. The Chair would like to recognize Mr. Lucas,
who's probably 10 pounds lighter.
Chairman Lucas. Mr. Chairman, you will find, as you work
your way through this process, there's lots of exercise you
will get. But that's what makes being a Member of this august
body so wonderful. Are you recognizing me for 5 minutes, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Collins. Yes, sir, you are recognized----
Chairman Lucas. Thank you----
Mr. Collins [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Chairman Lucas [continuing]. Very much. Administrator
Spinrad, when you testified on Fiscal Year 2022 budget, you
said you shared my desire to expand commercial weather data, if
it meets NOAA's standards and sustained availability. And while
the Fiscal Year 2024 budget requests a $6 million increase for
commercial data purchases, it also lays out a plan to keep the
account essentially the same level of $25 million every year
through 20--fiscal year 2028. Can you explain the decision--can
you explain this decision just a little bit more to us?
Dr. Spinrad. Yes. Thank you for that question. And I
actually think we're in an extraordinary position right now
with respect to the use of commercial data. I--when I--you may
know I have come out of retirement twice now to come back to
NOAA. When I had----
Chairman Lucas. Thank you.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Previously served as the head of
NOAA Research, the idea of using commercial data was not even
part of the thinking. So I think the first thing to recognize
is that we now have a plan for sustained investment in
commercial data. I would also add that, quite honestly, it's a
bit of an unknown in two regards, because the private sector is
developing new capabilities, and also because we want to make
sure it's sustainable. The private sector is going to provide
us data, but they need a bottom line of--if you will, of other
clients. And so part of the thinking with respect to the long-
term investment is let's stabilize this, let's look at what the
power of the investment is, and let's continue to reconsider
how it should be balanced.
Chairman Lucas. Can you expand for a moment on the sources
on commercial data, number of providers, the new types of data
becoming available to--in--on the market every year that NOAA
could potentially purchase? Just give us a little background.
Dr. Spinrad. I can give you a general response with a
little bit of insight, and then I'd love to be able to follow
up with some very specific response.
Chairman Lucas. Please.
Dr. Spinrad. But I know, for example, one of the areas
that's been most powerful and effective is the purchase of what
we call GPS (Global Positioning System) Radio Occultation Data,
and that we have worked with at least three different
corporations for the purchase of this data. In short, this is a
novel capability the private sector has developed that allows
us to collect thousands of profiles of atmospheric data per day
using some very creative manipulation of satellite transmission
data. Those three companies have demonstrated effectiveness in
doing that. I believe we just renewed the contract for one of
those. But that's an example of what we're doing, and how--and,
by the way, those data feed directly into our numerical weather
prediction guidance for our forecasters.
Chairman Lucas. Absolutely. This Congress I am leading a
major legislative effort to establish NOAA as an independent
agency with an organic act. And I'm not going to ask you to
endorse, I'm not even going to ask you for a comment on the
legislation. But I don't want to hide the ball either on the
intent behind my question. When putting together NOAA's budget,
can you estimate how many meetings or conversations you have
with what you would define as your higher-ups in the Department
of Commerce (DOC)?
Dr. Spinrad. A lot. And it's interesting you ask that,
Chair Lucas, because I do keep a very close look at my
calendar, in terms of----
Chairman Lucas. Uh-huh.
Mr. Spinrad [continuing]. Balance of internal and external
engagement, and I can comfortably tell you it is about 50/50.
And internal also includes the Department of Commerce. Now just
my higher-ups, but I would say some of the most productive
dialogs I'm having, for example, are with my counterpart at the
Patent and Trademark Office, International Trade
Administration, Economic Development Administration, and or
course NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology)
and Census. So a lot of cross-decking in the Department.
Chairman Lucas. Absolutely. And, to continue with my logic,
it's public knowledge that Commerce has the capacity to
transfer NOAA funding to its Working Capital Fund for shared
services, and has done so with millions of dollars. Do you and
DOC leadership discuss these potential actions, or, better yet,
potential dollar amounts when putting together your annual
budgets?
Dr. Spinrad. We certainly discuss with the Department those
distributions, yes.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you. With that, Mr. Chairman, I
appreciate your indulgence on time, and I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Having no other
Members, or seeing no other Members--well, seeing no other
Members that have any questions, I want to thank the witness
for his valuable testimony, and the Members for their
questions. The record will remain open for 2 weeks for
additional comments and written questions from Members. With
that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
