- CONTINUING U.S. LEADERSHIP IN COMMERCIAL SPACE AT HOME AND ABROAD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CONTINUING U.S. LEADERSHIP
IN COMMERCIAL SPACE AT HOME AND ABROAD
=====================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-20

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-767PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

July 13, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Eric Sorensen, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15

Witnesses:

Ms. Karina Drees, President, Commercial Spaceflight Federation
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Mr. Jim Dunstan, General Counsel, TechFreedom
Oral Statement...............................................    37
Written Statement............................................    39

Dr. Josef S. Koller, Systems Director, Center for Space Policy
and Strategy, The Aerospace Corporation
Oral Statement...............................................    44
Written Statement............................................    46

Ms. Caryn Schenewerk, President, CS Consulting, LLC
Oral Statement...............................................    52
Written Statement............................................    54

Discussion.......................................................    65

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Ms. Karina Drees, President, Commercial Spaceflight Federation...   106

Mr. Jim Dunstan, General Counsel, TechFreedom....................   116

Dr. Josef S. Koller, Systems Director, Center for Space Policy
and Strategy, The Aerospace Corporation........................   126

Ms. Caryn Schenewerk, President, CS Consulting, LLC..............   132

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Paper submitted by Mr. Jim Dunstan, General Counsel, TechFreedom
``Regulating Outer Space: Of Gaps, Overlaps, and
Stovepipes,'' James E. Dunstan, The Center for Growth and
Opportunity at Utah State University.......................   140

CONTINUING U.S. LEADERSHIP
IN COMMERCIAL SPACE
AT HOME AND ABROAD

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 13, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank
Lucas [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
I recognize myself for five minutes for an opening
statement.
Good morning, and welcome to today's hearing where we'll
discuss future and current U.S. leadership in commercial space.
From the dawn of the space age, the private sector has worked
hand-in-hand with the U.S. Government, but it wasn't until the
liftoff of the first privately funded space launch from United
States' soil in 1982 that the Nation's commercial space
industry truly took off.
As industry has grown and evolved over time, Congress
enacted several pieces of space legislation to promote
commercial space activities, while upholding the international
obligations of the United States. This legislation granted the
executive branch regulatory authority over certain space
activities, but also charged agencies with the dual mandate of
both encouraging the private sector and protecting the public
and the national interest of the United States.
Today, the United States is a world leader in commercial
space activities. The Nation hosts an active market for launch
and reentry services that delivers both cutting-edge payloads
and astronauts to space. Nongovernmental entities of all types
and sizes have access to capacities that once were only
available to governments and large corporations, sparking a
renaissance in commercial space activity. The private sector is
expanding into territories historically dominated by national
space programs, proposing business concepts that envision
commercially operated habitats in low-Earth orbit (LEO), on-
orbit servicing and manufacturing, and utilization of space
resources. These are exciting developments. But new
technologies present new issues for the government to consider
when addressing space operations, and Congress must take a
thoughtful approach on how to oversee these innovative
activities without stifling progress.
One such issue is the government's approach toward
commercial human spaceflight activities. In the early 2000's,
Congress authorized the Secretary of Transportation to regulate
aspects of commercial human spaceflight, but not until after
the expiration of a learning period that would allow industry
time to grow and supply regulators with data to inform
appropriate regulations. Congress has since extended this
learning period twice after determining that industry was not
sufficiently mature for additional regulation. The most recent
extension granted in 2015 will expire at the end of September.
Congress must determine whether the current state of commercial
human spaceflight merits an additional learning period
extension, or whether to let the learning period come to an
end. Congress also must address other pressing issues for
commercial space operators, including the appropriate
governance structure for both new and existing space activities
and how to advance space situational awareness (SSA) to
maintain safe operations in orbit.
As this Committee prepares to consider commercial space
legislation, it's imperative that we keep U.S. international
competitiveness at the top of our priorities. Ensuring a robust
commercial space sector is key to maintaining U.S. leadership
in space and technology, and other countries, friendly and
otherwise, are actively engaging in space activities. Some seek
to create a favorable environment for space companies, offering
incentives for both investment and regulatory perspectives. Our
legislation must be carefully written and executed to create a
favorable environment here at home and prevent U.S. companies
from turning to overseas destinations that promise speedy
authorizations with minimal restrictions.
Maintaining U.S. leadership in space is also critical to
the future of international space policy, especially as more
actors become involved in space worldwide, both private and
governmental. The United States' status as a major spacefaring
nation has historically secured us a key role in decisions of
international norms and standards. That has allowed us to
ensure that our off-world activities embody our values,
transparency, fairness, and collaboration. I can assure you
that those aren't the norms that our adversaries would
establish if they were steering the development of
international space policy.
If we want to continue to set the rules of the road,
Congress must work hand-in-hand with the executive branch and
stakeholders to ensure that the United States maintains its
status as a leader in space. Passing legislation that fosters
the burgeoning commercial space industry is a key step toward
this goal. As our Committee develops this legislation, we'll
keep these major considerations in mind, a thoughtful
regulatory environment that supports innovation, a competitive
approach to grow our domestic industry, and a focus on
maintaining U.S. leadership in international space policy.
Our witnesses today represent a range of stakeholder
perspectives, and I look forward to hearing their testimony and
having a robust discussion on these important topics.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's hearing, where we will
discuss current and future U.S. leadership in commercial space.
From the dawn of the space age, the private sector has
worked hand-in-hand with the U.S. government, but it wasn't
until the liftoff of the first privately-funded space launch
from United States soil in 1982 that the nation's commercial
space industry truly took off.
As industry has grown and evolved over time, Congress
enacted several pieces of space legislation to promote
commercial space activities while upholding the international
obligations of the United States.
This legislation granted the executive branch regulatory
authority for certain space activities, but also charged
agencies with the dual mandate of both encouraging the private
sector and protecting the public and the national interests of
the United States.
Today, the United States is a world-leader in commercial
space activities.
The nation hosts an active market for launch and reentry
services that delivers both cutting-edge payloads and
astronauts to space.
Nongovernmental entities of all types and sizes now have
access to capabilities that once were only available to
governments and large corporations, sparking a renaissance in
commercial space activity.
The private sector is expanding into territories
historically dominated by national space programs, proposing
business concepts that envision commercially-operated habitats
in low-Earth orbit, on-orbit servicing and manufacturing, and
utilization of space resources.
These are exciting developments. But new technologies
present new issues for the government to consider when
addressing space operations, and Congress must take a
thoughtful approach on how to oversee these innovative
activities without stifling progress.
One such issue is the federal government's approach towards
commercial human spaceflight activities.
In the early 2000s, Congress authorized the Secretary of
Transportation to regulate aspects of commercial human
spaceflight, but not until after the expiration of a ``learning
period'' that would allow industry time to grow and supply
regulators with data to inform appropriate regulations.
Congress has since extended this learning period twice
after determining that industry was not sufficiently mature for
additional regulation. The most recent extension, granted in
2015, will expire at the end of September.
Congress must determine whether the current state of
commercial human spaceflight merits an additional learning
period extension, or whether to let the learning period come to
an end.
Congress also must address other pressing issues for
commercial space operators, including the appropriate
governance structure for both new and existing space
activities, and how to advance space situational awareness to
maintain safe operations in orbit.
As this Committee prepares to consider commercial space
legislation, it's imperative that we keep U.S. international
competitiveness at the top of our priorities.
Ensuring a robust commercial space sector is key to
maintaining U.S. leadership in science and technology.
Other countries, friendly and otherwise, are actively
engaged in space activities. Some seek to create a favorable
environment for space companies, offering incentives from both
investment and regulatory perspectives.
Our legislation must be carefully written and executed to
create a favorable environment here at home and prevent U.S.
companies from turning to overseas destinations that promise
speedy authorizations with minimal restrictions.
Maintaining U.S. leadership in space is also critical to
the future of international space policy, especially as more
actors become involved in space worldwide, both private and
governmental.
The United States' status as a major spacefaring nation has
historically secured us a key role in discussions of
international norms and standards.
That has allowed us to ensure that our off-world activities
embody our values: transparency, fairness, and collaboration.
I can assure you that those aren't the norms that our
adversaries would establish if they were steering the
development of international space policy.
If we want to continue to set the rules of the road,
Congress must work hand-in-hand with the executive branch and
stakeholders to ensure the U.S. maintains its status as a
leader in space. Passing legislation that fosters the
burgeoning commercial space industry is a key step towards this
goal.
As our Committee develops this legislation we'll keep these
major considerations in mind: a thoughtful regulatory
environment that supports innovation, a competitive approach to
grow our domestic industry, and a focus on maintaining U.S.
leadership in international space policy.
Our witnesses today represent a range of stakeholder
perspectives and I look forward to hearing their testimony and
having a robust discussion on these important topics. I now
recognize the Ranking Member for her opening statement.

Chairman Lucas. I now recognize the Ranking Member for his
comment, opening statement.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's
hearing on continuing U.S. leadership in commercial space at
home and abroad. I also want to extend a warm welcome to our
distinguished witnesses. Thank you for being here today.
Three years ago, during the early months of the COVID-19
pandemic, the Nation breathed a sigh of relief when the SpaceX
crew Dragon demonstration mission successfully and safely
transported crew to the International Space Station (ISS) and
back home again. The United States had been dependent on Russia
to deliver our astronauts to and from the ISS for nearly a
decade following the planned retirement of NASA's (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration)'s Space Shuttle Program.
The success of that crewed demonstration mission was the
culmination of years of government investment and partnership.
Our Nation's investment in civil space R&D (research and
development), science, exploration, and utilization have
advanced the underlying space capabilities and technologies
that have fostered a thriving commercial space industry. I want
to thank the--I want the United States to continue to lead the
world in innovative space technologies, and--which provides
significant economic and societal benefits for our country.
Today's hearing will review the governance of our United
States commercial space sector, if and how the frameworks the
Committee has put into place are sufficient, and what is needed
to not only encourage the continued growth and leadership but
to meet our international obligations. While I'm sure we all
have many questions, one thing is clear. The success of the
industry depends on safety. A bad day could hurt the entire
commercial space industry.
With that in mind, I hope we will hear from our witnesses
on how we can ensure safe and responsible commercial space
behaviors, which are the types of actions we want other nations
to emulate. It's not only the right thing to do, it's our
obligation as signatory to the Outer Space Treaty of 1967, to
ensure authorization and continuing supervision of U.S.
nongovernmental entities in outer space. In short, the U.S.
Government is responsible for what its commercial actors do in
space.
The Science Committee has been at the forefront of
commercial space regulations since the Launch Act of 1984 first
directed the Department of Transportation to license and
regulate commercial space launches. The Committee also
authorized regulation of private remote-sensing space systems,
the last major commercial space statutory update in 2015. Since
that time, commercial space activities have expanded and they
have accelerated. Companies are placing mega-constellations in
space to enable broadband communications and other services.
Private citizens are flying into space on both commercial
suborbital and orbital spacecraft. Companies are providing in-
space satellite servicing. Through NASA, commercial companies
are also developing space stations for low-Earth orbit and
landers to deliver both scientific payloads and astronauts to
the surface of the Moon.
Space is becoming a busy place, placing increasing
importance on the role of space situational awareness
capabilities to track space debris, satellites, and to warn
operators of potential risks for collisions. Each of these
areas come with issues and complexities, as well as advocates
for differing positions. I hope we'll have an opportunity to
hear from the relevant Federal agencies on their role as the
implementers of regulatory frameworks, as well as other key
sectors such as the insurance industry on what Congress needs
to do and what we need to consider if we're to legislate in
this area. This Committee will take a thoughtful look at all of
the relevant information and insight as we seek to balance
leadership and growth with safety and responsibility.
I look forward to working with the Chairman, my colleagues
in the minority, and the Administration on any potential
legislation that Committee may consider.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sorensen follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's hearing on
``Continuing U.S. Leadership in Commercial Space at Home and
Abroad.'' I also want to extend a warm welcome to our
distinguished witnesses. Thank you for being here.
Three years ago, during the early months of the COVID-19
pandemic, the nation breathed a sigh of relief when the SpaceX
Crew Dragon demonstration mission successfully and safely
transported crew to the International Space Station and back
home again. The United States had been dependent on Russia to
deliver our astronauts to and from the ISS for nearly a decade,
following the planned retirement of NASA's Space Shuttle
program.
The success of that crewed demonstration mission was the
culmination of years of government investment and partnership.
Our nation's investments in civil space R&D, science,
exploration, and utilization have advanced the underlying space
capabilities and technologies that have fostered a thriving
commercial space industry. I want the United States to continue
to lead the world in innovative space technologies and which
provide significant economic and societal benefits to our
country.
Today's hearing will review the governance of our U.S.
commercial space sector, if and how the frameworks this
Committee has put into place are sufficient, and what is needed
to not only encourage the continued growth and leadership but
to meet our international obligations.
While I'm sure we all have many questions, one thing is
clear. The success of the industry depends on safety. A bad day
could hurt the entire commercial space industry. With that in
mind, I hope we will hear from our witnesses on how we can
ensure safe and responsible commercial space behaviors, which
are the types of actions we want other nations to emulate. It's
not only the right thing to do, it's our obligation as
signatory to the Outer Space Treaty of 1967 to ensure
authorization and continuing supervision of U.S.
nongovernmental entities in outer space. In short, the U.S.
government is responsible for what its commercial actors do in
space.
The Science Committee has been at the forefront of
commercial space regulations since the Commercial Space Launch
Act of 1984 first directed the Department of Transportation to
license and regulate commercial space launches. The Committee
also authorized regulation of private remote sensing space
systems. The last major commercial space statutory update was
in 2015. Since that time, commercial space activities have
expanded and accelerated. Companies are placing mega
constellations in space to enable broadband communications and
other services. Private citizens are flying into space on both
commercial suborbital and orbital spacecraft.
Companies are providing in-space satellite servicing.
Through NASA, commercial companies are also developing space
stations for low Earth orbit and landers to deliver both
scientific payloads and astronauts to the surface of the Moon.
Space is a busy place, placing increasing importance on the
role of space situational awareness capabilities to track space
debris, satellites, and to warn operators of potential risks or
collisions. Each of these areas come with issues and
complexities as well as advocates with differing positions.
I hope we will have an opportunity to hear from the
relevant Federal agencies on their role as the implementers of
regulatory frameworks, as well as other key sectors such as the
insurance industry, on what Congress needs to consider if we
are to legislate in this area.
This Committee will take a thoughtful look at all the
relevant information and insight as we seek to balance
leadership and growth with safety and responsibility. I look
forward to working with the Chairman, my colleagues in the
Minority, and the Administration on any potential legislation
the Committee may consider.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Sorensen.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding today's hearing,
``Continuing U.S. Leadership in Commercial Space at Home and
Abroad.'' I also want to welcome our panel of expert witnesses.
Thank you for being with us today.
My home state of California is a hub of commercial space
and aerospace companies, large and small. For that reason, I've
seen firsthand the valuable contributions our commercial space
sector has on creating good paying jobs, economic growth, and
innovative systems and technologies that benefit our civil,
commercial, and national security space activities.
That's why it's important we are considering commercial
space regulatory frameworks, which were last updated
statutorily in 2015 with the Commercial Space Launch
Competitiveness Act. I'm pleased that our U.S. commercial space
regulatory regime, led by the work of the Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology over many decades, has enabled a robust
and world-class commercial space industry, and I want to ensure
our U.S. commercial space sector continues to lead globally.
The recent pace of growth in commercial space, the
increasing number of companies involved, and the diversity of
commercial space services being offered create both
opportunities and challenges. Today's hearing allows this
Committee to take a fresh look at whether regulatory and
statutory changes are needed to help embrace those
opportunities and address the challenges. To that end, I look
forward to hearing from our expert witnesses on several
questions, including,

Are there opportunities to improve the efficiency
and effectiveness of the governance of commercial space
regulations that Congress has put in place?

What are the options for a framework that meets
our international obligations for the authorization and
supervision of novel commercial space activities, and what
technical experience is necessary for the entity or entities
involved in such framework?

Who has accountability for risk in commercial
space activities, and how is risk handled?In closing, I would
be remiss if I did not mention the vital importance of our
commercial space workforce. I hope our witnesses can help us
understand what can be done to support and grow that workforce
commensurate with the evolution of the commercial space
industry.
I look forward to working with the Chairman, the
Administration, and other relevant sectors on how we can ensure
that our U.S. commercial space regulatory frameworks provide
clarity and predictability, enable both innovation and safety,
are efficient and effective, meet our international
obligations, and support success and continuing leadership.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Lucas. Let me introduce our witnesses. Our first
witness today is Ms. Karina Drees, who serves as President of
the Commercial Spaceflight Federation (CSF). She is also Chair
of the FAA's (Federal Aviation Administration's) Commercial
Space Transportation Advisory Committee (COMSTAC) and serves on
the National Space Council Users' Advisory Committee. And prior
to Commercial Spaceflight Federation, Ms. Drees was the CEO
(Chief Executive Officer) and Manager of the Mojave Air and
Space Port.
Our next witness is Mr. Jim Dunstan, who serves as the
General Counsel of TechFreedom. He's also founder of the Mobius
Legal Group. He has four decades of experience as a space
lawyer, which includes drafting and negotiating the first
commercial lease of a manned space station. He also served as a
member of the Virginia JCOTS (Joint Commission on Technology
and Science) Aerospace Advisory Committee.
Our third witness is Josef Koller. He serves as the Systems
Director for the Center for Space Policy and Strategy at The
Aerospace Corporation. He's also co-founder of The Aerospace
Corporation's Space Safety Institute. Mr. Koller has previously
served as a Senior Adviser to the Office of the Secretary of
Defense for Space Policy, and prior to that, he managed and co-
led more than 40 scientists at the Space Science and
Applications Group at Los Alamos National Laboratory.
And our final witness is Ms. Caryn----
Ms. Schenewerk. Schenewerk.
Chairman Lucas. Yes, thank you. Let it be known if I
pronounced your name correctly, you probably should be worried.
And Founder and President of CS Consulting. Prior to founding
CS Consulting, she served as Vice President of the Regulatory
and Government Affairs at the Relativity Space. She also served
as the Industry Head of FAA's Part 440 Aerospace Rulemaking
Committee (ARC) and is a member of the FAA's Commercial Space
Transportation Advisory Committee where she leads the
Regulatory Working Group.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for being here.
And I now recognize Ms. Drees for five minutes to present
her testimony, please.

TESTIMONY OF MS. KARINA DREES,

PRESIDENT, COMMERCIAL SPACEFLIGHT FEDERATION

Ms. Drees. Thank you so much. Chairman Lucas, Subcommittee
Ranking Member Sorensen, and distinguished Members of the
Committee, thank you for inviting me to testify on behalf of
the Commercial Spaceflight Federation. I'm honored to share our
members' views on commercial space in the United States and the
policy and regulatory issues facing our industry.
CSF is the leading national trade association for the
commercial space industry. CSF members expand America's
leadership in space, create thousands of high-paying
engineering and manufacturing jobs, and invest billions of
dollars across the country, revitalizing a domestic aerospace
supply chain that had been in decline. CSF members proudly work
with civil, national security, and intelligence agencies to
ensure they carry out their missions in a manner that is more
cost-effective and innovative than government-developed
solutions.
The policies enacted by this Committee and by Congress as a
whole, including the 2015 Commercial Space Launch
Competitiveness Act, are vital to facilitating the growth of
the industry. The future pace of development and the retention
of our Nation as the flag of choice depends on a policy and
regulatory environment that facilitates innovation. Our Nation
must leverage and grow the commercial sector to outcompete
State actors like China and Russia.
As the Committee develops a commercial space package, CSF
respectfully offers several items for your consideration.
Further details on each of these priorities and a full list of
priorities are included in my written testimony.
First, the learning period for human spaceflight is set to
expire at the end of September. As Congress considers the
future of the learning period, it is important to note that
industry has had slower technical development and significantly
fewer commercial crewed spaceflight missions than anticipated
during the last extension in 2015. CSF supports a multi-year
extension to the learning period to enable key dialogs to
continue between government and industry through the ASTM F47
standards process, the Part 460 Aerospace Rulemaking Committee,
and the COMSTAC safety working group to ensure that the FAA has
the appropriate expertise and resources to take on this
authority. Allowing the learning period to end this year would
lead to regulations that inadvertently freeze development
before industry has had time to mature, harming safety and our
Nation's competitiveness in the long term.
Second, consistent with prior legislation offered by this
Committee, the Department of Commerce is the most appropriate
agency to ensure Federal compliance with Outer Space Treaty
Article VI obligations for ``authorization and continuing
supervision'' for activities that fall outside of existing
regulatory approval structures. A light-touch regime would
satisfy treaty compliance requirements and provide clarity,
while facilitating innovation and American leadership in space.
A single agency must manage this process to ensure there is one
accountable entity, minimal burden on industry, and no
unnecessary duplication of effort between Federal agencies.
Third, Federal space launch infrastructure demand is
steadily outpacing supply. Thankfully, there is a network of
FAA-licensed space launch sites across the country eager to
help ensure our Nation has sufficient infrastructure for this
sector. However, these sites largely do not have access to
Federal grant money. There is an existing authorized grant
program, but it has been dormant for over a decade. The program
should be reauthorized with key changes consistent with GAO
(Government Accountability Office) recommendations.
Fourth, many current regulations governing commercial space
activities require near-term modernization to ensure efficient
processing as the rate of commercial activity accelerates.
These regulations, including Part 450 launch and reentry
licensing, export control regulations, and remote sensing
regulations were developed in an era with limited industry
activity. Without reform, agencies risk missing statutory
timelines to fulfill regulatory responsibilities, harming our
ability to compete and slowing innovation while other countries
surge ahead.
Additionally, access to space situational awareness (SSA)
information is essential to ensuring continued safe operations
in space for all users. As Congress considers SSA, it's
important that the Department of Commerce is given the
statutory authority to take on this mission and is encouraged
to use commercial services data and analytics to the greatest
extent possible.
Thank you again for the opportunity to contribute to this
conversation on commercial space. It is a critical time for our
industry, and we greatly appreciate Congress' attention to
these important issues.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Drees follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you.
And I now recognize Mr. Dunstan for five minutes to present
his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JIM DUNSTAN,

GENERAL COUNSEL, TECHFREEDOM

Mr. Dunstan. Thank you. Chairman Lucas, Subcommittee
Ranking Member Sorensen, and Members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. I hope that this
testimony, along with my recently published paper on regulating
commercial space activities, will assist Congress as it
considers comprehensive space legislation.
The testimony I provide today is my own personal and does
not reflect the positions of any organization or company.
Space is heating up, not from an environmental standpoint,
but in terms of business activity. Advances in space
technology, especially the advent of cheaper access to space
created by space entrepreneurs, with strategic funding from the
government of course, have opened entirely new opportunities
for U.S. businesses to be the catalysts of the creation of a
robust cislunar economy. According to Space Foundation, the
world space economy was valued at almost $470 billion in 2021,
and according the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, the U.S.
portion of that economy generates $211 billion in gross output
each year. I think that's actually understated. And space
entrepreneurs are just getting started.
The legal and policy questions that commercial space
activities present, frankly, I thought I would be working on 40
years ago when I graduated from law school, not what we are
finally addressing today in 2023. The first problem is that we
do not have a comprehensive regulatory approach to commercial
activities in space. We've never had a National Space Act. The
rules of the road are cobbled together from various agency-
enabling statutes, some of the regulatory underpinnings dating
back almost 150 years. The result, as I discussed in my paper,
is gaps, overlaps, and stovepipes. Simply put, space is
regulated by several different agencies, none of which were
originally sanctioned by Congress to regulate in outer space.
This includes the FCC (Federal Communications Commission), the
FAA, the Department of Commerce, NASA, and the Department of
Defense (DOD), all of which currently have a hand in directing
if not directly regulating outer space commerce.
The second problem is that, following the Supreme Court's
decision in West Virginia v. EPA, it is clear that agencies may
no longer regulate based on vague terms like the public
interest. Congress, quote, ``does not alter the fundamental
details of a regulatory scheme in vague terms or ancillary
provisions. It does not hide elephants in mouseholes.'' The--
end quote. The current patchwork regulatory system is a
labyrinth of mouseholes that new entrants must traverse, great
for me as a practicing space lawyer, but highly dangerous for
us as a country for there is a very real danger that courts,
when asked to review regulatory actions in the future, may well
conclude that Congress never provided the basic regulatory
authority to those agencies in the first place.
The stakes are sky high, pun fully intended. Space is
inherently international. If we do not provide a practical
regulatory system that can quickly and economically authorize
and supervise the activities of U.S. nationals in space, what I
would call a frictionless regulatory system, two things will
happen. First--and we're already seeing this--U.S. domestic
companies will simply move offshore and find a country that
will quickly and cheaply grant them authorizations for their
outer space activities in exchange for license fees and taxes.
Those fees and taxes are thus exiting the U.S. economy.
Second, the existing regulatory scheme and any future
regulatory scheme that is characterized with a high degree of
friction slows down the U.S. space economy and thus advances
the interests of our adversaries, including China, who do not
share our domestic--our democratic principles and who would
wish to export their ideals into space to direct--to our direct
detriment.
So what should a National Space Act look like? After West
Virginia v. EPA, I think Congress needs to do four things. It
needs to assign clear regulatory authority to any agency or
small set of agencies with minimal gaps and overlaps. It must
provide explicit rulemaking authority to that agency to create
the rules of the road for space in the 21st century. It must
also provide explicit enforcement powers to its chosen space
agencies so that there is a cop on the beat to ensure both
compliance with domestic law and the United States' obligations
under international law. And four, understanding that some
overlap is inevitable and that there must be some interagency
coordination, ensure that that coordination process is as
transparent as possible.
Understand that I'm not advocating for Congress to
overregulate space activities. Overregulation introduces levels
of friction into the regulatory system that could accelerate
flight overseas and play directly into the interests of our
adversaries. Nor I'm advocating for a totally hands-off
approach to space activities, but danger to the commons of
outer space require us to be good stewards of the cislunar
system.
In the same way that the Earth sits in the Goldilocks zone
of our solar system--not too close to the sun, not too far
away--Congress' task is to find a balance on the continuum
between permissionless innovation where nearly anything goes
and the precautionary principle where the government must
micromanage and approve every activity by U.S. citizens in
space. This is a hard but necessary task if we wish to continue
to be leaders in the cislunar economy going forward.
I hope that this Committee will consider introducing in the
formal record my paper entitled ``Regulating Outer Space: Of
Gaps, Overlaps, and Stovepipes,'' and I welcome the questions
and the dialog on these important issues. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dunstan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you.
And I now recognize Dr. Koller for five minutes to present
his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. JOSEF S. KOLLER, SYSTEMS DIRECTOR,

CENTER FOR SPACE POLICY AND STRATEGY,

THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION

Dr. Koller. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and distinguished
Members of the Committee, for inviting me to join the
discussion on continuing U.S. leadership in commercial space at
home and abroad. I'm Assistant Director at The Aerospace
Corporation, which is a nonprofit, Federally Funded Research
and Development Center (FFRDC) working across the entire space
domain to solve complex problems and advanced solutions in the
national interest. We provide independent and objective
technical advice to all government space programs with a
workforce of over 3,000 scientists and engineers. In addition
to helping lead Aerospace Center for Space Policy and Strategy,
I'm also the co-founder of the Space Safety Institute.
Allow me to cover some aspects of a safety framework and
why a holistic approach is critical to enable the projected
growth in a space economy. The current approach in the
commercial spaceflight sector is for industry to develop
consensus standards before the government implements binding
regulations. This approach appears sensible. There is a fear
among commercial providers that regulation could only be a
hindrance and could slow down innovation and progress. At the
same time, even commercial providers are concerned that an
accident would set the industry back by many years. These
concerns center on defining the right balance to foster
commercial innovation and safety. However, we should really
broaden our discussion and create a more comprehensive picture
of what contributes really to safety. In the end, no government
regulation or industry standard can guarantee an accident-free
environment. Only through a comprehensive set of safety-
promoting initiatives can we achieve a procedurally efficient,
safety-effective, and innovation-permissible environment.
Based on our study on developing a comprehensive safety
framework for commercial spaceflight, we identified guiding
principles and five major groups in a successful safety
framework. First, people, safety culture, and a safety
management system, these three are the most critical aspects of
any safety framework as people are your eyes and ears on the
ground and catch mistakes and possible failure modes early on
before any regulators can.
The next group consists of everything like best practices,
industry consensus standards, regulation, certification,
licensing, accident investigations, and so forth, all important
in themselves.
The third is about third-party reviews and safety case
methods to identify safety blind spots because everybody has
them.
Fourth is another important one, which is on data
collection and analysis in order to catch safety issues and
failure modes so they can be anticipated, predicted, and
mitigated.
And fifth is a component on international cooperation and
open collaboration. The full report describes those in detail
and is publicly available online, and it also includes a
roadmap for implementation.
The second part of my testimony is regarding mission
authorization of commercial human spaceflight and highlighting
an issue that is separate from the learning period. The FAA
oversees commercial spaceflight during launch and reentry, but
operations outside the atmosphere are not part of the FAA's
regulatory authority. Even when the learning period ends, the
FAA authority to oversee passenger safety would only apply
during launch and reentry. Just like commercial aviation
benefits from a single oversight agency, commercial human
spaceflight would do the same. It should be provided a one-stop
shop with a continuous chain of custody through all phases of
flight.
In closing, I want to highlight the need for practical
solutions and their implementation in addition to a
comprehensive safety framework rather than the status quo.
Economic growth is not enabled by the status quo but by a
practical, innovation-permissive environment that is consistent
with domestic and international obligations. The United States
should lead the way in commercial human spaceflight safety.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify on these
essential topics, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Koller follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you.
I now recognize Ms. Schenewerk for five minutes to present
her testimony.
Ms. Schenewerk. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. I'm getting closer.

TESTIMONY OF MS. CARYN SCHENEWERK,

PRESIDENT, CS CONSULTING, LLC

Ms. Schenewerk. Chairman Lucas, Space and Aeronautics
Subcommittee Ranking Member Sorensen, and distinguished Members
of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to share my
perspective on the U.S. commercial space industry. I think you
will hear some similar themes to what you have heard from my
colleagues. I am honored to appear before the Committee in my
personal capacity, and I'm not representing any company or any
client's views.
Today's U.S. space industry's growth has been dependent on
forward-looking policies and key government partnerships. This
Committee's support for STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) education, as well as public-private
partnerships that foster technical exchanges, Federal facility
access, and early stage research and development has been
essential. My testimony is aimed at clarifying a few key points
regarding U.S. space law and policy governing private space
activities.
While I haven't been to space yet, I have significant
experience engaging with the regulatory regimes governing space
access. Most importantly, I hope to convey that space is highly
regulated and shed light on oversight of launch and reentry,
including the fact that human spaceflight is not wholly
excluded from regulation. I also want to highlight the need for
clarifying authority over exciting new or so-called novel space
activities.
My first point, the U.S. space industry is highly regulated
and encompasses a diverse range of activities with different
levels of maturity and customers. As such, it operates in
accordance with a multitude of local, State, and Federal laws
and depends--it depends on where companies operate. In some
cases, in fact, they may be subject to foreign laws. U.S.-based
companies are licensed based on their primary activities,
launch reentry, remote sensing, and telecommunications by the
FAA, NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration),
and FCC respectively. That said, each of those activities may
also require licenses from one or both of the non-primary
agencies. Despite this Committee's support, we have not yet
achieved a one-stop-shop approach to licensing space
activities.
In addition to space-focused regulations, companies,
manufacturing, and testing facilities and operations are
regulated by Federal, State, and local agencies governing
environmental protections, labor practices, and transportation
activities, among others. When companies utilize legacy U.S.
Government capabilities such as launch sites or test stands on
U.S. Space Force or NASA facilities, for example, they are
subject to the controlling agency's rules and requirements.
Second, U.S. launch and reentry companies, which compose a
small segment of the space economy, approximately $7 billion of
the $350-60 billion economy, private sector economy, are
subject to U.S. law no matter where they operate. That was
established in the 1994 Commercial Space Launch Act. The
primary focus of the CLA-based licensing regulations and review
is public safety. That requires the FAA to review and--the
design, operation, and testing of a vehicle's flight safety
system, as well as vehicle hazards, including debris, toxic
release, and overpressure. As outlined in my written statement,
obtaining a launch or reentry license is an extensive multiyear
effort.
With respect to human spaceflight, the learning period or
moratorium does not limit all regulatory oversight. For
example, the FAA regulates to protect crew members because they
are part of the vehicle's flight safety system, which falls
within the FAA's public safety authority. There are also
regulations regarding spaceflight participants, including their
training and acceptance of risk.
Given the limited number of private human spaceflights,
three orbital and seven suborbital, the ongoing opportunities
for thoughtful engagement between the FAA and industry, as well
as the FAA's challenges with implementing its existing
regulations, the original premise underpinning the learning
period still appear solid.
Next, I'd like to quickly focus on novel activities, an
emerging aspects of the space economy. These include in-space
servicing, assembly, manufacturing, or in-space destinations,
such as LEO habitats or Moon- or Mars-based capabilities. These
are exciting endeavors that do not clearly fall within FAA,
FCC, or NOAA's licensing regime. Significant support exists for
the Commerce Department's Office of Commercial Space having
mission authority over novel space activities. I recommend that
this Committee support efforts to clarify agency authorities in
a manner that is appropriate to the in-space activities and
ensure that any regulatory regime is clearly defined. Continued
uncertainty will diminish U.S.-based leadership and is costly
to companies developing these novel and necessary capabilities.
Last, effective regulatory regimes required resourced-
trained and organized regulators who engage meaningfully with
cutting-edge innovations. Sometimes the safest approach may not
look like the status quo. U.S. space policy and legal oversight
is extensive. And while not perfect, it is facilitating rapid
technological and scientific advances. I have no doubt that
space capabilities are having or have the potential to
positively impact each of your districts from agricultural
optimization to disaster relief, energy efficiency efforts, and
rural connectivity. As the Committee considers commercial space
legislation, it has the opportunity to continue U.S. leadership
and diminishing regulatory uncertainty, while facilitating
continued space safety.
Thank you for your time you're--thank you for the time you
are investing in developing balanced and thoughtful
legislation. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schenewerk follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. I want to thank all the witnesses for their
testimony. And I recognize myself for five minutes.
And I address my first question to both Ms. Schenewerk--
Ms.--yes, Schenewerk and Mr. Dunstan. How does the regulatory
framework for commercial space activities in the United States
compare with frameworks in other countries? And while you're
thinking about that, are there any regulatory processes
impacting the ability of U.S. space companies to compete
internationally? A lot of question, but two good witnesses,
whoever cares to go first.
Mr. Dunstan. I'll jump in first. I think we need to
understand that for a lot of other countries, their approach to
space regulation began with more of a clean slate, more of a
blank sheet of paper. And so they have--places like Luxembourg
and the United Kingdom have, I think, more specific something
approaching a National Space Act that we never had, whereas we
have sort of built it from the agency up through the various
processes. And so I think we're a little bit behind the curve
because of the regulatory system that we already had in place.
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes, I concur with Mr. Dunstan. In America,
we love the phrase bootstrapped, and indeed, in this case, I
would say that we have bootstrapped our legal regimes from
existing regimes. And so, you know, that is a significant
difference. And I do think that is a disadvantage in some
cases. It does show American ingenuity and our willing to be
innovative with regard to how we apply our regulations and our
desire to ensure that our companies are able to proceed with
their activities, but it definitely begs that, as we look at
the new in-space activities, the ones that I mentioned and
other ones that are--you know, even things like space nuclear
power and propulsion, are we thinking about these new
activities in a manner and devising legal regimes to govern
them that are forward-looking? I like to say that we shouldn't
let a failure of imagination be the source of our failure, and
so we should be imaginative as we think about what the
possibilities are for the future.
And I do think that there is a point where we may realize
that building on the existing foundation, we've built too many
layers of the house, and the foundation is not strong enough to
hold it. And so I do think that we need to be really thoughtful
as we think, especially in competition with countries like
China that have very different legal regimes, if you want to
call it that, governing their activities. So I guess the short
answer is we need to definitely be thoughtful about the way
we're doing things today, and we certainly need to be very
careful and thoughtful about how we devise new regulatory
regimes for tomorrow's activities.
Chairman Lucas. Absolutely. To Ms. Drees, in just over 2
months, the statutory learning period that limits FAA's ability
to regulate human spaceflight safety is set to expire. What's
the status of standards development efforts related to
commercial human spaceflight?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. The
industry has been working very hard to ensure that we continue
that standards process. We continue working directly with our
regulator to ensure that we're developing these standards and
eventually regulations very thoughtfully and very carefully. I
agree with my colleagues that safety is the highest priority by
far within industry. So, so far within the ASTM process, seven
standards have been passed, two are up for ballot right now,
and there are 10 currently being drafted. There has been
substantial progress made even in the past 12 months. Everyone
within the industry has now come to the table. And we also have
FAA AST participating.
Chairman Lucas. How would the added workload of regulating
human spaceflight safety impact FAA's execution of its existing
responsibilities to license launch and reentry of course to
protect the uninvolved public?
Ms. Drees. That's an excellent question. And one of the top
concerns that we have with respect to the 460, which is the
human spaceflight regulation, as there's a lot of work that
still needs to be done on the part 450 regulation, which is the
launch and reentry licensing piece that the FAA is responsible
for. They released their new rule in 2020, and there's really a
long way to go to ensure that that rule, that regulation is
working well for industry. So the concern that we have is if we
put too much on AST's plate all at once, it will really detract
from their primary mission, which is the safety of the
uninvolved public through launch and reentry regulation.
Chairman Lucas. Mr. Dunstan, as noted in testimony, FCC is
licensing authority for satellite spectrum. However, FCC has
begun to propose regulation for satellite activities beyond the
transmission spectrum. Is this consistent with FCC's authority
in your opinion?
Mr. Dunstan. I do not believe so. I think that exceeds the
FCC's authorized authority to regulate.
Chairman Lucas. Going one step further, is the FCC the
appropriate agency to lead Federal efforts on satellite
regulation beyond spectrum, or are there other agencies that
have a stronger interest and bring better expertise to the
table?
Mr. Dunstan. I think there are other agencies that are
better situated to do that. The FCC is incredibly good at
licensing spectrum and allocating spectrum. A lot of the other
stuff, they simply do not have the expertise in house.
Chairman Lucas. If my colleagues will indulge me for one
more moment, what are the potential consequences of FCC's
increased involvement in space activities?
Mr. Dunstan. Well, I think, first and foremost, it's going
to be speed. The FCC has had a great difficulty even keeping up
with the licensing of spectrum, and to put more on their plate
in areas that they just are going to have to come up to speed
on, I think it's going to slow those activities down
substantially.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you. My time has expired.I21I
recognize Mr. Sorensen for five minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. I'd like to begin by thanking Chairman Lucas
for convening this hearing and our witnesses for appearing
before us today.
I'm a meteorologist and also the proud son of an aerospace
engineer, who was a contractor supporting the Space Shuttle
Program. I have a visceral memory of the loss of Challenger and
her crew. After the Challenger disaster, I didn't see my dad
for several days. My dad worked for Sundstrand in Rockford,
Illinois, a city that I now represent. Sundstrand was a
contractor on the Challenger project. And after the disaster,
my dad and his colleagues spent days determining if the O rings
that they produced for a mission were on that shuttle, and they
were not. With that indelible imprint from my childhood, I'm
very interested in knowing what can be done to continually
improve safety for those explorers and those heroes.
As the Committee that leads our government's R&D efforts,
we have an obligation to ensure spaceflight safety. Ms. Drees,
can you speak to what agency such as the FAA's Office for
Commercial Space Transportation are doing on R&D to support
commercial human spaceflight safety? And are there other areas
of R&D that would enable continued safety advances in
commercial human spaceflight?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question, Congressman
Sorensen. I completely agree with you that safety is by far the
most important aspect of the entire industry. And every single
one of our members, as far as I know, believes that as well,
which is why we're working so hard to ensure that we maintain
the perfect public safety record that we have with commercial
human spaceflight.
You mentioned the shuttle program. And yes, our members and
myself obviously agree that those tragedies were very difficult
for every single American and especially myself and folks in my
generation growing up in that era. It wasn't so much the Apollo
program. For us, it was the shuttle program that was so
impactful for my generation. The challenge that we have on a
regular basis with respect to safety is we want to be able to
innovate our vehicles to ensure those things don't happen,
which is exactly what we're doing.
So the challenge is if we start developing that regulatory
environment too soon before we have enough data, before we have
enough knowledge of those individual vehicles, there is a long-
term safety risk that something could go wrong. The purpose of
continuing to innovate while we develop these standards side by
side with the regulator will allow us to have the best, the
most safe vehicles on the market in the future.
Mr. Sorensen. I appreciate that. We--instead of learning
from our mistakes, we need to make sure that we're using
science to not make the mistakes in the first place.
To Dr. Koller, we recently lived through the harrowing
incident of the OceanGate Titan submersible and the rescue
campaign that was undertaken. As we see the rapid evolution of
commercial space activities, what do we know about
contingencies for on-orbit human safety and in-space rescue,
which will be even more challenging than was done for Titan?
And who would be responsible for that?
Dr. Koller. That is a very important question. Thank you
for asking that. Often, people make comparisons and also call
it apples and oranges. What's similar is that similar
clienteles, similar, you know, price range, informed consent.
But when it comes to in-space rescue, comparing it to the
OceanGate tragedy, what's really important to understand is do
we have the capabilities, the authorities, and the environment
in place to actually rescue somebody from space? You know, for
the OceanGate tragedy, the Coast Guard immediately--and from--
not just from the United States, but from other nations, rushed
to rescue and spend enormous amount of effort trying to find
the submersible. We do not have anything in place for in-space
rescue. We have no strategy in place. We have no capabilities.
And I think we need to start now to learn from examples like
the submersible and submarine rescue and from the past and what
capabilities need to be put into place, but also answer the
question on who pays for what efforts? Because is it a
humanitarian effort to rescue somebody in space? And so all
these questions still need to be answered.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you for that. And, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey,
for five minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Drees,
why is it important that the United States lead the standards
process, developing standards?
Mr. Dunstan. Thank you so much for that question. Just as
we want to set the norms of behavior in space, we want to be
able to have a good standards regime within the United States
that the entire international community follows. And the
challenge that we're having right now is if we're too focused
on some of these other things or too distracted by some of
these other things, then the challenge is international players
could start to develop their own standards as they dominate
more of the space activities.
Mr. Posey. I heard some references to giving FAA more
authority to regulate space, and I just want to share with you
before I got elected to Congress, Starfighters, who operate a
fleet of F-104s flown by pilots that have flown zillions of
missions and zillions of miles safely, have been doing
parabolic testing for NASA for years. You know, it's so much
cheaper to put your experiment in the backseat of an F-104 and
do some parabolic stuff than it is to launch a rocket to do the
same thing.
And as it would be, some people said, hey, I'd really like
to take a ride in one of those things, and, you know, witness
weightlessness for myself. You know, the space tourism business
is already booming. We'd already heard about people with, you
know, hundreds of reservations at a quarter-million bucks a
shot, be weightless, and taking them up in the cargo planes.
And so Starfighters applied for a launch license to carry these
tourists. That was 14 years ago. Now, before they even applied,
FAA had licensed human space launches in Nevada for a company
that had, you know, never launched a bottle rocket. And they
said, well, you know, we regulate airlines from Washington,
D.C., to Orlando, things like that, and we did this real
extreme over here space regulation, but you're kind of in the
middle. So for over 14 years, they've been fighting to get a
license that any other country in the world would gleefully
grant them. So, you know, I'm real concerned about that. And
can the U.S. Government support the commercial space industry
with its allies in global standards bodies?
Ms. Drees. Yes, absolutely. And our members are working
very hard on standards development across the board, not only
with human spaceflight, but there are a lot of standards
organizations that we're helping to be involved with to ensure
that we're setting the stage for these norms of behavior.
Mr. Posey. Mr. Dunstan, what do you think about the
prospect of FAA basically taking over all space activities?
Mr. Dunstan. I don't know that the FAA has that expertise
in house. It certainly has the expertise as to launch and
reentry. They've got great engineers over there. But when
you're talking about what activity somebody can conduct in
space, I'm not too sure FAA is the proper home to be
authorizing that or regulating that activity.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the Ranking Member for five minutes,
Ms. Lofgren of California.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
One of the things that, you know, I think we need to wrap
our heads around is who bears the risk of commercial activities
in space? Who's accountable for things that go wrong? And along
those lines, I'm concerned about the potential for on-orbit
collisions from space debris, defunct satellites, or even
active satellites, especially with mega-constellations being
deployed that comprise large numbers of satellites. The United
Nations is taking a look at this issue, along with others. And
I'm not sure who in the United States is accountable for the
potential damage for these risks.
Now, the Department of Commerce's Office of Space Commerce
is currently working to establish a civil space situational
awareness capability to track debris and issue warnings to
space operators on potential collisions. And the DOD, of
course, is performing this function, but I think it's eager to
transition it.
So to what extent is there a clear plan in place for the
civil capability? What will it entail? How do we deal with the
potential and avert the collision risk? And I don't know who
would--should answer this, but maybe we'll start with you, Dr.
Koller?
Dr. Koller. Thank you very much. That's a very important
question. Space debris is a real issue and conjunction
avoidance maneuvers are done to a large degree, especially with
large constellations. To the first part of your question, who
bears responsibility, well, I want to defer to my legal
colleagues here on this distinguished panel, but it's the Outer
Space Treaty, Article VI, continuous authorization and
supervision that's mirrored by other nations.
So the plan is I think some--let me answer the question
from an international perspective. What I see is that the
United States has been struggling with who should hold what
types of responsibilities and authorities in this arena. And I
see the international community standing by to some degree. But
I think that time is about to pass now, and I think the status
quo is not adequate. I see where we're trying to figure out
who--what organization should hold what responsibilities, and I
think it's time to make an assignment and stick with that
assignment.
Ms. Schenewerk. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren. So a
couple of things that contribute to this. One is that my
colleague is correct. The Outer Space Treaty addresses this,
but it's actually addressed in the liability convention. And
the liability convention is focused, as are most activities and
discussions around space, with the idea of protecting the
uninvolved public and accepting risk in space. So the liability
convention assigns strict liability for activities that occur
in the airspace, so in Earth's airspace or on the ground. So to
the extent that a piece of debris falls from space and lands on
my car, the launching State is responsible for that. And I've
actually been involved personally in managing debris that has
reentered and had to be cleaned up or addressed.
And so what happens is, it's a government-to-government
engagement because it's a treaty obligation. And we have
insurance in the launch industry and reentry insurance in the
launch and reentry regulations that governs that
responsibility, that indemnifies the government or covers the
government up to a certain amount. And we've never, ever had
any claims in any way that hit any kind of cap on the
insurance, the coverage that's required. But it's strict
liability in space. It's actually--you have to find fault. So
it's more similar to you know, what we would consider regular
tort liability. And so that's the framework, and it's the idea
that if you're in space, you're accepting the risk of being in
space.
The second aspect that I want to highlight on this is the--
are there efforts that are happening at the United Nations, for
example, with the long-term sustainability space activity, so
that's working to set norms of behavior in a collaborative
environment at the United Nations, as well as significant
nonprofit efforts and industry-led efforts. So even the World
Economic Forum is talking about safe space sustainability at
this point. COMSTAC has talked about the issue. I know COMSPOC
is thinking about the issue. There are numerous activities. It
is the hot topic of the day because everybody recognizes that
the last thing we want to do is junk up space because then we
can't use space for all these very important capabilities that
can save lives on Earth.
Ms. Lofgren. Very good. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Babin [presiding]. Thank you very much. And I'd like
recognize myself for five minutes.
First off, thank you very much, every one of you, for being
here. Ms. Drees, the last Commercial Space Act called for the
FAA to deliver a report on human spaceflight safety frameworks.
This report was to be delivered after coordination with the
Commercial Space Transportation Advisory Committee, COMSTAC,
but the FAA posted a draft report that was not coordinated with
COMSTAC. What is the status of that report, and why did the FAA
issue a draft report without COMSTAC's input?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. And by the
way, it's my honor to serve as the current Chair for the
COMSTAC, so I'm----
Mr. Babin. Right.
Ms. Drees [continuing]. Deeply involved in these topics.
So the FAA has drafted a report to Congress. They've asked
COMSTAC for input on the report. COMSTAC held a meeting in May
to discuss the report and come up with recommendations for the
FAA. COMSTAC has agreed on the recommendations. We're still
working through some of the additional language. So COMSTAC
will be sending that report--the comments back to FAA probably
within the next week, and then the FAA will be able to wrap up
that report.
The challenge, from my perspective, is that we did not see
much information in the first draft of that report responding
to the question of which aspects of the industry are ready for
new regulation and why. So when COMSTAC weighed in, we wanted
to make sure that that concern was addressed.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you. Ms. Schenewerk--I know how to
pronounce your name--the approval process for commercial remote
sensing systems involves an opaque interagency process that has
led to licensing delays and often overly burdensome conditions
placed on the operators. This inefficiency had significant
impacts on U.S. leadership. When several U.S. companies sought
to establish synthetic aperture radar services here in the
1990's--we've alluded to this already a little bit--delays and
dysfunction in the approval process pushed those capabilities
overseas. Many proposed models for space governance feature the
same opaque interagency structure that operates outside of the
Administrative Procedures Act. How can we ensure all space
activities don't fall victim to the same troubles that the
commercial remote sensing industry did?
Ms. Schenewerk. Thank you, sir. I think it's because of the
Texan connection.
Mr. Babin. That's it.
Ms. Schenewerk. So I very much appreciate your question.
And I think that the point is exactly that. At the end of the
day, somebody has to be responsible. So one of the fundamental,
you know, issues that we face in the remote sensing world has
been whether or not a specific office and a specific designated
official has a responsibility for approving or disapproving and
even getting feedback, specific actionable feedback in a clear
timeframe to the applicant. And, you know, we're facing that
challenge across all these regulatory regimes that govern our
space activity, but you're correct that in the remote sensing
realm, it specifically was a problem that did send activity
overseas.
And so, you know, we're seeing a resurgence in--a
significant resurgence in Earth observation capabilities
growing in the United States right now for a number of reasons.
And the last thing we want to do is see a chilling effect on
that as a result of that problem, the black box problem, as
it's been referred to. So I'd say that as we develop a regime
to govern any kind of novel activities, in-space activities,
that's often talked about as an interagency process, right? We
need to have a clear door that I take my clients to, a clear
person who is responsible at the end of the day for
adjudicating the differences among the agencies and making a
decision that they can be held accountable for in allowing or
disallowing or placing conditions upon the applicant's
activities.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much, Ms. Schenewerk.
Mr. Dunstan, does the National Environmental Policy Act,
NEPA, pertain to activities in space?
Mr. Dunstan. Thank you for that question. I believe it does
not. TechFreedom has filed two amicus briefs on appeals from
the FCC in which we walked through the history of NEPA. In
fact, it was passed in 1969. Something else really important in
space happened in 1969. We were walking on the Moon. It was
also just after the Senate had ratified the Outer Space Treaty
of 1967. Congress knows how to specify when it wants something
to apply to outer space, and Congress did not say that NEPA
applies to outer space.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. Thank you.
One more. Ms. Drees, the FAA recently announced plans to
reduce the amount of airspace closed off around launches at the
Cape. What are the FAA and industry doing to better integrate
and coordinate launch activity with air traffic? And are there
recommendations from advisory groups that the FAA has not
implemented?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. I'll be
very brief. So there are opportunities now for industry to work
directly with FAA, and we're doing that through a Collaborative
Decision Making (CDM) effort where a lot of the space
companies, including Commercial Spaceflight Federation, are
talking directly with FAA ATO (Air Traffic Organization) on a
lot of airspace issues. ATO has been working on developing this
space data integrator tool. There are other tools that they're
considering. And this was part of the recommendation from the
SPARC in 2018, I believe, or the airspace ARC at the time,
where we recommended some additional tools.
So the FAA is evaluating those options at this point, and
we are working very closely with them. We are also working
closely with the airline community. Now, that's something
that's different through the CDM process to ensure that we're
exchanging information in much better--much more real time and
having those open dialogs with the aviation community.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much.
And I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms.
Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you to the Chair and Ranking Member,
and thank you to the witnesses for being here and for your
expertise.
I'm grateful that we're having this hearing because the
rate of human spaceflight and commercial activity has risen
steeply since 2015 when Congress last considered updates to
commercial space policy. In fact, according to the FAA in 2022,
last year, a record 79 licensed launches made commercial space
activity, nine times more frequent than it was in 2015.
Commercial rockets are servicing the International Space
Station. Regular satellite launches and the advent of
commercial space tourism have raised concerns about improving
human and environmental safety. And I think that's especially
highlighted now in light of the recent analogous OceanGate
situation.
It's also critical to strengthen the transparency about
occupant risk and also build cooperation and collaboration
among companies and regulators as we assess this maturing
industry and put safety at the center of its rapid innovation.
So I want to ask first, Ms. Schenewerk, this past April, as
you know, SpaceX attempted the first launch of the orbital test
flight with its Starship rocket, which exploded and destroyed
much of the launch pad. So the results sent concrete chunks of
the pad, clouds of pulverized debris miles away, and that
affected south Texas towns and a national wildlife refuge. And
it's my understanding that both SpaceX and the U.S. Government
are facing lawsuits, and the environmental effects are still
being assessed.
So is it clear who's responsible for understanding,
assessing, and, where appropriate, mitigating against
environmental risks and other consequences of commercial space
launches?
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes, ma'am, it is. Thank you for your
question, Ms. Bonamici. It is actually clear. So the thing that
is true about the space activity that you just referenced is
that it is subject to environmental law no differently than any
other activity, whether it's an industrial activity, a building
activity, whatever it may be. The--NEPA applies in the same
manner. So in my testimony, my written testimony, I included a
chart that showed all the different parts of the review of a
license or reentry activity, and a significant aspect of that
is actually the environmental review. It can take many years
before you can even start building your launch site or your
reentry site. Reentry sites tend to be less construction to
date, but that environmental review--so--and it depends on, you
know, is--and you follow the same evaluation on whether or not
it's an environmental--an EA (Environmental Assessment) or an
impact statement.
Ms. Bonamici. Right.
Ms. Schenewerk. So the answer is yes, it does apply, and
the activities that will follow, will follow the law in the
same manner that they would, regardless of the leading agency.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific, that's helpful. My next question is
for Ms. Drees. The commercial spaceflight industry operates
under an informed consent system currently for human
spaceflight. So in the April 2023 report, the RAND Corporation
stated that was unable to examine the extent to which
spaceflight participants are being fully informed of the risks
because informed consent documents are considered proprietary.
So, Ms. Drees, how can the commercial spaceflight industry
improve transparency? And how can Congress and the FAA evaluate
the safety the industry if the moratorium on commercial
regulation is extended another eight years, especially when
consent documents are considered proprietary?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. Yes, so the
industry currently operates under an informed consent regime.
The FAA currently regulates the launch and reentry aspects of
the actual launch. They regulate some aspects of the vehicle,
but the participants that are inside the vehicle participating
in that activity are asked to sign a waiver essentially saying
that they've been told what the risks are of that vehicle,
they've been told that that vehicle has not been certified by
the FAA, et cetera. The FAA has very specific requirements for
what the operator must inform all participants of regarding the
spaceflight experience. The participant is very well-informed
because of what the FAA requires and there is a pretty
extensive process in place to ensure that the folks that are
signing those informed consent waivers know exactly what
they're signing.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. And, Dr. Koller, your
studies focus on what can be done to improve safety was based
on an extensive analysis of other commercial sectors, and you
note that the study's recommendations do not affect space
vehicle design or affect innovation. So with that in mind, is
there any reason the government should not require or regulate
actions to improve safety, or should it be voluntary?
Dr. Koller. I think it's really important to broaden the
conversation and, in addition, to talk about the difference
between industry best practices and regulation is that we
broaden our perspective on what contributes to safety. There is
an inextricable tie between safety culture and the prevention
of accidents, for example. Another example is there's--we need
to understand where failure modes are coming from. So
collecting data, analyzing it is very important. Otherwise,
you're just working in a retroactive regime, and we need to be
proactive and predictive.
Ms. Bonamici. I agree with that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Indiana,
Mr. Baird.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. I
appreciate the opportunity to listen to such expertise from our
great witnesses, so we thank you for being here.
You know, a few months back I had an experience visiting
the Zucrow Labs at Purdue University. This one-of-a-kind
facility developed a Hypersonic Pulse shock tunnel, which allow
for flight simulations for speeds ranging from Mach 5, to Mach
40, their most recent development being a Mach 8 quiet wind
tunnel. And this one wind tunnel provides a critical
development in hypersonics and is the first of its kind to
collect data in speeds greater than Mach 6. The advancement in
the hypersonic industry is reimaging--reimagining the way we
look at suborbital commercial flight.
So my first question, Ms. Drees, goes to you. You mentioned
in your testimony that Congress should enact a learning period
extension past September of this year and mentioned 2031. If
the learning period was to expire, can you explain the impact
that this would have on our advancements in hypersonics and
global competitiveness? And do you agree with CSF to extend the
learning period to 2031, or would you suggest something else?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. Yes, CSF
absolutely agrees that the learning period should be extended
for a number of reasons. You know, first and foremost, with a
focus on safety, we feel like the only way to achieve that in
the long-term is by focusing on industry consensus standards
today rather than writing regulation today based on the
vehicles that are that are designed today. We want to enable an
industry that allows entrepreneurs to flourish and that allows
new companies to come online with new capabilities. It's very
difficult to do that if the regulation is already in place.
There's a lot that we have to sacrifice potentially and give up
if we start regulating now versus allowing companies to
continue innovating on their own designs.
The challenge that we have is the folks that are designing
these vehicles are the experts. They truly are the experts.
There's no one else that they can lean on to get advice from on
how they should develop their own systems. So we want to be
able to continue focusing on those standards alongside FAA
until we get to that point where we're much more mature as an
industry and adequately informed to focus on regulations.
Mr. Baird. So would any of the other witnesses care to
comment on that question?
Ms. Schenewerk. I'll just add, sir, that one of the
important points about where the industry is, is that it's a
very diverse industry right now. So we have three activities
that are occurring or three entities that are licensed to
operate and fly, including humans. Those three entities and
their vehicles look vastly different. So I think it's an
important point that, you know, writing a regulation based on a
number as small as three is a challenge in and of itself, much
less in an industry where you haven't had a consolidation of
design.
So what we often see in much more regulated industries such
as, you know, the cruise industry, even the commercial aviation
industry, trucking industry, is that those things all look like
each other. So, you know, you can have innovation around the
software around the edges of those, but what you don't see is
real innovation in the design of the vehicle in and of itself.
And I'll point to the fact that our industry has really
innovated in ways that are driven at safety. For example, the
vehicle that is flying to space right now looked at the
previous vehicles and learned the lessons based on the data and
the science around what the best shape of a vehicle is for the
highest safety factors. And that, of course, was in
partnership--and this is a very important point--with NASA,
and, you know, thereby with the government.
And so I think there's also a point to be made around this,
that these activities aren't happening in a vacuum, pun
intended. They're happening in partnership, often with
government officials, and they're based on a significant amount
of experience in the past.
I also will add that one of the ways that we could benefit
is we do have expertise that aren't in government today or
aren't in the companies, but the availability of those folks
and the way that they engage is often somewhat challenging. So
I think that we need to have a situation where we can have, you
know, free access, for example, perhaps to engineers at FFRDCs,
or free ability to exchange information.
That said, proprietary--the proprietary aspect of these
vehicles is still an important aspect of being commercial and
being competitive. And I think that what we'll continue to see
is safe operations because we also see aligned incentives
across government, industry, and the regulators.
Mr. Baird. Thank you for that. And I see my time is
expired, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Michigan, Ms.
Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thanks to all our
panelists. It's a big topic that deserves a lot of attention
and, frankly, coordination across multiple Committees in the
Congress, which is how the United States is going to continue
to lead in the commercial space industry.
And we talk a lot on this Committee about investment and
the need to invest, and we go through that in our
reauthorization process. And we're also in appropriations. But
as I was thinking about today's hearing and as I heard Mr.
Dunstan deliver his opening testimony, I just have to ask,
where and how is the international law working? And what
happens if it gets broken? And we start to see a lot of
innovation coming into play. We recognize and remember Mr. Musk
doing Starlink for when Russia invaded Ukraine. But what
happens if that takes place in the reverse? And how do we start
enforcing--and this is in one of your recommendations, sir. How
do we start enforcing international law if we're working with
actors who might seek to break it?
Mr. Dunstan. Well, when I was discussing enforcing, I was
specifically talking about U.S. agencies regulating U.S.
companies. Obviously, when we're talking about international
treaty obligations and norms, now, you've got to go to the
State Department, which is our--which is our arm there, which
is more difficult. And we do have a Space Force, our United
States military, it protects our interests on the high seas,
and hopefully, the Space Force will protect our interests and
our citizens in outer space.
Ms. Stevens. And as we're looking to compete with the
Chinese Communist Party--and I'm on the Select Committee for
that topic--we're looking at a range of business practices that
are fair, some that are not. And are you aware of any instances
in which some nations that might be more adversarial to the
United States are not necessarily obliging treaty negotiations
or are potentially giving a signal that State-owned enterprises
are going to get in the way of our free market enterprise as it
pertains to commercial space activity?
Mr. Dunstan. So thank you for that question. I think it's
twofold. One is the--I think the real problem that we're seeing
right now is we're seeing especially Chinese companies coming
in and trying to buy their way into U.S. technology. I'm--have
a number of clients who, frankly, have turned down some pretty
big sums of money because when you trace it back through the
eight or nine layers of companies, it turns out the money is
coming from China. And we know that what's going to happen
there is going to be an outflow of intellectual property. So
they're--it's----
Ms. Stevens. They're willfully making that choice to turn
down the----
Mr. Dunstan. Yes. Yes, they are. The second thing I think
is the United States needs to be more aggressive in terms of
its stance on ASATs (anti-satellite weapons), and we need to
take a position and push the international community to stop
testing things that create tens of thousands of pieces of
debris. It's just stupid. And frankly, it doesn't really need
to be done. We know how that works. We know how bombs work----
Ms. Stevens. Right.
Mr. Dunstan [continuing]. And so we should really press our
international----
Ms. Stevens. Debris has come up a couple of times already,
and I had a question on debris as well because how are we
managing that? And even the simple question of how does a
satellite get into space and what rules do you have to go
through? And we've obviously got our own system, and then
there's other countries that have their own system per se, but
then we're dealing with this junk and it's--it is going to
cause us some challenges. And so I don't know if any of our
other witnesses want to jump in on the risks of debris in
addition to what we've already talked about.
Dr. Koller. Yes, if I may add to that, there are several
ways of dealing with debris. One, of course, is the Space
Traffic Coordination System that lets you coordinate amongst
the different operators to avoid the debris generation through
conjunction and collisions. There are other effects like in
drag debris. If it's in low-Earth orbit, it will reenter
automatically, so if your placement is not high enough, it's in
the lower-Earth orbit, it will automatically reenter. And third
is active debris removal. And I think there is some more work
to be done----
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and who pays for that, right, and how do
we--you know, are we picking up the world's debris in outer
space? And, you know, who are good actors, who are not in
different systems, and the like? I mean, those are good
questions, and we'll submit the rest for the record. But thank
you all so much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Webster.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Webster. Let's see. Ms. Schenewerk, you mentioned
that--the possibility of companies experiencing overregulation
or other things that could drive them away from the United
States into another place? What do you think that we as a
Congress should do? I guess, there's some regulatory things
that already is--sort of people understand and we're talking
about, but what could we do to prevent that or maybe enhance
that or something?
Ms. Schenewerk. Thank you, Congressman Webster. So I think
the most important piece is looking both at what we're doing
today and looking at what we're planning for the future. So the
activities, the in-space servicing activities, assembly,
manufacturing, mobility activities, space habitats, the
activities that are not subject to the launch and reentry
regulations where we definitively say that you are subject to
U.S. law and jurisdiction no matter where you go, those in-
space activities, particularly the ones that I think will
define the future of our industry, as we think about who owns
the oversight of that--and, as I mentioned in my testimony,
there's a lot of thought around the Department of Commerce's
Office of Space Commerce handling that. That ownership at
Office of Space Commerce is more similar to the way other
countries have structured theirs where they're thinking about
those activities in regards to their economic contribution and
the potential for economic growth and also their terrestrial
impacts.
And so I would say that what we want to do is make sure
that we develop an oversight regime that is clear, clearly
defined, transparent, and has clear timeframes for feedback to
applicants so I know which door to go into, I know how long
it's going to take, I know exactly what I need to provide. And
I will say that what I need to provide should be clearly tied
to the key aspects of the activity. What are the most important
things that the government cares about? Is it a national
security concern? And then who is responsible with the national
security apparatus to give the feedback back to the person who
is the authority at the Department of Commerce, and thereby
adjudicate the decision and give me my license?
Mr. Webster. So just as much as the determination of what
should be done, there's also the idea of what agency, what
department, what form of Federal Government or one that doesn't
even exist should take up those? And it could be multiple ones,
is that correct?
Ms. Schenewerk. Well, currently, it is multiple, and I
don't honestly see a day where it won't be multiple. So an in-
space activity, for example, a company that wants to provide
space servicing, who wants to refuel on orbit or wants to clean
up debris on orbit, they're going to use spectrum, so they're
going to have to talk to the FCC no matter what because they're
going to need to communicate with their satellite. If they're
undertaking remote sensing activities, which they probably are
because they're probably doing rendezvous proximity operations
in order to combine with another satellite and provide that
refueling or to pick up that debris, that currently is an
activity that is mostly overseen by the Department of
Commerce's NOAA and its remote sensing regulations. So, you
know, that--there's some expertise there with that activity. So
I think we can find--we'll find ourselves in one office, but
we'll find ourselves, as we do today, talking to multiple
offices unless we have a wholesale reform of our regulatory
approach to space.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much. Let's see. Ms. Drees, how
does AI (artificial intelligence) affect all these things we're
talking about?
Ms. Drees. That's a really interesting topic and one that,
you know, our members are paying very close attention to. There
are definitely a lot of benefits and a lot of risks with
artificial intelligence, especially with something as sensitive
as space. We have a lot of smart people working on these issues
right now. And, you know, there are some companies that are
already starting to use AI for their technical development, so
it's definitely something the industry is watching very
closely.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Weber [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Ross from North Carolina.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Lofgren, for holding this hearing. And thank you to all
the panelists for joining us today.
My State of North Carolina--actually, our State of North
Carolina--has a longstanding Federal-State partnership with
NASA that brings an impressive capacity to NASA and the Nation
through leveraging research, education, outreach, and products
that have relevance and transferability at the State, regional,
and national levels. In 1991, North Carolina Space Grant was
established, which is administered at NC State University in my
district. North Carolina is inspiring the NASA and commercial
space workforce of the future. In fact, one of our own NC State
graduates, Christina Koch, is one of the four astronauts
selected for Artemis II, the first crewed mission on NASA's
path to establishing a long-term presence at the Moon for
science and exploration.
My first question is for Ms. Schenewerk. You have extensive
experience in the commercial launch industry. To what extent is
workforce and the availability of a skilled workforce an issue,
and does this issue affect the commercial space sector? And are
there issues for Congress to address?
Ms. Schenewerk. Congressman Ross, I'm so grateful for this
question because I--there are issues. And the--it's an
important topic, actually, with regard to regulation because
one of the things that we heard at the COMSTAC meeting just
this week in our discussion about the oversight of launch and
reentry and the implementation of Part 450 is the challenge
that the regulators are finding in recruiting and retaining
talent. So they need engineering talent and analytical talent
that can go toe-to-toe with the industry in order to be able to
engage with us meaningfully in our innovative designs and
operations.
And so one of the things that we really need to be, you
know, thinking about, and I think this is a charge for the
Committee, is what does it look like to be able to support that
agency and the other agencies that oversee space and making
sure that they are staffed in a manner that fulfills their
obligations to your interests and fulfill--in furthering
research and development, in furthering safe regulations, and
in making sure that we're competitive. So thank you for that
question.
Ms. Ross. Do any of the other panelists want to weigh in?
Dr. Koller. Yes, real quick, what I would like to say is
about five years ago, I asked a similar question at a panel.
And at that time, it was not relevant or deemed not relevant.
Today, I really appreciate the question and highlighting that
issue.
Just to summarize very shortly, I do not think you can grow
a $1 trillion space economy without the adequate workforce. So
crucially, investments are desperately necessary.
Ms. Ross. Great. Anybody else?
Ms. Drees. Yes, absolutely. We are very proud in our
membership. You know, when we think about STEM, when we think
about, you know, the--educating the workforce, our members are
highly in tune with us and highly interested in this. And in a
lot of ways, the new space industry is STEM. You know, this is
where we're getting a lot of folks interested in the science
and engineering jobs. A lot of our members have their own
organizations that help to inspire and really get even kids as
young as kindergarten excited about what's going on in the
space industry. So we do see this as a real challenge, but I
think a lot of the new space companies are proactively engaging
not only with the educational systems, but also with the
Administration, with the Space Council and their STEM
initiatives because we recognize that, as the industry grows,
developing talent is going to be absolutely critical.
Ms. Ross. And just to re-ask my last part of the question,
what can Congress do? Because what I've noticed is with
everything going on, with the Webb telescope--I also have the
Museum of Natural Sciences in my district, which projects all
of these things in this enormous globe called the Daily Planet
where you can watch what's going on in space--that Congress has
made some recent investments in space exploration so kids want
to be rocket scientists again instead of go to Wall Street. And
is that something that's on us to do as well as you?
Mr. Dunstan. Yes, I'll take that one. I appreciate the
question. I think the answer is that Congress needs to make
clear that space is open for business and that there are
opportunities there. In addition to my space law practice, I
have done an awful lot of internet law, and I will tell you, we
lost an entire generation of what--who probably would have been
aerospace engineers, became internet engineers because that was
the exciting place to be. And so we need to do everything we
can to re-entice the next generation coming up. At a very early
age STEM has got to start, as Ms. Drees said, in kindergarten.
And we've got to make sure that everybody understands that
there's a place in space as a child growing up. Thank you.
Ms. Ross. Great. Thank you. And I yield back.
Mr. Weber. Thank you. And by the way, gentlelady from North
Carolina, I believe Christina Koch lives in my district, just
so you know.
Ms. Ross. Educate me.
Mr. Weber. All right. OK. All right. A little friendly
competition there.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Weber.
My district is an epicenter for space activity in the
United States with NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center and many
space industry partners located in the greater Huntsville area.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on developing a
modern commercial space bill that supports the growing number
of space companies in my district, while also supporting our
civil and national security space capabilities.
Ms. Drees, you mentioned that Commercial Spaceflight
Federation members are already using cislunar space to generate
value for our economy. At the same time, Marshall Space Launch
System and Moon to Mars system will require greater investment
in collaboration with industry to create a strong deep space
exploration business model. Can you elaborate on how members of
the Commercial Spaceflight Federation are working with NASA to
stimulate the commercial cislunar economy that supports deep
space exploration?
Ms. Drees. Absolutely. Thank you so much for that question.
So with the Artemis program, when NASA announced that we're
going back to the Moon, it inspired a lot of existing companies
and new companies to start thinking about how are we going to
develop the cislunar economy? How are we going to develop the
Moon and in the future Mars? And how are we going to use the
Moon to go to Mars. And there's an entire ecosystem that needs
to be built and developed to make that happen.
So the first step really is NASA saying we're going back to
the Moon. Now that NASA has said we're going back to the Moon,
they will be able to determine how many launches they need per
year, what the government will actually do there, and industry
can grow around that. So there's a lot of exciting
opportunities.
Folks, obviously, are building a lot of great things in and
around the Huntsville area, a lot of our members are there as
well, and companies really all over the country are developing
these capabilities. So it really is an exciting sort of next
step when we think about what happens in space beyond LEO that
a lot of companies are getting more involved with.
Mr. Strong. That's great. And I know that we've got to have
NASA say it, but I think Congress has already said it, we're
going back to the Moon.
Ms. Drees, how can we work with commercial partners to
develop interoperable deep space systems without compromising
national security and intellectual properties?
Ms. Drees. So that's an excellent question. And what I
would say is, you know, we've gotten to the point now where the
entire government really is dependent on the capabilities of
commercial space companies. So not only are there companies
that are working on space systems for commercial use or for
civil use, they're working on a lot of these systems for
national security purposes. And because of that, they work
closely with national security organizations, with the
intelligence community to ensure a lot of these coordination
things are already happening.
Mr. Strong. And I know that I've got everything going at
you, but I appreciate your answers. What government agency is
best situated to create international deep space
interoperability standards? Who do you think would be best to
do that?
Ms. Drees. So that is a really good question, and it's
something that the community is really starting to think much
more about. There are a lot of standards opportunities
happening right now in terms of what could happen in the
future, what can happen in a cislunar environment. It's still
very much to be determined. I think we have a long way to go
before we start thinking about that. I think the first step
really is in something like the Artemis Accords, which has been
established and a lot of countries have signed on to. They have
been the first step in that process to ensure that we're
getting countries on board to start to develop these norms.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. National security agencies are using
commercial remote sensing data to enhance and augment their
capabilities. We have seen firsthand how impactful the use of
the commercial data is and how quickly the DOD and armed
services can get critical intelligence from commercial
partners. Mr. Dunstan, can you elaborate on how the government
agencies can use the model that our national security agencies
have used to better leverage the commercial space industry,
especially the growing remote sensing sector?
Mr. Dunstan. Thank you for the question. Yes, I think that
you can really look at what the national security agencies have
done vis-a-vis remote sensing and can be applied elsewhere
rather than continuing to build all of their own facility by
diversifying and using data from commercial sectors. It's
really enhanced our national security, which is really
interesting, because if you go back in the original Landsat Act
and whatnot, there was a real concern that commercial entities
shouldn't be allowed to do this. And now I think we've realized
that it's a real asset. It's not a national security liability
to lean hard on commercial remote sensing data.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. I'm happy to be recognized. I think there are
Members before me if they want to be recognized, but I'm fine.
Mr. Weber. You want to see if anybody will volunteer?
Mr. Lieu. OK. I will go.
So thank you to the witnesses for your testimony today.
It's very helpful. I represent the 36th Congressional District
in southern California. We have a lot of space assets, so--I'm
honored that The Aerospace Corporation is located in the
district. It is the same district where the James Webb
telescope was assembled. And I just talked to a CEO of a
company last year who was manufacturing pharmaceuticals in
space. And so space is really important to my constituents, as
well as to America.
And I want to talk first about critical infrastructure
sectors. So the United States has designated a number of
critical infrastructure sectors. And according to the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), here is a definition.
There are 16 critical infrastructure sectors whose assets,
systems, and networks, whether physical or virtual, are
considered so vital to the United States that their
incapacitation or destruction would have a debilitating effect
on security, national economic security, national public health
or safety, or any combination thereof. Some of these sectors
include the chemical sector, the food/agriculture sector,
assets such as dams, but space is not one of them.
And so I want to ask Ms. Drees. Do you think it'd be
important for space to be one of them? And I do have
legislation with Congressman Ken Calvert. We're co-Chairs of
the Aerospace Corporation--I'm sorry, the Aerospace Caucus on
this legislation, and so I want to get your views on that.
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. It is a
really important question, and it's something that is actually
being considered right now. There's an effort under DHS right
now to sort of take a look at the critical infrastructure
sectors and whether space should be included in that
conversation. So we are continuing to work with these industry
partners and with the government partners to determine is this
really going to be the best path for the space industry
overall? Because there are a lot of capabilities that are still
very new, I think there's just a lot of questions to be
answered. But there's absolutely no doubt that this country
relies on the space industry.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. So let me know if we can be helpful.
So second, I have a question about safety. And I understand
that when you put a human being on any launch vehicle, you're
going to make sure to go above and beyond in terms of safety.
I'm just curious about before that happens, about all the
research and development. And so Bill Nelson was here at this
Committee, and I'm going to read a portion from SpaceNews and
talk about his testimony. It was after the SpaceX launch that
had to be aborted midflight. ``Testifying before the House
Science Committee about the agency's Fiscal Year 2024 budget
request, Nelson said SpaceX expects to be ready make another
Starship launch attempt in as little as 2 months. `The
explosion, that's not a big downer,' he said.'' Then he goes on
to say--this article says, ``He explained SpaceX's `hardware-
rich' approach to vehicle development, with several Starship
and Super Heavy vehicles in production. `That's their modus
operandi. They launch, and if something goes wrong, they figure
out what it is, go back, and they launch it again.' ''
So, as you know, SpaceX did this monumental thing where
they designed rockets that fly back and land and they're
reusable. If they had to sit there and make sure the very first
time they launched that it worked, maybe they wouldn't have
developed that for several more years, if at all.
So, Dr. Koller, I'm just curious, what is your view of that
approach, that when you don't have a human being on this, maybe
we let companies innovate and try different approaches? I'm
just wondering if that's a sensible way of doing it.
Dr. Koller. Absolutely. I'm a firm believer in agile
development. The paradigm of failing often and failing early is
very much adequate, and that is the reason why we see so much
innovation today in the sector. However, I would reserve that
for the non-crewed, non-human, non-passenger phase of the
development. I do believe failing often and failing early does
not apply anymore once people are actually on board.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I see my time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and
thank you all to the witnesses who are here today.
In my district, NASA Glenn Research Center works closely
with the commercial industry on a variety of programs,
including the Artemis mission, to return to the Moon and to go
beyond. These partnerships bring together the government's
institutional knowledge and world-class facilities with the
speed and efficiency of the private sector. And I know this has
been touched on already a little, hopefully not too repetitive
or redundant, but, Ms. Drees, Ms. Schenewerk, or Mr. Dunstan,
can you further highlight the benefit of partnerships like
these and lay out how we can ensure their continued success at
NASA Glenn and elsewhere in the future?
Ms. Drees. I'll just start briefly. You guys can definitely
chime in. So it's incredibly important. And there's a--there
are a lot of opportunities to really partner between commercial
and civil organizations. In particular, the Glenn Research
Center is really important to our space program, and a lot of
our CSF members partner with Glenn in a variety of ways,
including through communication service programs and space
nuclear network. There are a lot of other opportunities to
partner with NASA through things like Space Act agreements, and
with all of the NASA facilities around the Nation, a lot of
companies are taking advantage of those opportunities.
Mr. Dunstan. Yes, I would agree. I think the Glenn center
especially has been very good with working with commercial.
Unfortunately, at times, I don't think that filters all the way
up to headquarters back to Washington, D.C. I was extremely
critical of the Moon to Mars architecture that NASA put out
because it placed--commercial partnerships were way down in the
corner of their overlapping Venn diagrams. In fact, it got me a
trip to NASA Johnson Spaceflight Center to talk more about
that. So I think we need to keep our eye on that. And the fact
that there is so much innovation going on in the private
sector, we can't go back to the Moon with a new Apollo. We've
got to rely on our commercial partners and bring that
technology back to NASA.
Mr. Miller. Yes, I--sorry, I didn't--I was just going to
say I believe that if we could get NASA further down the road,
at least NASA Glenn Research Science Center, you know, the
program authority, I think that we could expand on those
relationships a lot. And I'm never going to stop pushing for
that being the Representative in northeast Ohio with that
center right there. So to everyone's dismay, I'm going to keep
on pushing for program authority.
As some of you may know, NASA Glenn also administers the
Communication Services Program, is pioneering NASA's near-Earth
space communications. This program in part will procure
commercial services for space communications. By NASA's own
admission, using commercial technology will provide NASA
missions with a cost-saving access to continual industry
innovation, saving money that can be refocused on scientific
work.
Again, this is for any of the witnesses. Can you please
elaborate once again on NASA's collaboration with private
sector companies on the Communication Services Program?
Mr. Dunstan. Yes, I'll go ahead and take that. I absolutely
agree that that coordination is vital. I do spend a lot of time
at the FCC, and I will tell you that oftentimes, NASA is
extremely cooperative and good to work with, but there are
times when you'll have an application sitting before the FCC
that there will be a very short letter from NASA, which
essentially says standby, we're looking at this, and then it
takes a long time for them to come back in and get there. And
meanwhile, the clock is ticking on the time value of money for
commercial entities. And so even Glenn, as good as they are,
has got to speed things up in that coordination efforts. We
can't allow NASA to just--this is sort of the precautionary
principle. We can't say, hold off until we decide that it's
safe. That coordination has got to move with greater speed and
relevancy.
Ms. Schenewerk. If I could add to that in agreement, but in
addition, I would say that this is an example of one of the
challenges of government using commercial more, right, so using
commercial-style contracts, which tend to put the burden on the
commercial entity to go through the commercial licensing
regime, which is not wrong, but it does result in a situation
where the government is looking for a capability, and then
another part of the government is slowing down their access to
that capability. And so, you know, it's--it is something that
is in need of kind of whole-of-government thought about, so
we've sent demand signal from the national security world or
from the civil space world to commercial to develop this
capability. We potentially have a procurement or we have
research and development funding flowing to that capability.
But then we don't have either a clear regulatory regime, or we
have a highly disorganized regulatory regime that that entity
will have to go through before it can provide that service back
to the government customer. So you got--you have to kind of
think about all the threads that get pulled.
And, you know, I don't say that in any way to diminish the
benefits, which are huge, of using commercial-style contracts.
I say that to highlight that you have to think holistically
about this as we think about the--why regulatory reform and why
smart regulations are so important.
Mr. Miller. You know, I'm not going to disagree with either
of your assessments and couldn't agree more that, you know,
regulatory reform needs to be put in place and dial down just a
bit to be a little bit more pragmatic with where we are within
this country as we continue to put guidelines and revisions on
ourselves, foreign countries. And our adversaries and even
allies are moving forward at the speed of light, and we are
still stuck back in time, unfortunately.
I thank all the witnesses for your answers and for your
time today. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman yields back.
And, Congressman Foushee, if you were supposed to have been
recognized earlier, then that was Congresswoman Lofgren's
mistake by their choosing the gentleman from California in lieu
of you----
Ms. Lofgren. I would say it's the staff's mistakes.
Mr. Weber. Then I'm responsible. So at any rate, you're
recognized.
Mrs. Foushee. Not an issue. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
certainly Ranking Member Lofgren, for having this Committee
hearing today. And thank you to all of the witnesses for your
testimony and appearing before us.
First off, I'm going to join the competition and make sure
that, for the record, it is known that astronaut Christina Koch
went to high school in my district. NASA has said that----
Mr. Weber. When you throw the gauntlet down, it's tough.
Mrs. Foushee. Absolutely. Absolutely.
NASA has said that the billions of dollars in savings it
has generated from public-private partnerships across its
portfolio will enable it to return to the Moon, while also
allowing for vital investments in climate science, STEM, and
more. This question is for Ms. Drees and Dr. Koller. Can you
outline how these partnerships with the commercial industry
support NASA and what steps are needed to maintain both rapid
innovation and fiscal responsibility?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that question. It has been
absolutely essential for NASA to partner with industry on a lot
of programs that we've seen and a lot of programs going
forward. There was a shift not too long ago of bringing
commercial partners on board through firm fixed-price
contracts, through more partnership agreements to enable the
industry to provide the best possible options for the Federal
Government to take advantage of. So what we've seen change with
NASA over the past really 15 years, we see that continuing to
develop. And there are a lot more opportunities to get--to have
these partnerships.
You know, in addition to the Artemis program, which is
going to be absolutely critical to the future of the space
program, the ISS is going to be retiring in the next several
years, and NASA has proactively started working with industry
to develop commercial habitats to essentially replace the ISS
in the future to allow NASA astronauts to continue going to
space. So this partnership has been absolutely critical.
Dr. Koller. I don't have really anything in addition to add
to that fantastic answer. I think public-private partnerships
in the United States are of great value and should be
continued. There's tremendous benefit in using those kinds of
tools and developing synergies with the industry. It's also
important not to just look at the benefits, but also the risks
involved.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you for those responses.
NASA and DOD's partnerships with commercial space companies
promote economic growth far outside the industry. In North
Carolina, new commercial satellite services are providing high
speed connectivity to communities in my district and across the
State that had been left behind in the digital divide. Ms.
Drees, can you please elaborate on how this industry supports
other national priorities beyond space exploration like
broadband expansion, workforce development, climate science,
agriculture, and more?
Ms. Drees. Absolutely. That's a really great question and a
very important thing that we're seeing not only within the
space industry, but also beyond the space industry thanks to
spin-offs inspired by the technical developments for the space
program that's helping a lot of other industries as well. For
example, you mentioned climate science. We wouldn't know--I
think the estimate is 50 percent of what we know about the
climate is because of assets in space and remote sensing. We
wouldn't have the knowledge that we have. We wouldn't be able
to be proactive about some of the things that we want to be
able to do to help the climate. Agriculture as well has now
relied much more heavily on the remote sensing industry. So
there are a lot of opportunities to bring some of that
technical capability that we're developing in the space
industry to more problems--to more solve more problems and
challenges here on Earth.
Mrs. Foushee. Dr. Koller, would you care to elaborate as
well?
Dr. Koller. I think there is a very interesting trend
happening when it comes to remote sensing and communication and
artificial intelligence and analytics. There's a very
interesting trend that leads to more transparency in the world.
And just like Ms. Drees pointed out, there's a tremendous
benefit in using those trends and finding the right
combinations to derive those benefits.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. I thank the gentlelady.
And the Chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
Mr. Weber. Man, where do I start? Ms. Schenewerk, you said
in your remarks--and I'm trying to quote you now--``Don't let
innovation or the source of our imagination be the source of
our failure'' or something to that effect. Can you elaborate on
that?
Ms. Schenewerk. Don't let our lack of imagination be the
source of our failure.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes. So, you know, one of the things that
we see, again, going back to my experience with launch and
reentry was that the original launch regulations--because
originally, it was just launch--were taken directly from range
requirements. So one of the things that they didn't imagine was
a day when we would have reusable rockets like SpaceX has with
Falcon 9. So I was at SpaceX at the time when we were like
licensing Falcon 9 and working with the agency to figure out
what you do in a situation where your regulations say one thing
and they don't contemplate this potential state where you have
a reusable orbital rocket.
And so what I mean by that in--more broadly is we need to
make sure that, as we devise a regulatory regime, that we're
not just thinking about the specific thing that is in front of
us today at that time, only expendable rockets, but we're
thinking about developing a regulatory approach that is
flexible, as well as clearly defined. And that is not easy.
Not--you know, if there's no----
Mr. Weber. Thinking outside the box.
Ms. Schenewerk. Right. Exactly. Exactly. And I'll note that
there has been a shift to performance-based regulations, right,
which can accommodate more optionality, diverse kinds of
approaches to technology, but they're not a panacea. And I'll
refer back to my comment about the need for well-staffed, well-
trained, well-organized regulators because when an applicant
comes in with a unique approach and the regulator is used to
things being done the way they've always been done, that
failure of imagination could occur in the sense of saying, this
could be safer, but we're used to the status quo. So now it's
harder to get the safer approach through or nearly impossible.
Mr. Weber. So my recommendation would be in their
engineering department, above the door it ought to say
``imagineers'' instead of ``engineers.''
Ms. Schenewerk. I fully support that.
Mr. Weber. So--and this would be a question for everybody.
And one of the questions was in 2018, Trump Administration
issued Space Policy Directive-2, which proposed the elevation
of Commerce Department's Office of Space Commerce report
directly to Secretary of Commerce. Then we also mentioned DHS
because you know we're going to have some bad actors in space.
Which agency in your opinion, Ms. Drees--and we'll go this
way--do you think should be in charge?
Ms. Drees. So I think in the immediate term there needs to
be several involved, as Ms. Schenewerk mentioned earlier. When
it comes to things like mission authorization or the gaps that
we have to fill, CSF is definitely supporting the Office of
Space Commerce to fill that role. So the commercial activities
that do not currently fall under existing regimes for
compliance under the Article VI Outer Space Treaty obligations,
we think the Department of Commerce is going to be the best
agency to handle that.
Mr. Weber. Mr. Dunstan?
Mr. Dunstan. Yes, I would agree for those gaps, that
Department of Commerce, but we also have to be cognizant of the
fact that not every single activity needs to be regulated. If
someone is up in space and pulls out a harmonica, they
shouldn't need a license to be able to play their harmonica
on----
Mr. Weber. It depends on how good they are.
Mr. Dunstan. Well, yes, there is that. But yes, we have to
be careful that we're not overregulating every single activity
because that's just going to clog the system up.
Mr. Weber. Mr. Koller?
Dr. Koller. I want to draw on what Ms. Schenewerk said
earlier in a similar way of don't let the perfect be the enemy
of the good. I see that we've had this discussion for way too
long now, and I think it almost doesn't matter anymore which
agency is responsible for what types of activities as long as
you provide it with the adequate resources, the workforce, and
the capabilities to actually fulfill that requirement.
Mr. Weber. So a trifecta, DHS, Space Force, Commerce? Ms.
Schenewerk, who do you think?
Ms. Schenewerk. So my expectation would be that those
entities would all to the extent that it was appropriate, and
by--and I think that the person who is responsible--so if it's
housed at the Department of Commerce, then the official that
runs that office and runs that application process would be
responsible for establishing the interagency review on any
given application. And if that application and the activities
in that application should be under consideration by DHS, then
it would be their job to bring DHS in. It would also be their
job to say, DHS, we've heard your concerns, and we're going to
move forward. And that decisionmaking process needs to be
clearly placed in one location and then have a timeframe
associated with it.
Mr. Weber. I was going to say they have a timeline----
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weber [continuing]. Because we don't want these things
to drag on.
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes, sir.
Mr. Weber. And I'm going to go to you, Mr. Dunstan. The
1967 cooperation act--I forget what it was called--was--it was
literally, what, between Russia and the United States.
Primarily at that time, Russia wanted it to be State-driven,
and the United States wanted it to be, you know, industry-
driven. How many more cosigners do we have now on to that, do
you know?
Mr. Dunstan. On the 1967 Outer Space Treaty, I believe it's
112 nations. So the vast majority--and virtually all countries
that have any presence in outer space are signatories to the
Outer Space Treaty of 1967. But that begins to then drop off as
we go through the treaty regime, less so for the registration--
--
Mr. Weber. Well, I'm running out of time. I apologize for
going over, but I would offer this idea that we need somebody
who is watching all the actors in this and has a responsibility
to say bad actor, you know what I mean, and one that we have to
really be focused on.
I'm going to yield back and recognize Mr. Lee. I'm sorry,
Ms. Lee. Here we are. I'm looking over here. Sorry.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to our
panel today for your time and your expertise.
In recent years, Pittsburgh has stamped itself as a hub for
development and innovation in the commercial space industry and
space aviation. Just last month, I had the honor of announcing
and voicing my support for the Keystone Space and Defense
Innovation District that will bring together partners in the
tristate area of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and West Virginia. Ash
Robotics, one of our companies based in Pittsburgh, is a
leading company in the commercial space industry, specializing
in lunar lander development, lunar payload delivery, and other
space-related services. They recently won a $79.5 million grant
from NASA commercial lunar payload services programs to deliver
payloads to the lunar surface.
I'm proud that companies and universities I represent play
a pivotal role in developing cutting-edge technologies for the
commercial space industry and space aviation. Our vibrant
entrepreneurial ecosystem support startups and small
businesses. Their expertise spans a wide range of areas,
including robotics, artificial intelligence, material sciences,
and advanced manufacturing. These innovations have been
instrumental in enhancing the capabilities of space systems,
satellite technologies, launch vehicles, and more. And it's
just a shoutout, a few of our higher education partners, we
have Carnegie Mellon University, which is renowned for its
expertise in robotics and AI. We have the University of
Pittsburgh, who collaborates with NASA on various research
projects and initiatives, advanced--and advanced materials for
spacecraft, biomedical studies, and the effects of space travel
on human health. And we have Duquesne University, which offers
a space law program to analyze the legal and policy aspects of
space activities. Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to
brag a bit.
Our amazing higher education partners do incredible work,
but there is enough space in the sky for all to contribute to
discoveries in space, regardless of whether they hold an
advanced degree or went to a 4-year university. So while
Pittsburgh has a rich history in robotics research and
development, I look forward to seeing that opportunities in
educating and training the next generation of space industry
professionals are more equitable and accessible to all.
Commercial space aviation is undeniably fascinating and
holds immense potential for scientific discoveries,
technological advancements, and economic growth. However, I
want to make sure that the development and activities in the
commercial space industry remain relevant to the day-to-day
concerns of citizens. While space exploration often captures
the imagination, I want to be able to translate its
achievements into the practical applications that impact the
lives of people I represent. I also want to remain mindful that
my environmental advocacy must reach to the lowest depths and
the highest heights. The development and deployment of space
technology should strive to minimize carbon emissions, waste
generation, and pollution. Sustainable practices must be
implemented to reduce the industry's ecological footprint and
align with the day-to-day concerns of citizens regarding
climate change and environmental stewardship.
So with that in mind, Ms. Drees, I was just wondering how
someone like me, a Representative, could reconcile the growing
amounts of money from both the public and private sector on
space exploration with my constituents here on the surface of
Earth, right? We have people who have so many concerns about
how they're going to make--meet their ends day to day, and
they're facing cuts to social welfare and programs like Social
Security and SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program)
benefits. So what type of work do you do that translates to
those folks on their day to day?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that. I completely agree.
You know, there are so many exciting things that are going on
across the country in terms of technical development,
entrepreneurship. When I got interested in the industry almost
20 years ago, there was very little going on. And unless you
were an engineer, you had no chance of working in the industry.
The new space industry has evolved--the commercial space
industry, I should specify, has evolved in such a way that it
needs everybody. It needs engineers, but it needs technicians,
it needs welders, it needs plumbers. It needs everybody that
can contribute to the industry because there's so much
happening within the space industry. And it's not just rockets
that we're launching anymore. There are companies that are
building satellites. There are companies that are building
habitats. There's a lot of things happening even on the ground.
There's the ground infrastructure. But there's so much that the
entire space industry needs. And, as Caryn mentioned earlier in
her remarks, even the regulators are struggling to hire people.
So there's a significant demand for labor in the industry
across all levels.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Just really quickly, how are these
scientific discoveries being accelerated by commercial space
aviation? And also, what do these discoveries mean for creating
solutions in the community for like urban agriculture and
combating pollution and mitigating adverse effects of climate
change?
Ms. Schenewerk. I'm happy to take this. I'm actually
working on a TED talk about this. So I think that it's a very
important question. There is a massive amount of data that we
can collect from space, and we are on the verge of collecting
even more. So we have we have capabilities for Earth
observation like hyperspectral that offer great opportunities
for us. So one of the most important things that we need to do
is we need to be able to get massive amount of data, and then
we need to be able to analyze that data and apply it across a
number of industries, whether that's agriculture, whether
that's being able to design more energy efficient. So can we
see our buildings from space and then make good decisions about
how we manage our energy use? Space offers the ability to have
that data. It's then what do we do with the data. So that's
also a job-creating opportunity. It's also why things like
quantum computing and AI are so important because those are
tools that we can deploy against the data to then help us make
good decisions to then drive outcomes that impact everyday
Americans, particularly those that are suffering the most.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. That was my time. Thank you so much for
answering those. I look forward to your TED talk. And I yield
back my time.
Mr. Weber. Man, she speaks at about 250 words a minute with
gusts up to about 350.
Ms. Lee. It's my gift.
Mr. Weber. Yes, ma'am. It is.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And thank
you to all of our witnesses for a fascinating hearing.
Dr. Koller, I was particularly interested in your testimony
regarding the creation of a safety framework for space. I think
that that's extremely important. You said something in your
testimony that really resonated with me. You said that an
effective framework would guarantee an accident-free
environment. And I want to talk a little bit about that because
I'm not sure I agree. But I think it's very important that we
consider what we mean when we put together a safety framework.
I think it's important that we crystallize our approach to
safety and what the end goal is. And I think that this thinking
can be informed by our experience in the commercial aviation
sector, where we started out with a terrible accident record
where accidents occurred all the time. And now we've gotten to
the point where all the people on this dais go hurtling through
the stratosphere at nearly the speed of sound twice a week,
usually, with the expectation that we will always get to where
we're going, and that accidents will never occur. So I think
space flight will be on a similar trajectory.
But I also think that, you know, something else you said
that resonated with me was that a single accident might set the
industry back many years. And I think that's absolutely true.
We've had a similar kind of public opinion problem with
autonomously driven cars, where we hear about one accident
caused by an autonomous vehicle in the entire country, and it
makes front page news, and yet we've got tens of thousands of
auto accidents that are caused by human drivers that occur
every single day that aren't making the news. So really, we're
not using a fair metric when we think about safety in that
respect. We're--you know, the metric should be is an
autonomously driven car safer than a human-driven car? And the
metric instead that we're applying is that one accident
anywhere is too many and is an illustration of a problem that
has to be solved.
So, you know, thinking about that, what should our approach
to safety be in commercial spaceflight?
Dr. Koller. Right. I hope I didn't create a
misunderstanding. What I was trying to convey is that there is
no guarantee that an industry best practice or a government
regulation can prevent an accident from happening, right? But
what we instead need to do to develop a more comprehensive,
more holistic safety framework, if you look at all the
different sectors, regardless if it's transportation or
medical, there's a--always a more holistic, almost an ecosystem
around safety developed, and it's never just industry best
practice or regulation. That's what I was trying to say. And
only if you take into account key components--and in our report
that I have here, in our report, we lay out the fundamentals of
those key components. And if you really boil it down to what is
that dissenter, regardless of what launch mechanism you have,
do you have horizontal, vertical, or even ballooned rights,
people and safety culture are common. The common denominators
are people are the ones that make mistakes. So safety culture
is the key, in addition to collecting the data and to be more
predictive and proactive. And there's a number of additional
components that build a safety framework, and I think there's
many lessons that can be learned from other fields.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. I agree with you. And I'm hopeful
that we can build a safety framework that recognizes our
responsibility to protect consumer safety, but balances that
against our responsibility to allow innovation and to allow
freedom. And I think in aviation we've done a pretty good job
of that where we recognize that our obligation to someone who
buys a ticket on an airliner is different than someone who buys
a ticket on a two-seat ultralight, right, that those levels of
safety are not equivalent. We have a responsibility to do some
education with the public, that their expectation of safety in
those two situations is not equivalent. And yet there's room in
our aviation ecosystem for both of those uses, and I hope that
we can accomplish something similar in spaceflight because I
think we're going to have to confront that question eventually.
Well, I don't think I have time for another question, but I
want thank you very much. Hopefully, this is a discussion that
we can continue.
I'll yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Baird [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
And next we go to Mrs. McClellan from Virginia.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chair and Ranking Member,
for planning this important hearing. And I always enjoy when we
talk about space, and everyone goes through what's in their
State, reminding everyone that manned spaceflight began in
Virginia at Langley and that we are still home to the NASA
Langley Research Center, the Wallops Flight Facility, and
several commercial space companies that provide critical
services, develop innovative technologies, and promote economic
development in our Commonwealth and beyond. So, since we're
putting those markers down, I just want to remind everybody of
the importance of NASA Langley.
With that, Dr. Koller, could you discuss any gaps that need
to be addressed in the regulatory frameworks for commercial
remote sensing, including any challenges with the updated
three-tiered approach to assessing risk?
Dr. Koller. A few years I was intricately involved in the
interagency negotiations on what are the right license
conditions. And was very pleased in the progress that has been
made over the last five years. In the past, it was a lengthy,
difficult process, and it's--I boil it down to due to the fact
that different heads of departments and agencies have different
authorities. And we recognized that a few years ago and
developed a memorandum of understanding that really advances
the resolution process of when there are differences in
opinions as the Secretary is providing national security
conditions that, you know--and the Department of State is
providing conditions on international obligations. So I think
there's a--tremendous progress has been made. And we were--I
was very pleased to see the progress in the tiered approach
between the three different tiers, and I see the numbers of
approvals, the timeline for approvals have gone down
tremendously and there was great progress. Since then, I sort
of lack the insight of where things are being stuck or if there
were still issues, but in general, all of these were great
advancement and improvement.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you for that. Ms. Drees, would you
speak to how the U.S. Government is working with the commercial
space industry to enable more activity at commercial
spaceports, especially those like Wallops?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much for that. One of our
priorities is space launch infrastructure and making sure that
we retain that robust launch infrastructure across the country
so that facilities like Virginia Space Center and Wallops have
that ability to continue launching commercial payloads at any
given time.
There's a lot of activity that happens in the Federal
ranges--at the Federal ranges at the Cape in Florida and
Vandenberg in California, but there's an entire network of
commercial spaceports across the country that can continue
ensuring that we are able to launch these assets into space.
And one of our priorities is ensuring that the STIM (Space
Transportation Infrastructure Matching Fund) grant program,
which is the grant program available for commercial spaceports,
gets refunded, reauthorized and refunded so that we can
continue sending those assets into space from other facilities.
Wallops is definitely one of the national assets that we
consider in our commercial spaceport network. And Rocket Lab
has been recently launching out of Wallops from a company that
was, you know, originally established in New Zealand. So I
think it's a testament to say, you know, there's a lot of
capability. There's a lot more capacity within the spaceport
community, but an infrastructure program for those space ports
is essential.
Mrs. McClellan. And then I wanted to follow up with you on
a previous question. From the industry perspective, can you
discuss what changes to the regulatory environment would be
needed to provide certainty for long-term investment and job
growth?
Ms. Drees. So from a regulatory perspective, there are a
lot of, I think--there's a lot of room for improvement overall.
From launch and reentry regulation, export control, to remote
sensing regulation, there's so much that we really need to be
looking at as an entire space program within the industry,
within the government, to make sure that we can continue that
that robust launch cadence. We've seen a significant uptick
overall in the launch cadence over the past couple of years, I
think 180 orbital launches even last year, and almost half of
those are coming from China. So there's a significant factor
that we're considering here with international competition. The
regulatory environment in the United States is absolutely
critical to making sure that we can retain that competitive
edge.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentlelady yields back.
And now we go to the great State of Georgia with
Representative McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
witnesses for being here today.
I first wanted to address in the last couple of days, the
most commonly asked question, which is, first of all, no, I'm
not abused at home.
So now that we put that to bed, I wanted to go on with some
other things that continue a line of questioning from Mr. Weber
that he addressed to you earlier. He talked about the
different--you talked about the treaties. We talked about the
E.U. and their regulatory burden on what's happening right now.
And knowing that they're kind of leading the way in regulation
right now, what do we do to fight that, that tendency to
constrict what we're supposed to get done when we have an ally,
a group of allies really, that are doing something that may
inhibit the progress of something we need to do, especially
when we have to work in coercion with them? How do we combat
that mentality, both here in the United States and also
globally, so that we don't put ourselves at a disadvantage to
those people who are maybe not playing as nice? And I'll leave
that for either Ms. Drees or Ms. Schenewerk.
Ms. Schenewerk. Perfectly said. So I'll happily answer the
question, and thank you for it. So I think that the comment
that Mr. Dunstan said earlier with regard to the fact that some
of the other nations that have passed space law started with a
blank sheet----
Mr. McCormick. Right.
Ms. Schenewerk [continuing]. Is certainly beneficial to
them. And I'll reiterate that American innovation is beneficial
to us. So, you know, they're still--despite the challenges that
we have, you know, if you're going to operate in a democratic,
regulated country, then I still posit that this is the best one
to operate in. That said, we want to stay competitive to your
point. And so I think that, you know, the work that is being
done by this Committee, in collaboration with the National
Space Council, with the Senate, and with industry, so that
working-together aspect is very important. And I think that
what we need to make sure that we do is, to Ms. Drees' point,
continue to look at the regulations that we have and continue
to look to optimize them, improve them. We can't be afraid of
saying, oops, we got it wrong or it was right then, but for
today, it needs to evolve. And so that is a burden that is on
us constantly to run while we chew gum, I guess. And so we need
to be actively engaged in looking for the opportunities to
improve, supporting with resources to both do the job and do
the improvements at the same time.
Mr. McCormick. So I'll make the comment that I just hope
that we don't go down that same trajectory of overregulating
our industry in the idea that we of course have to be safe,
which we've kind of addressed tonight, too, but that we don't
hamstring ourselves in the competitive world that we live in.
Secondly, we've seen this massive explosion of the both
low- and high-orbit vehicles that are out there right now. And
you can see even the debris and everything else like that. And
one of the things we have a real concern with a trajectory that
basically I think by 2030 we're supposed to have around 58,000
satellites out there, which is going to be phenomenal in
tracking them. I know the FAA is trying to get involved and
that we have--we already mentioned all the other organizations
that want to participate in that. But, Ms. Drees, I'll probably
address you on this. Will it be necessary for the United States
to have an entity capable of managing space traffic around the
Earth's orbit, a single agency?
Ms. Drees. Yes, absolutely. That's a great question. And we
believe the Department of Commerce is that agency. So when it
comes to space situational awareness, there are a lot of
commercial capabilities out there. And if the Department of
Commerce leverages the existing commercial capabilities, they
can help fast-track some of these programs that they have in
mind for managing the space assets. So the--you know, the
critical thing about what's happening in space is not so much
the functioning things that are in space, it's the things that
we can't really control, the debris that we can't really
control, the things that may not be able to maneuver.
Someone actually mentioned a great analogy that's really
stuck with me. You know, the things that are in orbit, that are
going on in orbit are sort of like a marching band marching
across a football field. The marching band is in perfect order
and they're in sync and they're very well-choreographed. The
debris sort of acts as the fan who's running across the field
that is causing a lot of chaos within that marching band. So
that's kind of what we think of when we look at things like
debris.
So the satellite community is, you know, very responsible
in terms of making sure that their assets are deployed in the
correct orbit, that if they need to decommission those
satellites, they have a process by doing that.
Mr. McCormick. Real quick because I'm almost out of time
and I want to give you ample opportunity to address this, but
why the Department of Commerce is superior over other
organizations in managing what you're describing right now,
what you're laying out?
Ms. Drees. So they've already been designated as the agency
for space situational awareness. There are always questions
that continue to come up about whether that should be the right
agency. And when those questions come up, it tends to derail a
lot of progress that's already been made. They're the most
capable of managing that, and they already are managing a lot
of the space situational awareness that the Department of
Defense has handed over to them.
Mr. McCormick. OK. Good. And with that, I yield. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
And now we go to Mr. Casten from Illinois.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Baird from Indiana.
So thank you all for coming here today. You know, we're
talking about civilian and commercial uses of space, and I
guess I sort of parse that into sort of looking down and
looking up, if you will. And if I start with looking down, I
want to build on Mr. McCormick's questions. My understanding--
and maybe I'm misinformed--is that most of the monitoring we do
of the--how crowded space is getting is ground-based, either
from DOD or commercial uses. And I guess I'd welcome--you know,
I'd ask Dr. Koller but welcome anybody who's got thoughts on
this, are there scenarios where we need to think about space-
based monitoring, maybe at higher elevations--higher orbit
levels as well? And that may rapidly get beyond things that we
can have an open hearing, I realize, because you know, there's
civilian competition that then shades into confrontation if
we're not careful. But I guess I would just love your thoughts
on should we be doing more space-based monitoring? Are we doing
enough? What should we be thinking about on this Committee with
respect to that?
Dr. Koller. Absolutely. And there are actually, in fact, a
number of companies who are pursuing those kinds of activities.
They also need to be provided with the appropriate remote
sensing licenses. So absolutely, yes.
Mr. Dunstan. If I can chime in, I think one of the things
when we're talking about space situational awareness is how
much data we are collecting. And we're improving on that, and
we have improved very, very significantly. But that problem
means you have more data in the all-against-all conjunction
analysis. And those models need to get better because frankly,
satellite operators are having to move around way more than
they should have to simply because our models as to how close
or whether or not there's actually going to be a collision are
not good enough. And I analogize it to what the FAA did a
number of years ago by upgrading its systems to allow planes to
fly three miles apart as opposed to five miles apart. And
that's the thing we're going to need in space because all that
data doesn't do us any good if we're constantly telling
operators seven or eight times a day that they're going to have
to move their satellites around.
Mr. Casten. Interesting. Thanks. Did you--I didn't know if
you were chiming in there before I get to my next question.
Ms. Schenewerk. I just want to agree with Mr. Dunstan and
note that that's why we talk about space situational awareness
and the need to have high fidelity space situational awareness
before we can move on to some kind of space traffic
coordination because if you don't know where things are with a
high amount of--with a good fidelity, high--like high
confidence, then it makes telling people to move and where to
go pretty risky. And so you're introducing risk into the system
versus what you have today. So we really need to perfect that
space situational awareness capability to your point about the
ability to do that from space and from the ground, so that's
infrastructure investments that need to occur, as well as
analytic capabilities.
I think that that's--the other thing I'll note is--and why
in that case would that be something at the Department of
Commerce, given that it's this traffic management potentially,
and it's because, at that point, we're talking about space
actors who are engaging in space activities in a known
environment who have gone to space to do space commerce. We're
not talking about innocent people who are climbing on board
with an expectation of safety as a passenger on a plane. And so
it's a different kind of coordination on a technical-to-
technical operator-operator level versus a flying public
situation.
Mr. Casten. I want to get to another question. I think
there's a rich conversation just because I think DOD gets in
there very quickly in ways that we need to be careful about.
My second question I almost hesitate to ask, but I'm going
to do my best and hopefully not set our Nation backward. The
second part of commercial is sort of looking outward, right,
and the, you know, space tourism and travel and, you know,
maybe ultimately settlement or colonization of other planets
and the Moon. And there's such a tremendous inspiration in all
that, and I don't want to in any way lose the inspirational
value of that. I also sit here and say we--our species is
unable to inhabit the vast majority of the Earth. The parts of
the earth that we are unable to inhabit seem to be getting
bigger lately. You know, the sea levels rise, the ocean gets
bigger, the deserts get bigger. We've got more and more parts
of the low latitudes that exceed temperatures that humans can
live at. And that's to take nothing away from tourism. But I
just find myself wondering, do we need to level set? Is it
practical--is there any practical scenario where our species
that can't figure out how to live on most of the Earth has a
viable path to live on any location we have ever identified?
Mr. Dunstan. I'll take that one on. I--the simple answer--
and it's not simple--is eventually, we need to move our heavy
industry off of the surface of the Earth and into space. And if
you look at some of the great visionaries, Gerard K. O'Neill
and other people like that, that's what they've been advocating
for. And there's so many--there's multiple generations of
people that have grown up firmly believing that, that if we can
take the bad stuff that we do here on the Earth and move it out
into space where we--it can be better contained, we'll be much
better off as a species. Also, it increases the resources
incredibly to be able to tap into space power and the resources
of space, so we can actually increase the size of the pie and
fight less about the stuff on the Earth.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much for your time. I yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
And next we go to Georgia with Representative Collins.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I just want to make it obvious, I think, my other
colleague from Georgia, y'all can tell who the troublemaker is.
Now, Ms. Schenewerk, I want to kind of go over a couple of
things that are usually my favorite topics, and one of them has
really been discussed here a lot and that's regulations and
China. I had the opportunity to be in Taiwan last week, and
they were boxing up their latest satellite for launch. And I
thought it was really cool that, you know, a country of 24
million people are actively involved in the space race. And
that being said--and you take a look at China and where they
want to be dominant in everything from the economy to space and
military and they say they want to surpass everybody by 2045.
So you take that into account, and then you look at the amount
of spending that they're doing on space, they may even pass us
before 2045.
So I guess my question is, the cost of ceding that
leadership in space to China is pretty big. How can the
commercial sector be utilized to help maintain the U.S.
leadership?
Ms. Schenewerk. So the U.S. private space industry services
all three of the U.S. space markets, so to speak, and the
international markets, commercial, civil, and national
security. So to the extent that NASA makes research and
development investments with one company that has, say, you
know, capabilities--developing capabilities for nuclear power
and propulsion or for hyperspectral imaging, those capabilities
can also benefit, of course, the national security side of the
house.
And I think that's an important thing to remember is that
we segment these markets, and we segment oversight of them, but
at the end of the day, we really want to make sure that we have
these robust capabilities. So it calls upon us to think
holistically about our efforts and our investments. So are we
making decisions that foster venture capital? Because that
certainly has been a big piece of the growth of the U.S.
commercial space industry. Are we passing smart regulation so
that when we're engaging commercially and they're having--and
the commercial company is having to get a license, they're able
to do that and that's not overly burdensome? Are we thinking
smartly about our procurement approaches? Are we setting
requirements and sending demand signals that companies can then
get investment and they can build against in order to develop
the capabilities that we need to be competitive? So there are a
number of pieces that need to be put together to get the puzzle
right in the United States based on our system in order to
compete competitively with China.
Mr. Collins. Yes. Thank you. Swapping over to the to the
regulation part, in your testimony--and I'm sorry if this has
already been asked. I know--sometimes I feel like a ping pong
ball being bounced back and forth between these Committees
hearings. But the FAA has only issued four licenses under the
Part 450, and you noted that two of those licenses had exceeded
the 180-day time limit for review. Do you feel that with the
time--FAA--if they're going to become more efficient in issuing
Part 450 licenses? And alternatively, are there aspects of Part
450 that can be reformed? Do you think they can be reformed to
make it more streamlined?
Ms. Schenewerk. So I'll start with the last part of your
question, which is I'm encouraged by the fact that the FAA
tasked the COMSTAC, the Commercial Space Transportation
Advisory Committee, its FACA (Federal Advisory Committee Act),
on which I serve and lead the regulatory working group, with an
effort to advise them on updates to the 450 regulations that
were needed and how to prioritize those vis-a-vis other
regulatory changes that need to happen at the FAA. We approved
recommendations on Tuesday to the FAA, and those
recommendations do call upon the FAA to address specific
aspects of Part 450 that are proving problematic. It also notes
that because we've only had four licensees under Part 450, some
amount of experience with Part 450 makes it--a limited amount
of experience makes it challenging to give those kinds of
specific discrete feedback aspects. But a big piece of the
feedback was on process.
And so we're encouraged, of course, that the FAA is seeing
more resources, the ability to hire more people. And I really
think that it's very important in a performance-based
regulation scenario, that they be well-staffed and well-trained
in order to be able to go, as I've said, toe-to-toe with
industry. So I am concerned by the amount of time that it's
taken to get those licenses. And I think that the--you know,
the folks at the FAA are working very hard. They're very
intelligent, very dedicated public servants, and they're trying
to implement regulations that need to be updated because they
were moved very quickly through the system. And industry is
very eager to work meaningfully with them to get it right.
Mr. Collins. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
And we go next to Representative Tonko from New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, sir. And thank--I thank our Chair and
Ranking Member for holding this important hearing, and I thank
our witnesses for their participation.
We know that private companies rely on good and sound
science to inform their most important decisions. And so much
of that science emanates out of the robust federally funded
research enterprise. The public-private partnerships that have
allowed the space industry to flourish over the last 60 years
will continue to be the cornerstone of safe and successful
commercial space activities.
So the Federal Government is undoubtedly in the best
position to create standards that will protect the integrity of
the R&D required to advance these ventures. Unfortunately,
we're not only dealing with a patchwork of agency and
regulatory processes for the licensing and approvals to operate
in space, but we also have a patchwork of scientific integrity
policies across the plethora of State--or Federal agencies.
Throughout my time in Congress, I've made the establishment
of Federal scientific integrity policy standards a major
priority. It is imperative that no matter what Administration
is in the White House and no matter who is at the helm of our
Federal agencies, scientific research can be relied upon as a
safe launch to deepen our exciting opportunities in this age of
commercial space activity.
So for anyone on the panel or any and all, what is the
importance of scientific integrity in the context of commercial
space activities, and how does that play a role in R&D efforts
driven by the private sector?
Dr. Koller. I think scientific integrity is--the
fundamentals--is part of the fundamentals of scientific
development. And in a collaborative approach between academia
and industry and the government, I think we need to find ways
to accelerate scientific progress and development because those
are the seed points for technological innovation and
development.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Anyone else?
Ms. Drees. I'll add to that for maybe a little bit of a
different perspective. You know, one of the things that we see
as an opportunity in the space industry is being able to bring
scientists to the ideal environment where they can conduct
research in a suborbital or orbital environment. And what we're
seeing is, you know, a lot of companies that are partnering
with government and with academia to be able to bring that
scientific community up to up to space.
In addition to a lot of the companies and organizations
that are members of CSF, we also have several universities and
other organizations that we consider research affiliates, and
we work closely with them as well. We have a space applications
research group that we work very closely with. So there's a lot
of opportunity for scientific development, even within the
commercial space sector as it is.
Mr. Tonko. Anyone else? Yes, Ms. Schenewerk, please.
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes. So the add I will make to this is the
opportunities that have been created. So Ms. Drees was--you
know, referenced this to some degree, but also the--with
affordable launch and with more affordable manufacturing of
spacecraft, we see that aspect being--those affordability
aspects affecting the ability to get science to space faster,
too. So, you know, one of the things that kind of is a
crossover with this Committee's jurisdiction is thinking about
how organizations like NASA think about how they conduct
science and how they may need, in some cases, to modernize
their approach to engaging the scientific community with the
space community because of the opportunities that now exist
that previously didn't. So the fundamental approach in--of
bringing science to space is definitively different today than
it has been in the past, and we need to make sure that that's
moving through the system, getting into the academic world and
we're making sure that we're really building those public-
private partnerships to make sure that we're capitalizing on
that affordability factor.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Thank you very much. And looking
forward to the future, what possibilities are each of you most
excited about in the commercial space sector?
Ms. Schenewerk. So I mentioned I haven't gone to space yet.
I would love to live in a world where a person like me, who's
been a government servant and now a lawyer working with a
number of companies, could go to space. I think that the
benefit for that is that my time or my investment would then
garner further activities because the thing that I'm really
excited about with space are all the aspects of space that can
benefit people's lives here on Earth, the technology that we
will develop that will help us clean water so that we can have
sustainable water in space, that helps us with more sustainable
energy approaches, that helps us understand how we could do
better crop growth, how we can have rural connectivity so
people can access information to help them make a decision
about how they might vote or about how they might access
benefits or how they might travel next week. Whatever it is,
space offers the benefits to people on Earth, and we will only
see those if we continue to make the investments that we're
making and we continue to expand the scope of the space
activities.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. My time is up. And I thank you,
Chair, and I yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
And the witnesses might want to know that there's just two
of our Members that have questions left.
And with that, we'll go to Representative Caraveo from
Colorado.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to
all--to you all for sitting through a long hearing. I'm very
excited for today's hearing, especially since a couple of us
actually just got to meet with NASA astronaut Frank Rubio, who
is currently orbiting the Earth on the International Space
Station, and so that was a wonderful experience.
Colorado, unknown to many people, is a national leader in
space exploration and research. We're actually the Nation's
second-largest aerospace economy, and we rank first in the
Nation for aerospace employment concentration. Additionally,
Colorado is home to one of 12 FAA commercial spaceports in the
United States that can support horizontal launch and landing
operations.
As some of you may know, in 1994, Congress authorized the
Space Transportation Infrastructure Matching program to provide
Federal support for the development of a domestic commercial
spaceport network. And unfortunately, only a small handful of
STIM grants were distributed between 2010 and 2012, and the
program has not been appropriated since then, despite a
significant increase in the demand for space transportation
services.
Ms. Drees, as someone who has run a spaceport before, can
you please speak to the need for Congress to reauthorize and
reappropriate the STIM program in order to support civil,
commercial, and defense missions?
Ms. Drees. Absolutely. Thank you so much for that question.
And I completely agree. Having run a spaceport myself, I can
tell you how difficult it is sometimes to be able to get some
of those--the grant funds to allow companies to continue
innovating in that environment. When I was in Mojave, it was 10
years ago when we got a STIM grant. Shortly after that, the
program was defunded or I guess not funded again. It is
absolutely critical. And one of the things I mentioned earlier
is we have a network of nationwide commercial spaceports that
can really support the things that are happening at the Federal
ranges. So there is definitely a capacity problem that we're
experiencing at the ranges, and our Nation's network of
commercial spaceports can help really fill that gap.
So it is really important that we see a grant program
established for these commercial spaceports so that we can
continue to allow these operations. A lot of testing happens at
these commercial spaceports as well, which is really important
to the development of the entire industry. So we see the
opportunity for commercial spaceports across the country to
really help establish that part of the industry.
Ms. Caraveo. And more specifically, how important is
building resilient spaceport infrastructure to maintaining
technological competitiveness over our adversaries?
Ms. Drees. Yes, absolutely. And we do see that as a
critical component of having a national spaceport strategy of
sorts, to have a lot of different capabilities around the
country. This is something even that DARPA (Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency) has been very interested in in making
sure we have some sort of resilient launch capability or launch
system here in the United States. There are a lot of
spaceports, but every spaceport has its sort of unique
characteristics. So having those capabilities across the
country is absolutely critical.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you. Great points there.
Shifting to orbits, I want to talk briefly about remote
sensing. It continues to be more and more important for our
society, and its uses continue to grow. Our own government
relies on commercial imagery for national security missions and
civil applications. And in fact, in my district, there's a
company that is based there whose remote sensing work has
helped tell the story of Ukraine--of the conflict in Ukraine in
ways that we haven't been able to do before.
So, Ms. Drees, again, for you, you mentioned in your
testimony the need for additional transparency and definitions
for remote sensing regulations. Can you please elaborate on the
need for continuing review of those--the regulatory environment
for remote sensing?
Ms. Drees. Thank you so much. Yes, we do know that some
sort of regulatory reform at NOAA is absolutely critical. And
Ms. Schenewerk can probably fill in anything that I might miss
here. So the challenge that I think that we're dealing with is
a lot of the regulations that were created long ago didn't
really expect to see the industry as it's grown and developed
into today. So the reforms that need to happen are really meant
to help sort of speed up the process. The challenge that a lot
of the satellite companies have is the length of time that it
takes to actually get their asset up into space, which is very
detrimental to small companies that are relying on that one
single asset to keep their companies alive.
So the streamlining process requires keeping industry very
much engaged, along with the regulator, to make sure that
there's transparency along the way. If there are challenges
with the application, those challenges should be communicated
back to the company immediately versus, you know, having a
complete, you know, form back to the company with a lot of
things that could have been answered along the way. So that's
one of the things that we're recommending.
Ms. Schenewerk. Yes, I'll just add that one of the pieces
that really is important in the conversation about remote
sensing capabilities and the licensing is how those conditions
that are placed on licenses, especially for more sophisticated
systems, right, so if you're a tier one system, maybe it's not
so bad, but if you're tier two or tier three and you have
conditions, whether those conditions expire over time, have
clear indicators for when you can move past those and not face
those conditions. Because that is the challenge of having to
get a license and then go back and adjudicate the conditions on
your license where you might be able to open up a market, might
be able to serve as a customer, might be able to provide
humanitarian support that is limited by virtue of that
condition that perhaps is overtaken by events.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you both so much. And thank you, Mr.
Chair, for extending my time.
Mr. Baird. The gentlelady yields back.
And now we go to Florida with Representative Frost.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
NASA has launched dreams, careers, technologies and has
helped with the expanding private space industry. And there's a
lot of symmetry here. You know, public university researchers
are now mainly launching their experiments from private
satellites. But the increasing number of launches, you know,
they're a hazard. Some fear that it could create a zero G Wild
West.
And, Dr. Koller, I agree with you, and it seems like you
seem to redirect this binary choice that folks have--sometimes
will have us to believe that there's either no regulation or
crazy amount of regulation. And you seem to reject that tug of
war between regulation and no regulation. You say we should
focus on a comprehensive approach to safety with both
government and industry taking initiative to solve these
problems. I'm curious, what are some of the threats to safety
that you see? And also, how has the industry stepped up to
solve them, and where are they--where has it fallen short?
Dr. Koller. So I think--excuse me. I think there could be a
distinction being made between are the missions purely robotic,
or are actually people involved? And I think different
paradigms could apply to those, right, if the life and safety
of an individual on board is directly at risk. And so for
those--I think for those types of missions, I think we need to
take lessons learned from other sectors and implement the right
tools, the right mechanisms, and develop a more collaborative
approach, not an adversarial approach between regulator and
industry, but a collaborative approach that is taking into
account people's culture, data collection, various different
mechanisms, including, you know, international transparency and
collaboration. And I think if we do build--if we are able to
build a more comprehensive safety management system in a
collaborative way, I think that is our chance to actually
gradually improve the--and reduce the risks that are involved.
Mr. Frost. Thank you. And there are many industries that
have great relationships between regulators and the industry.
And I think now that we're at this beginning phase, we have an
opportunity to make this one of those.
Last fall, the Biden Administration announced their first
cislunar science and technology strategy. Mr. Dunstan, when you
say we need to be good stewards of the cislunar system, what
does that mean to you?
Mr. Dunstan. Well, for me, it means that we have to
recognize that--especially the orbits around Earth everyone
uses and so everyone is responsible for them. And so we have to
be--do our part to be responsible to not clog them up with too
much junk. And I think because of our ability to innovate so
rapidly, we should be at the forefront of developing
remediation efforts, technologies that we can actually bring
down. And there have been some really excellent studies as to
where the worst ones are. We can identify sort of the worst
bodies that are up there. And if we can develop the
technologies to bring them down, we actually are being good
stewards and are helping the world as a whole.
Mr. Frost. Thank you. You know, I want this industry to
continue to grow and thrive, especially in Florida, where we
have over 150,000 jobs in aerospace and counting. And as a
former cadet major in the Civil Air Patrol, I used to fly
gliders out of Merritt Island, aerospace has a very special
place in my heart.
My district has some of the worst income inequality in the
country, and I think young people equipped for good-paying STEM
jobs can help provide a local solution to the income, wealth
inequality we see, especially in central Florida. I've met with
many STEM-obsessed students across my district, which
constantly bring up the great programs that they hear about and
have done through NASA that has helped them continue to spark
and motivate them to be involved in STEM.
Ms. Drees, how have members of the Commercial Spaceflight
Federation engage in efforts to promote STEM education in the
workforce?
Ms. Drees. That's a really important point for our
industry, and I appreciate the question. And many of our
members are not only very interested in this topic, we are
hiring, you know, students out of university to fill the jobs,
and they're motivating and inspiring kids even as young as
kindergarten to get interested in space and science and
technology in hopes that we can kind of start recruiting from a
very young age this next generation of scientists and engineers
that the industry so desperately needs, not only in the space
industry, but really across many industries. So it is a very
critical component, as is workforce development, in terms of
what's happening in the commercial space industry. We're also--
many of our members are partnering with the National Space
Council in their efforts in STEM initiatives as well, so it's
absolutely a critical aspect of the industry.
Mr. Frost. Thank you. And, Ms. Schenewerk? OK. Perfect.
Based on your experience, how can Congress help with workforce
development in the commercial space sector?
Ms. Schenewerk. So I think that the programs that the
Congress supports through NASA, the education programs, I think
thinking, of course, about how our education system supports
schools across the Nation, particularly schools that are most
in need, is important.
But, you know, I think in terms of engaging with the
industry, the more that Congress engages in a meaningful way
and has meaningful conversations about the importance of the
industry, the exciting aspects of the industry, that helps,
right? So yes, when we have a bad day, that could get a lot of
attention, but even more important is when we have really good
days, like the day that we launched Americans from American
soil for the first time in a decade.
So that--those are the kinds of opportunities to highlight
what this industry is accomplishing to make sure that students
that are really young know that they are our futures in the
industry and that there's a whole host of capabilities, right?
Technicians, welders, truck drivers, to aerospace engineers and
astronauts, we hire all of those folks, even lawyers. So I
think that's an important point to engage meaningful and to
talk about the positive potential of the industry.
Mr. Frost. Yes, well, thank you all so much. The first
rocket launch--I've seen rocket launches my entire life from my
backyard. But my first one I actually did at Kennedy Space
Center was just a few months ago was for the TEMPO
(Tropospheric Emissions: Monitoring Pollution) rocket launch,
which was NASA technology on a private rocket. And I think, you
know, it shows that there's great room for collaboration here.
Thank you.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
We want to thank the witnesses for your valuable testimony,
and we appreciate the Members' questions.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and the written questions from Members. This hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:46 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
