- INNOVATION THROUGH COLLABORATION: THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE IN THE U.S. RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INNOVATION THROUGH COLLABORATION:
THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE
IN THE U.S. RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 8, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-2

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-313PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           PAUL TONKO, New York
TOM KEAN, New Jersey
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 8, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Witnesses:

Dr. Harriet Kung, Deputy Director for Science Programs in the
Office of Science, the U.S. Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Mr. James L. Reuter, Associate Administrator for the Space
Technology Mission Directorate, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26

Dr. Michael C. Morgan, Assistant Secretary of Commerce for
Environmental Observation and Prediction, the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    31
Written Statement............................................    33

Dr. Sean L. Jones, Assistant Director for the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the National Science
Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    39
Written Statement............................................    41

Discussion.......................................................    47

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Harriet Kung, Deputy Director for Science Programs in the
Office of Science, the U.S. Department of Energy...............    86

Mr. James L. Reuter, Associate Administrator for the Space
Technology Mission Directorate, the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration...........................................    95

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Legislation Discussion Drafts

Department of Energy and NASA Collaboration..................    98

Department of Energy and NOAA Collaboration..................   104

Department of Energy and USDA Collaboration..................   112

Letter submitted by Space Nuclear Power and Propulsion industry..   118

INNOVATION THROUGH COLLABORATION:

THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S ROLE

IN THE U.S. RESEARCH ECOSYSTEM

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 8, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
Welcome today's hearing entitled ``Innovation Through
Collaboration: The Department of Energy's (DOE's) Role in the
U.S. Research Ecosystem.'' I recognize myself for five minutes
for an opening statement.
Good morning. Today, the Science Committee will examine the
Department of Energy's role in the Federal research enterprise.
DOE is the Nation's largest Federal sponsor of basic research
in the physical sciences and is a world leader in energy
technology development and innovation. As such, it is uniquely
able to partner with other Federal research agencies to address
our most critical national science and technology challenges.
This hearing will serve as a legislative hearing for three
bills we plan to introduce soon that would authorize a number
of DOE's existing interagency research partnerships. We'll also
use the information from today's discussions to inform the
development of future legislation in this area.
DOE has a wide range of assets at its disposal that can be
leveraged for research partnerships. It operates 17 world-
leading national laboratories, which--with steward cutting-edge
research in high-priority areas and maintains and operates 28
scientific user facilities which serve as an essential resource
for the research and development (R&D) community. Together,
this network of facility supports tens of thousands of
researchers each year and provides a foundation for U.S.
competitiveness in emerging technologies.
We're here today to discuss how we can leverage DOE's
tremendous expertise and resources to help other Federal
research agencies address cross-cutting scientific challenges.
I hope to examine how these partnerships are already benefiting
Americans and how we can craft legislation to ensure that
agencies can continue collaborating on strategic research to
enhance U.S. competitiveness for the next generation.
For example, partnering on genomics-based research helps
DOE and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) overcome the
challenges inherent in developing low-cost, high-efficiency
biofuels. Working together, the agencies can improve crop
science, maximize carbon storage, enhance precision agriculture
technologies, and identify ways to combat invasive species,
among many other areas.
DOE and NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration) partner to improve climate modeling, weather
prediction, and other activities that require analysis of
large--extremely large and complex data sets. Leveraging DOE's
high-performance computing (HPC) capacities can improve NOAA's
forecasting and advance DOE's machine-learning abilities.
DOE and NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) have a long history of collaboration on
fundamental science research and particularly on nuclear
propulsion and power for spacecraft. The Voyager spacecrafts
launched more than 40 years ago continue to operate with DOE's
power system. DOE and NASA can work together on critical
challenges of building a lunar surface infrastructure and
efficiently powering a crewed journey to Mars.
Similarly, DOE and NSF (National Science Foundation) have
an active and extensive history of collaboration. These
agencies collaborate on a wide range of research topics such as
physics, quantum information sciences, artificial intelligence
(AI), and advanced manufacturing. By combining their resources,
DOE and the NSF support large-scale discovery science and the
development of international scientific resources like the Vera
C. Rubin Observatory.
I'm looking forward to hearing more from our witnesses
about the potential for future collaboration to enhance U.S.
competitiveness. As the United States faces growing competition
from the Chinese Communist Party, it's never been more
important to maximize our Federal R&D resources. One aspect of
that is examining how we can best utilize interagency
partnerships to strengthen American science and technology.
Last summer, Congress passed the CHIPS and Science Act,
which included detailed program direction and substantial
funding for DOE research programs and critical research
infrastructure. CHIPS and Science also includes investments in
NSF, NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology), and
NASA, as well as provisions to protect these investments from
theft and interference by adversaries. Overseeing the
implementation of CHIPS and Science will be a priority issue
for our Committee this year, and I expect many--that we'll have
many hearings that will touch on this subject.
Prioritizing support for our Federal science research
agencies like DOE and its Office of Science is one pillar of
our oversight plans this Congress, to build on these
investments, protect them from administration overrun--or
should I say turnover--and maximize return on investment of
taxpayer dollars.
There's a need for legislation to secure our essential
interagency research. Setting the seal on DOE's partnerships
with agencies like NASA, NOAA, NSF, and the USDA means we're
making the best use of our resources when we tackle challenges
like furthering space exploration, improving weather
forecasting, and advancing production agriculture.
I'm looking forward to speaking with experts about how we
in Congress can capitalize on this opportunity. I want to thank
our witnesses for their testimony today, and I look forward to
a very productive discussion.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning. Today, the Science Committee will examine the
Department of Energy's role in the federal research enterprise.
DOE is the nation's largest federal sponsor of basic
research in the physical sciences and is a world leader in
energy technology development and innovation. As such, it is
uniquely able to partner with other federal research agencies
to address our most critical national science and technology
challenges.
This hearing will serve as a legislative hearing for three
bills we plan to introduce soon that would authorize a number
of DOE's existing interagency research partnerships. We'll also
use the information from today's discussions to inform the
development of future legislation in this area.
DOE has a wide range of assets at its disposal that can be
leveraged for research partnerships. It operates 17 world-
leading national laboratories which steward cutting-edge
research in high priority areas and maintains and operates 28
scientific user facilities, which serve as essential resources
for the research and development community.
Together, this network of facilities supports tens of
thousands of researchers each year and provides a foundation
for U.S. competitiveness in emerging technologies.
We're here today to discuss how we can leverage DOE's
tremendous expertise and resources to help other federal
research agencies address cross-cutting scientific challenges.
I hope to examine how these partnerships are already
benefitting Americans and how we can craft legislation to
ensure agencies can continue collaborating on strategic
research to enhance U.S. competitiveness for the next
generation.
For example, partnering on genomics-based research helps
DOE and the U.S. Department of Agriculture overcome the
challenges inherent in developing low-cost, high-efficiency
biofuels.
Working together, the agencies can improve crop science,
maximize carbon storage, enhance precision agriculture
technologies, and identify ways to combat invasive species,
among many other areas.
DOE and NOAA partner to improve climate modeling, weather
prediction, and other activities that require analysis of
extremely large and complex data sets. Leveraging DOE's high-
performance computing capabilities can improve NOAA's
forecasting and advance DOE's machine learning abilities.
DOE and NASA have a long history of collaboration, on
fundamental science research and particularly on nuclear
propulsion and power for spacecraft. The Voyager spacecrafts-
launched more than 40 years ago-continue to operate with DOE's
power system. DOE and NASA can work together on the critical
challenges of building a lunar surface infrastructure and
efficiently powering a crewed journey to Mars.
Similarly, DOE and NSF have an active and extensive history
of collaboration. These agencies collaborate on a wide range of
research topics such as physics, quantum information sciences,
artificial intelligence, and advanced manufacturing.
By combining their resources, DOE and NSF support large-
scale discovery science and the development of international
scientific resources like the Vera C. Rubin Observatory.
I'm looking forward to hearing more from our witnesses
about the potential for future collaboration to enhance U.S.
competitiveness.
As the United States faces growing competition from the
Chinese Communist Party, it's never been more important to
maximize our federal R&D resources. One aspect of that is
examining how we can best utilize interagency partnerships to
strengthen American science and technology.
Last summer, Congress passed the CHIPS and Science Act,
which includes detailed program direction and substantial
funding for DOE research programs and critical research
infrastructure.
CHIPS and Science also includes investments in NSF, NIST,
and NASA, as well as provisions to protect these investments
from theft and interference by adversaries.
Overseeing the implementation of CHIPS and Science will be
a priority issue for our Committee this year, and I expect that
many hearings will touch on this topic. Prioritizing support
for our federal science research agencies like DOE and its
Office of Science is one pillar of our oversight plans this
Congress.
To build on these investments, protect them from
administration turnover, and maximize return on investment of
taxpayer dollars, there is a need for legislation to secure our
essential interagency research. Setting the seal on DOE's
partnerships with agencies like NASA, NOAA, the NSF, and the
USDA means we're making the best use of our resources when we
tackle challenges like furthering space exploration, improving
weather forecasting, and advancing production agriculture.
I'm looking forward to speaking with experts about how we
in Congress can capitalize on this opportunity.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony today, I
look forward to a productive discussion.

Chairman Lucas. Now, I'd like to recognize the Ranking
Member, the gentlewoman from California, for an opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you for today's hearing. And I want to thank our
distinguished panel as well. It's not every day that we're able
to speak to senior officials from four of our Nation's major
science agencies, and in the same panel no less, so we look
forward to working with each of you in this Congress.
The Members of the Science Committee take the
responsibility of overseeing America's scientific research
enterprise quite seriously, and it's a duty that will consume
this Committee as we move forward in this Congress. We have to
remain focused on making sure that we're enabling all the tools
and technologies we'll need to aggressively confront the
climate crisis. And as the economic and national security
implications of losing our global leadership in science and
technology are stark, I hope that everyone in the room can
agree that robust Federal science and technology programs are
essential to ensuring the prosperity and well-being of all
Americans.
We had a hearing last week on the importance of Federal
coordination on a National Science and Technology Strategy. And
today, we'll take a closer look at the role of the DOE and the
interagency partnerships that enable us to reap the benefits of
the research that the Department stewards. So many questions of
science are interdisciplinary and, as such, often require close
collaborations among relevant agencies to properly address
them. Fields such as quantum, artificial intelligence, climate
science really demand a whole-of-government approach to advance
the science.
And the agriculture sector is a great example where these
Federal science partnerships shine. Our Nation can only fully
address the climate crisis by deploying methods and tools to
decarbonize the ag sector, which represents 11 percent of U.S.
greenhouse gas emissions. My district is one of the most
productive agricultural regions in California, and I'm
encouraged to see that DOE national labs are leading impressive
research to balance farming productivity with conservation.
For example, DOE's Lawrence Berkeley and Idaho National
Labs are leveraging their scientific resources and facilities
to support technological innovation that's going to help
develop this emerging field of agriculture with notable
contributions like the crop artificial intelligence quotient.
This computational tool will provide farmers with accurate up-
to-date yield maps capable of analyzing variables like crop
yield and moisture to help growers apply precision treatments
only where needed, which will save time and money, while
simultaneously benefiting the environment.
This DOE project uses datas--data from USDA satellites,
which demonstrates the interconnection that we need between our
research agencies. And this is just one example of these
important interagency partnerships that we have to preserve and
build upon.
I also think that we would benefit greatly if we start
thinking about cross-cutting research opportunities for newly
emerging technologies. As we develop next-generation
technologies like fusion energy, we need to be thinking now
about the cross-cutting benefits and research that will be
needed to enable full benefits of that technology for our
society that could involve NASA collaborations for off-Earth
applications. It could involve DOD (Department of Defense)
collaborations for applications from remote locations to power
a future nuclear Navy.
But if we aren't beginning to think of those cross-cutting
opportunities now, then we will ultimately be depriving
ourselves of the tremendous potential and promise of fusion, a
game-changing technology. It won't be enough to simply develop
fusion energy technologies. If we want America to be a world
leader in this space, we need to utilize the full breadth of
opportunity in the Federal research enterprise to help create a
fusion research ecosystem to advance this technology.
We have an interesting discussion ahead of us this morning
and an incredible opportunity in front of us, and we must make
the most of it by ensuring our Federal research enterprise is
working as collaboratively as possible.
And I want to thank you again, Mr. Chairman. It's been
wonderful to work with you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding today's hearing. And
I want to thank our distinguished panel of witnesses for
joining us. It is not every day that we are able to speak to
senior officials from four of our nation's major science
agencies, and in the same panel no less. I look forward to
working with each of you this Congress.
As Members of the Science Committee, we have the
responsibility of overseeing America's scientific research
enterprise. This is a duty we do not take lightly, especially
in a time when numerous existential threats face our nation. We
must remain focused on making sure that we are enabling all of
the tools and technologies we will need to aggressively
confront the climate crisis. And the economic and national
security implications of losing our global leadership in
science and technology are stark. I hope that everyone in the
room can agree that robust federal science and technology
programs are essential to ensuring the prosperity and well-
being of all Americans.
We had a hearing just last week on the importance of
federal coordination on a national science and technology
strategy. Today, we will take a closer look at the role of the
Department of Energy, and the interagency partnerships that
enable us to best reap the benefits of the research that the
Department stewards. So many questions of science are
interdisciplinary, and as such, often require close
collaborations among relevant agencies to properly address
them. Fields such as quantum, artificial intelligence, and
climate science really demand a whole-of-government approach to
advance the science.
The agriculture sector is a great example where these
federal science partnerships shine. Our nation can only fully
address the climate crisis by deploying methods and tools to
decarbonize the agriculture sector, which represents 11 percent
of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. My district is one of the
most productive agricultural regions in California, and I am
encouraged to see that DOE national laboratories are leading
impressive research in precision agriculture, which offers the
opportunity to balance farming productivity with conservation.
For example, DOE's Lawrence Berkeley and Idaho National
Laboratories are leveraging their scientific resources and
facilities to support technological innovation that will help
develop this emerging field of agriculture, with notable
contributions like the Crop Artificial Intelligence Quotient.
This computational tool will provide farmers with accurate, up-
to-date yield maps capable of analyzing variables like crop
yield and moisture to help growers apply precision treatments
only where needed, saving time and money while simultaneously
benefitting the environment. This DOE project uses data from
USDA satellites, which demonstrates the interconnection that we
need between our research agencies. And this is just one
example of these important interagency partnerships that we
must preserve and build upon.
I also think that we would benefit greatly if we start
thinking about crosscutting research opportunities for newly
emerging technologies. As we develop next generation
technologies like fusion energy, we need to be thinking now
about the crosscutting research that will be needed to enable
the full benefits of that technology for our society. That
might involve NASA collaborations for off-earth applications.
That might involve DOD collaborations for applications in
remote locations or to power our future nuclear navy. But if we
aren't beginning to think of those crosscutting opportunities
now, then we will ultimately be depriving ourselves of the
tremendous promise of this game-changing technology. It won't
be enough to simply develop fusion energy technologies if we
want America to be the world leader in this space. We need to
utilize the full breadth of opportunity in the federal research
enterprise to help create a fusion research ecosystem to
advance this technology.
We have an interesting discussion ahead of us this morning.
We have an incredible opportunity in front of us and we must
make the most of it by ensuring our federal research enterprise
is working as collaboratively as possible.
Thank you, and I yield back my time.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Ranking Member, and I appreciate
those opening comments.
Let me introduce our witnesses today for the panel. Our
first witness today is Dr. Harriet Kung, the Deputy Director
for Science Programs at the Office of Science at the U.S.
Department of Energy, where she's responsible for direction and
oversight of Office of Science programs in advanced scientific
computing, computing research, fusion energy sciences, basic
energy sciences, high-energy physics, biological environmental
research, and nuclear physics. That's quite an agenda.
Our second witness is Mr. James Reuter, the Associate
Administrator for NASA's Space Technology Mission Directorate
(STMD), where he manages and oversees investments in cross-
cutting technologies that support NASA's current and future
missions.
Our third witness is Dr. Michael Morgan, the Assistant
Secretary of Commerce for Environment, Observation, and
Prediction at NOAA. In this role, Dr. Morgan provides the
Administration with direction and expertise regarding weather,
climate, ocean observations, and water.
And our fourth witness is Dr. Sean Jones, who is the
Assistant Director for the Directorate of Mechanical--or
Mathematical, I should say, and Physical Sciences at the
National Science Foundation. In his capacity, he oversees the
astronomy, chemistry, mathematics, material, and physics
divisions.
Thank you all, witnesses, for being here today and sharing
your expertise with our Committee.
And with that, Dr. Kung, I turn to you for five minutes for
your opening comments, please.

TESTIMONY OF DR. HARRIET KUNG, DEPUTY DIRECTOR

FOR SCIENCE PROGRAMS IN THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE,

THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Dr. Kung. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and Members of the Committee. It is a great honor and
pleasure for me to join you today representing the Department
of Energy to discuss the critical role of interagency
partnerships in delivering DOE's mission while supporting the
Nation's broader innovation ecosystem.
My name is Harriet Kung. As the Chairman just mentioned,
I'm the Deputy Director for Science Program in DOE's Office of
Science where our core mission is to deliver scientific
discoveries and major scientific tools that will transform our
understanding of nature, while advancing our Nation's energy,
economic, and national security goals.
I want to start by noting that DOE shares the Committee's
view of the critical importance of this topic, especially in
our current environment. As we all know, America is in
increasingly intense global competitions. It's a competition
for leadership in science. It's a competition in technology and
innovation. It will take all of us working together in the
executive branch, Congress, across the whole Nation in order to
meet this challenge, but also to build a more prosperous,
innovative, and inclusive America for decades to come.
In my testimony today, I would like to focus on three key
points on how DOE delivers impact to our interagency
collaborations. First, DOE's interagency partnerships span from
fundamental research to demonstration and deployment. Whether
it's unlocking the mysteries of the universe with NSF or
driving innovation in ocean observation with NOAA, DOE is
contributing our unique expertise and capabilities to
interagency partnerships to address the most challenging cross-
cutting science and technology problems.
Second, DOE engages in partnership where we advance our own
missions, while bringing complementary technologies
capabilities to our partners. Our 17 national laboratories, and
the Office of Science 28 user facilities represent unmatched
national resources, especially in the physical sciences and
high-performance computing areas. Thirdly, our shared efforts
have already delivered enormous outcomes going back many
decades. For example, DOE, along with our NIH (National
Institutes of Health) partner and private sector were
instrumental to unlocking the human genome, and in turn,
revolutionize modern biology and medicine. Working with NSF and
others, we have peered into the heart of atoms and deliver
exciting new insights on the fundamental building blocks of the
universe and making our Nation the global intellectual leader
in discovery science. And similarly, working with NASA, we
leverage our expertise in nuclear seismic technology to deliver
radio isotopes and power technologies that are driving Mars
landers and satellite probes traversing the whole solar system.
Looking to the future, we see a landscape where
strengthening U.S. leadership in science innovation will
require even greater collaboration. And as we work together to
implement the CHIPS and Science Act, these collaborations will
be needed to realize a future where the U.S. meets an
increasingly competitive global landscape. And for that matter,
our user facilities and national laboratories need to be
upgraded and fully resourced to meet the increasing demands
from both the DOE and also interagency-funded research. Fully
leveraging these existing centers of excellence, while building
capacity among historically minoritized communities, will be
critical to delivering on the promise Congress laid out in the
CHIPS and Science Act. We're already leaning in with a new
cross-cutting partnership with NSF and in collaboration with
NASA to deliver a one-of-a-kind instrument called LuSEE-Night
(Lunar Surface Electromagnetic Experiment-Night) to explore the
far side of the Moon. Similarly, we're looking to expand our
partnerships further with NOAA and USDA.
In closing, thank you for opportunity to address the
Committee, and I'm looking forward to talking with you about
DOE's collaborations and answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kung follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Doctor.
Mr. Reuter, you're recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JAMES L. REUTER,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR

FOR THE SPACE TECHNOLOGY MISSION DIRECTORATE,

THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Reuter. Yes, thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and your entire Committee. It's really a pleasure for
me to be here, and I'm excited to do so. My name is Jim Reuter,
the Associate Administrator for NASA's Space Technology Mission
Directorate. STMD develops transformative technologies,
enabling future missions to the Moon, to Mars, and beyond while
driving the space economy through strategic investments.
NASA and DOE have worked together for over 50 years.
Currently, we have more than 20 active partnership agreements
and more in development. Our collaboration has allowed for many
successful missions and projects. We wouldn't be here and--
without them with DOE providing crucial expertise in support of
NASA's Human Spaceflight, Science, Technology, and Aeronautics
Mission Directorates. Today, one of our most critical
collaborations is space nuclear power and propulsion because
it's nuclear systems that are essential to NASA's Artemis
program and Moon-to-Mars exploration objectives. Maturing space
nuclear technologies is also beneficial to advancing small
modular reactor technology on Earth.
DOE provides NASA with nuclear regulatory and safety
support, with indemnification, subject matter expertise, test
facility capabilities. Integrated teams are maturing low-
enriched uranium reactor designs, advanced manufacturing
methods, digital modeling, and test capabilities for space
systems. Fission power systems offer a reliable way to power
operations in other worlds, such as providing electricity for
habitats, resource extraction, and processing plants.
In 2018, the agencies conducted a joint ground test of a
kilowatt reactor prototype that helped develop preliminary
reactor design concepts. In 2022 then, the agencies extended
that development through three industry-led design efforts for
40 kilowatt systems as part of our NASA's Moon-to-Mars
campaign.
Space nuclear propulsion is an enabling technology for
human missions to Mars. DOE's contributions to this technology
are key to reducing the size of our reactors by advancing
higher-temperature fission fuels and reactor designs. NASA and
DOE continue working with industry to develop thermal
propulsion engines, and in 2021, this work led to the award of
three contracts for design efforts.
DOE and NASA also work closely on radioisotope power
systems (RPS), which harness heat from the natural decay of
plutonium-238 radioisotope, producing electric power and heat
for spacecraft systems and science instruments. This technology
has allowed 30 NASA missions to visit the solar system's most
remote and otherwise unreachable locations. Five of these RPS-
powered science missions are operating today, including two
Voyager spacecraft that launched in 1977 and are still
functioning in interstellar space. RPS powers the Mars
Perseverance rover, which is currently exploring and collecting
samples on the surface of Mars, and will also power NASA's
Dragonfly mission, an upcoming mission that will be a
rotorcraft destined for Saturn's largest moon Titan.
Through constant rate production, DOE has established the
domestic capability to produce plutonium-238 with production
aligned to NASA's mission needs. We're also investing in new
technology for more efficient and higher-performing RPS to be
considered for infusion in the next decade.
Our coordination and scientific research is increasing our
knowledge of the universe. DOE is the primary government
sponsor of the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS). It's a
particle physics detector attached to the external exterior of
the International Space Station and has been operating for 12
years. It has helped us understand the formation of the
universe and search for evidence of dark matter. AMS is just
one example of DOE's Office of High-Energy Physics carrying out
successful joint projects with NASA.
In the coming years, an experiment called LuSEE-Night will
be delivered by NASA's commercial lunar payload services to the
far side of the Moon. It will test the feasibility of low-
frequency radio astronomy from the lunar far side and make
radio observations of the very early universe.
Our partnership also benefits us at home. NASA and DOE both
participate in the U.S. Global Climate Research Program. We
coordinate models used to understand climate change on
timescales ranging from months to centuries and keeping our
Nation a leader in understanding the Earth system.
And finally, NASA Aeronautics works closely with DOE's
Advanced Research Projects Agency to develop lighter electrical
systems and more reliable circuits. We are applying that
research to our national aviation challenges.
We look forward to continued collaboration with DOE and
welcome opportunities to expand our partnerships and leverage
our resources in order to advance technology, science, and
exploration in meaningful ways for the American people. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Reuter follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Reuter.
Dr. Morgan, you're recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MICHAEL C. MORGAN,

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE

FOR ENVIRONMENTAL OBSERVATION AND PREDICTION,

THE NATIONAL OCEANIC

AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION

Dr. Morgan. Thank you. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today regarding NOAA's work with the
Department of Energy on high-performance computing and our
Earth system modeling enterprise. I appreciate the Committee's
interest in supporting successful interagency research
collaborations with the Department of Energy, and I'm excited
about the benefits that deeper ties with the DOE will bring to
NOAA and the Nation.
NOAA's mission is to provide weather, water, and climate
research and products which protect life and property, as well
as enhancing the national economy. As the Nation grows more
vulnerable to climate- and weather-related disasters, we will
need improvements in these products to meet NOAA's mission.
A core component of NOAA's efforts to meet this challenge
is the creation of more comprehensive Earth system models.
These models represent our understanding of how the
multifaceted connections between different components of the
Earth's system such as the atmosphere, oceans, land, and sea
ice, as well as hydrology, interact across short and long
timescales. Research conducted using these models allows us to
develop a deeper understanding of the climate--of climate
change and to provide more accurate weather forecasts.
These models require significant high-performance computing
capabilities. NOAA maintains a strong relationship with the DOE
to secure access to these critical computing resources. Most
notably, NOAA and DOE work together to run Gaea, NOAA's largest
research and development supercomputer hosted by DOE's Oak
Ridge National Laboratory. Gaea allows NOAA researchers to
develop and refine advanced climate models, enhance scientific
understanding of climate variability and change, and improve
the accuracy of global and regional climate model projections.
Gaea also powers research into the relationship between climate
variations and extreme weather such as hurricanes.
Gaea provides additional value to NOAA researchers and the
Nation by enabling seasonal real-time experimental predictions
from the Seamless System for Prediction and Earth System
Research, or SPEAR. These predictions are performed every month
on the Gaea supercomputer fed into the North American Multi-
Model Ensemble climate predictions, and made freely available
to the public for use in regional and tailored forecast.
Gaea also supports the development of operational numerical
weather prediction systems based on the Unified Forecast
System, or UFS, a community-based coupled comprehensive Earth
modeling system. UFS applications span local to global
prediction on timescales from sub-hourly analyses to seasonal
predictions. The system is designed to be a source system for
NOAA's operational numerical weather predictions.
Finally, the Earth system model 4, the culmination of
NOAA's 4th-generation climate model development effort, was
developed and run primarily on Gaea. It unifies advances from
past development efforts and focuses on chemistry, carbon, and
ecosystem comprehensiveness. Analyses of simulations from this
model will serve as the basis for future research, helping to
improve our understanding of coupled carbon chemistry climate
interactions and to reduce uncertainty and projections of
future climate change and its impacts.
These advances have been made possible by NOAA's
interagency agreement with DOE's Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Codifying and expanding this agreement, as proposed by the
Committee, would benefit NOAA, the Department of Energy, and
the Nation. Potential advances made possible includes
simulations with large ensembles, more realistic representation
of Earth's system processes and interactions, and high spatial
resolution predictions of extremes and abrupt changes.
Increasing resolution allows the capture of small-scale--
smaller-scale processes and features which can lead to better
representation of severe weather, more timely warnings,
improved prediction of extreme events and their duration, and
higher-confidence climate projections.
NOAA-DOE collaboration could enable also the application of
artificial intelligence and machine-learning methodologies to
the Earth system modeling. Similarly, using DOE's computing
resources and expertise could lead to improvements in
atmospheric data simulation.
Collaboration between NOAA and DOE not only reduces
duplication of efforts, it is a cost-effective approach to
generate an additional computational capability for both
agencies. Moreover, such collaborations could result not only
in computational advances, but also in better decisionmaking on
issues of national importance, such as future energy use and
technology options.
For over two decades, NOAA scientists have defined the
leading edge of climate and Earth system modeling. Interagency
agreements like those with DOE and other partnerships with
academia and industry provide critical opportunities for NOAA
to advance Earth system modeling in order to save lives and
property and support the national economy, strengthening the
exchange of information and scientific capabilities with
partners will enable NOAA to continue to meet our core mission.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Morgan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Dr. Morgan.
Dr. Jones, you're recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. SEAN L. JONES, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR

FOR THE DIRECTORATE OF MATHEMATICAL

AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES,

THE NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Dr. Jones. Great, thank you. Good morning, Chairman Lucas
and Ranking Member Lofgren and Members of the Committee. Thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss
interagency partnerships, which contribute to our shared goals
to spur innovation across the Nation, train the next-generation
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
workforce, and secure global leadership in emerging
technologies. My name is Dr. Sean L. Jones, and I'm the
Assistant Director for NSF's Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS) Directorate.
NSF is extremely proud of the role the agency has played in
our Nation's global leadership in science, engineering and
technology. The MPS Directorate has supported some of the
biggest scientific breakthroughs of the last few decades,
including the first image of a black hole, to the first
detection of gravitational waves and the discovery of the Higgs
boson.
Many of the technologies that are the drivers of national
competitiveness today such, as artificial intelligence and
quantum information sciences, are rooted in sustained NSF
investments over multiple decades. NSF is grateful for the
strong support of this Committee and the Congress, which has
made these and many other breakthroughs possible.
With the passage of the CHIPS and Science Act, Congress put
in place a roadmap for securing U.S. leadership in science and
engineering for decades to come. The new law positions the
Federal research agencies to strengthen the American research
ecosystem to quickly translate research and the impacts that
address national challenges and benefit the Nation. The
agencies represented here today are critical components of this
recipe for success, and it is imperative for us to work
together to achieve the goals laid out in CHIPS and Science.
Through OSTP's (Office of Science and Technology Policy's)
National Science and Technology Council, NSTC, the agencies
work together to coordinate across priority areas and to
leverage investments and expertise. For example, NSF and DOE,
along with NIST, co-chair the subcommittee that coordinates
Federal R&D in quantum information sciences, including our
implementation of the National Quantum Initiative Act. Quantum
has created some of the 21st century's most critical tools,
such as lasers and broadband communication, and our continued
collaboration is vital as new discoveries in quantum physics
promise faster, more reliable computers and more secure
communication networks.
In January, NSF and DOE's Office of Science signed a
memorandum of understanding (MOU) that will enable increased
partnerships to address some of our most important challenges.
This MOU builds upon previous partnerships and provides
opportunities for collaboration on biotechnology, quantum,
advanced manufacturing, engineering, AI, and machine learning.
Growing a diverse, inclusive STEM workforce is also a priority
for both agencies, and the MOU allows the agencies to address
this critical need as well.
Importantly, NSF and DOE's robust partnership includes
access to various NSF and DOE-managed multiuser facilities
around the globe. One recent success from that partnership is
the NSF-supported work of researchers at the University of
South Carolina, who collaborated with the DOE Sandia National
Laboratories. The researchers have created a new type of porous
material with unique nanoscale properties that can potentially
enable superior hydrogen storage solutions, an innovation that
will be useful for fuel cells used in vehicles, backup power
supplies, and other applications.
Another example is the Large Hadron Collider, LHC, which is
the most powerful particle accelerator ever created, making it
the premier facility in the world for research in elementary
particle physics. Through a partnership between NSF and DOE,
the United States is a major contributor to this international
collaboration. A major international effort is underway to
upgrade the instrument at the LHC, and our two agencies are
coordinating closely to do so.
Beyond the Department of Energy, NSF closely collaborates
with many other agencies, including NASA and NOAA. NSF and NASA
partner to advance research programs ranging from astrophysics
to Earth system science, and NSF and NOAA partner on computer
modeling to support the Nation's weather and climate forecast
system.
In addition to our partnerships with other Federal
agencies, NSF is also developing long-lasting partnerships with
industry. NSF's new Directorate for Technology, Innovation, and
Partnership, TIP, which was codified in the CHIPS and Science
Act of 2022, helps position the agency to capitalize on the
uniquely American research ecosystem. The TIP Directorate has
announced new programs and partnerships with companies such as
Intel and Micron to develop bold, potentially transformative
solutions to address semiconductor manufacturing challenges and
advance opportunities for equitable STEM education.
In closing, NSF has made partnerships a central pillar in
our strategy for meeting the challenges of today and laying the
groundwork for the research enterprise of tomorrow. These
examples provide only a small sample of many collaborations NSF
is undertaking both within the Federal Government and with
other partners to leverage resources and provide the best
possible return to the American people for now and into the
future.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the
Committee today, and I'm happy to answer your questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Jones follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Dr. Jones. And thank you to all
the witnesses for your testimony.
The Chair now recognizes himself for five minutes for
questions.
Dr. Kung, as you note in your testimony, many of the
Department of Energy's successful interagency partnerships are
enabled by DOE research infrastructure like the Office of
Science user facilities and upgrades recently authorized in the
CHIPS and Science Act. What DOE facility investments are
necessary to ensure that our science--our Federal science
agencies are equipped to compete together against our
adversaries?
Dr. Kung. Thank you very much for that question. We're,
indeed, very, very proud of the 28 scientific user facilities
that we have stewarded. In fact, it's really the cutting-edge
technology, expertise, resources that we offer free of charge
to publish more research for the whole community that really
make them unique. We do need to make sure that these facilities
are continuing to stay at the cutting edge. We also need to
make sure that they are fully resourced. We can make these
resource and the talents of the staff available to the whole
community, not only to support the DOE science, but also to
support our interagency partners. But we're also safeguarding
the research that's being produced at our facilities to protect
any unintended sharing of information and technology. So all in
all, we're taking the stewardship responsibility very
seriously, making sure that they're indeed serving the American
people's the best interest.
Chairman Lucas. Along that line of questioning on my part,
I'm going to ask kind of a challenging question, I know. But we
will be operating in a very restricted budget environment this
fall, I suspect. Tell me what kind of investment should be
prioritized. And I know that's never a pleasant question, but--
--
Dr. Kung. Absolutely. In fact, this privatization is part
of our DNA as a Federal steward of these resources. We are
grappling with the privatization decision every day, amongst
the six programs that I'm overseeing, within each program, the
program also needs to prioritize their resources in order to
maximize the productivity and impact. But we're not making
these decisions in vacuum. We're actually surrounding ourselves
with a guidance from Congress, from the Administration, but
also from the community. For example, several of our sister
agencies and I, we work together to set priorities on the
topical areas that we need to jointly invest or individually
invest in making sure there's no duplication, but that there
are also synergistic opportunity to working across the agency
boundaries.
Chairman Lucas. Continuing with you, Doctor, on the Science
Committee we know that DOE plays an important role in
supporting research across the Federal Government, even in
agencies that are outside this Committee's jurisdiction--hard
to believe there are such agencies, aren't there, Ranking
Member--but outside our jurisdiction. As a farmer and rancher,
I'd like to take a moment to highlight the Department's work
with the U.S. Department of Agriculture. DOE and USDA have an
established history of partnering to address important research
challenges in areas like biomass, biofuels, genomics,
integrated water resources, rural energy development, and much,
much more. Doctor, in the past few years, what steps has DOE
taken to strengthen ties with USDA? And I ask that as we
consider legislation to support the DOE-USDA relationship.
Dr. Kung. Again, thank you for that question. We indeed
have a longstanding partnership in both science and also the
applied research development being conducted across the whole
department. Maybe I can focus my response on the Office of
Science part of interactions that we have conducted with USDA.
Let's take the bioresearch centers (BRCs) supported by our
biological environmental research program as an example. We
currently support four of these BRCs that are being tasked to
explore better ways and addressing bottlenecks in making sure
biofuels overcome some of the bottlenecks, making sure they are
cost-effective, and being able to being used in the commercial
sectors.
And this is a very strong partnership that we have with the
USDA, for example. The Agricultural Resource Services at both
Louisiana and in Illinois are working with one of our BRCs.
They're taking this integrator research idea as essentially
turning each of these plants as a factory to make sure that we
actually get as much functionality out of these plants. And
this integrated research approach is actually very, very
powerful. For example, one of the very exciting success stories
that we worked between DOE and USDA is this oilseed example,
where, during the non-crop, non-grow seasons, we actually
allowed the farmers to grow these cover oilseed. It's called
pennycress. This is a oilseed that, based on DOE's expertise,
we actually built in functionality to increase the seed
population and also the oil content that can grow--be derived
from these oilseeds, while USDA contributed their expertise to
make sure that these plants are drought-resistant, they are
more resistant to disease and so forth. It's really a perfect
marriage in the way that we're contributing the fundamental
science on the genomics microbiology perspective where the USDA
coming from the agriculture attributes. So in a way we're able
to produce this oilseed and make them into a commercial
application.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Doctor. With that, my time is
expired. I recognize the Ranking Member for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kung, my understanding is that you are the Acting
Director at this point of DOE's Fusion Energy Science Program.
I've got questions for everybody, but I only have five minutes,
so I want to talk to you about some of the issues of concern
that I have. As you know, Congress has passed in the last five
years several bills that came out of this Committee with
bipartisan support, and they were based on the Fusion Energy
Science Advisory Committee and the National Academies'
recommendations. We'll get--we'll find out what the President's
budget is tomorrow, but I want updates on where we are on some
of the requirements that Congress has put on the DOE. For
example, it's my understanding that although directed, the
Department has yet to establish an inertial fusion energy (IFE)
program that could leverage the recent accomplishment at the
National Ignition Facility (NIF), as well as the Department's
other nuclear security facilities, nor have you established an
alternative and enabling concepts program to assess and
accelerate the development of the next generation of fusion
technologies toward commercial development. So I'd like to know
what the Department is doing today to ensure that you're
complying with the Department of Energy Research and Innovation
Act of 2018.
And additionally, my understanding is that the milestone-
based public-private partnership was only established last
September, but it's now at $50 million, completely
oversubscribed, and I'm concerned and would like your input on
the status of that.
And last, I understand there's a pressing need to identify
and develop fusion materials, as highlighted in the recent
reports that I mentioned a minute ago. It's a major challenge
to ultimate commercialization of the industry. Yet, this R&D is
significantly underfunded when compared to the authorization.
So can you address those gaps for me, please?
Dr. Kung. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Could you turn on your mic? It's hard to hear
you.
Dr. Kung. OK. Thank you. Thank you for that question. I
also would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your
strong support for Office of Science and also for the fusion
energy in particular.
I would like to first address the inertial fusion energy
topic and actually have wonderful news to share is that
starting in Fiscal Year 2023, we are starting an IFE programs.
And this is actually based on the excellent work. We recently
tasked two very talented researchers. You may know Professor
Tammy Ma and Professor Riccardo Betti from Rochester, or
University of Rochester. Both of them led a base research need
for inertial fusion energy workshop last year. And based on
this excellent workshop report, we're actually formulating a
funding opportunity announcement (FOA) that will be released
later this year, probably later this month even to stand up a
IFE program. We're very, very excited to see especially the
Livermore NIF results. I think that is a giant leap forward for
the whole fusion energy science, as well as the technology, and
we're very, very proud of that.
And also recognizing that particular result really grew out
of almost six decades of very substantial science and
technology research in physics, in materials, in laser, and
also in all these technology developments, so we definitely
agree completely with you and the Committee that we need to
continue and enhance our investment in fusion energy
technology, in particular, with the view of bringing fusion
energy onto the grid.
And you have mentioned several reports, the Fusion Energy
Science Advisory Committee long-range report--long-range
planning report, the NASEM (National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine) report, all are strongly advising us
to increase our investment, along with the CHIPS and Science
and various authorization bills that your Committee has
provided, and we are taking them to heart.
In particular, you mentioned the milestone-based program.
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Dr. Kung. We're very excited to be able to launch that
program. Actually, we issued the solicitation earlier that
year. The plan is to look at the awards, which hopefully will
be announced in a couple weeks. Based on that, also inform our
future trajectory. We understand there is a gap between the
funding available that we put into the solicitation and also
the authorization level. We are taking the authorization level
as the guide as we're designing this program, but we're very
excited about the milestone program. We think that this is a
very important program to help us design this fusion power
plan, but also develop a technology roadmap jointly with the
private sector. I think those are very important information to
inform our overall strategy for fusion, especially bringing
fusion on the grid. Thank you.
Ms. Lofgren. I see my time has expired, but I know the
Chairman shares my interest in fusion, and I'm sure we'll be
pursuing it further in, you know, hearings in the future. So
with that, I yield back, Mr. Acting Chairman.
Mr. Williams [presiding]. Thank you. Sorry. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, for five
minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chair. With China controlling
more and more of the global supply chain of critical minerals
and materials, does the Department of Energy consider this a
serious threat to the national security of our Nation, Dr.
Kung?
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. There are critical
resources, including critical minerals, critical materials.
Mr. Posey. I can't hear you.
Dr. Kung. I'm sorry. Should I stop?
Mr. Posey. No, that's good.
Dr. Kung. I think I understand your question. It's about
resources that China is controlling. If it's not the right
question, I stand corrected.
Mr. Posey. Yes. Let's try this. What is the Department of
Energy's Office of Science and Policy and their commitment to
establish a domestic supply of minerals that come from China
that are rare?
Dr. Kung. Thank you. Thank you very much for that question.
Indeed, we're taking these resources--the availability of these
resources very critically, very importantly, and we recognize
that these critical minerals and materials are essential for a
number of the U.S. application, industry, commercial, and
that's really impacting not only our national security----
Mr. Posey. What are we doing about it?
Dr. Kung. What we're doing about it, we're doing it--we
actually are having a whole-of-the-government approach not only
within the Department. We're coordinating across the different
programs in the Department of Energy but also with our sister
agencies, NSF, NASA and Department of Defense to name a few.
I think from--speaking from my own office perspective, it's
very, very important that we take a dual approach. One is to be
able to find substitute alternatives to these critical
materials and minerals so we're no longer at the mercy of China
controlling----
Mr. Posey. I get that.
Dr. Kung. And the----
Mr. Posey. Give me an example of one that we've done like
where we've sought another alternative. Like we had a witness
last week said 90 percent of our graphite comes from China----
Dr. Kung. Right.
Mr. Posey [continuing]. So what are we doing about that?
Dr. Kung. So we may want to develop other graphite sources
not from China. But also in addition to graphite for example,
neodymium is one of the critical materials. There are super
exciting properties that neodymium possess that we may find
alternatives to having neodymium, for example, in high fuel
magnets. So that's exactly--trying to understand what makes
these critical mineral--critical materials so special that
impact our clean energy application, our other applications,
and then find----
Mr. Posey. How much money have we spent searching for
alternatives so far?
Dr. Kung. I'm sorry?
Mr. Posey. How much money have we spent searching for
alternatives in the last 10 years?
Dr. Kung. Right. So within--there are several pieces in the
Department of Energy. In the Office of Science, we're spending
about $20 million per year for the past 10 years or so. But
there are a dedicated program called Critical Material
Institute being supported by the Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy that had--that program has been going on for
10 years. So each year it's funded at $25 million, so over a
10-year span, it's $250 million. That is not the program that's
supported in my office. If you're interested, we can get you
additional information from----
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Dr. Kung [continuing]. My colleagues.
Mr. Posey. I would appreciate that. How many commercial
minerals and materials production facilities have resulted from
these expenditures?
Dr. Kung. Yes, that's exactly the question that my
colleagues in the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy will
be able to answer. I will be happy to get back with you on the
details of that.
Mr. Posey. How can the Department of Energy ensure that its
research funds are used in a way that promotes American
companies?
Dr. Kung. Indeed, we are keenly aware that the Department
also is putting--protecting the benefits of America's
investment in R&D, making sure that we fend off unneeded,
unintended sharing of information, especially recognizing there
are countries that are not really adhering to the same code of
conduct such as in terms of respecting our IP (intellectual
property) rights, respecting the IP rights, and also
intellectual property rights, as well as protecting research--
--
Mr. Posey. All right. Time's almost over. If we have a
foreign company competing with an American company, would we
ever fund a foreign company?
Dr. Kung. So the Secretary actually started----
Mr. Posey. Yes or no would be helpful because we're almost
out of time.
Dr. Kung. OK. So the Department had put in a very rigorous
vetting--risk-based vetting process to make sure that the
American derive the--from the maximum benefit from the American
investment in R&D. It's case by case. I--my understanding is
that, and if you--I will be happy to get back with you with
additional information on--if you have specific case you would
like to--us to address.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chair. My time's up.
Mr. Williams. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Jackson, for five minutes.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And it's a pleasure to
serve with you, sir.
Dr. Morgan, good morning.
Dr. Morgan. Good morning.
Mr. Jackson. I want to speak with you for a moment about
the somewhat notorious, where I'm from, radar coverage gap in
North Carolina. This is something I was not an expert in, am
still not an expert in. I just want to give you a sense of what
I've heard from some folks back home. And if I explain this in
a way that's inaccurate or leaves out some important context, I
want to give you the opportunity to correct me and fill in
anything that I'm missing, OK? I just want to make sure we're
all sort of on the same page with the situation.
Years ago, I had a meteorologist in my district educate me
about this. He asked me if I could do anything. I told him I
was in the State legislature. I didn't think that I could. But
now I found myself running for Federal office, and he
reapproached, along with a number of other meteorologists. As
it turns out, the nearest Doppler radar is about 80 miles away.
This was a decision that was made many decades ago. I think
there was some defense industry input for this. It was part of
a larger cold war calculus about how to spread out Doppler
radar across the country. And back then, the Charlotte
metropolitan region didn't have the three million people that
it has today, and nothing has been done to close that coverage
gap. I know a report was issued by I believe NOAA a couple of
years ago that kind of downplayed the significance of the gap.
There was some dissent. There was disagreement about its
significance.
Again, not an expert in this, but I can tell you that the
meteorologists in my district say that when it comes to
predicting and warning people about tornadoes and flash floods,
that they consider themselves severely hampered by existing
within this radar coverage gap. My understanding is for very
severe tornadoes, the coverage gap is not really a problem. But
for F-1, F-2, and for flash floods, being able to detect
weather below a 6,000 foot level is a major problem for the
three million people who live in this metropolitan region.
I would like to just give you some time to correct me if I
got anything wrong, and ultimately, I'm going to ask your
advice on how we proceed to rectify this.
Dr. Morgan. OK. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
We--your question recognizes the critical importance of
observations broadly in our predictive capacity in this
country. And NEXRAD (Next-Generation Radar) radar is one of the
key tools that we use for high-impact weather events like
severe thunderstorms, tornadic thunderstorms, and heavy
precipitation. And we use those tools to protect lives and
property.
I cannot fully address to you right now how the siting was
done decades ago. NEXRADs were built, sited, and deployed, as
you acknowledged, well over 30 years ago. And while we're
continuously upgrading them through our service life extension
programs and we're improving them with the latest technology,
we're also recognizing that where we have those gaps, because
the scan angle, the further out you go, the further up it's
going to be, that's absolutely correct. And so what we've done
is found ways of lowering that scanning techniques so that we
can cover more of the lower troposphere closer to the Earth's
surface.
If--you know, those gaps may still remain, and we're trying
to understand how we can better cover areas like Charlotte.
They're part of an aging--they're aging part of our critical
infrastructure, and we recognize that there's some inherent
limitations with our current technology.
So what NOAA is doing right now is we're really hard at
work at looking at the next system, the follow-on system to the
NEXRAD radar, and that what we're focused on is what's called
phased array radar, or PAR, and these systems are going to
allow us to greatly improve the scan times, as well as allow
for better forecasts and warnings.
Going back to the concern about warnings, that report that
was issued a couple of years ago, I believe, found that--from
the National Weather Service's analysis that, you know, we--one
of the key takeaways from that report was that for predicting
severe weather, it's not just the radars that are used, but
there are other observational platforms, surface observations,
spotter reports, et cetera, that help us fill in some of those
gaps, so it's not just the radar that's critical for that. But
we recognize where there are gaps, we are looking at new
technologies, looking at the--some technologies with the
private sector perhaps that might help to fill those in.
I would be happy to work--and my team--to follow up with
you on this and to discuss how NOAA is working to work--you
know, how we can best work with Congress to move forward in
this particular area.
Mr. Jackson. Well, I appreciate that. I accept your
invitation, would love to work with you, will say as a first
thought reporting back to my constituents that there may be a
new technology that's going to be invented, funded, deployed,
and rolled out, and we may be the beneficiary of that probably
is not going to cut it with them but look forward to having a
conversation.
Dr. Morgan. Right. But I think that lower scanning angle
that we're using now hopefully is beginning to ameliorate part
of that gap.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you.
Dr. Morgan. Thank you.
Mr. Williams. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Babin, for five minutes.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
it and appreciate all the witnesses for being here.
I have some very specific questions that I'd like to have
answers to if possible. For either Dr. Kung or Mr. Reuter, NASA
currently pays DOE to operate the facilities necessary to
produce plutonium-238, the isotope that is used to power many
of NASA's planetary probes and rovers. How much is NASA
currently paying DOE for plutonium-238 production?
Mr. Reuter. I don't think I have--we'll have to get that
information for you. I don't have the exact number of how much
we're paying for plutonium-238. We do have a great relationship
with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory and got an agreement on
continuous production rates that really serves our needs and
we'll address in the future.
Mr. Babin. OK. And I've got some more specific, and I hope
we get the answers to this, too, maybe if not today----
Mr. Reuter. Yes, we'll be glad to get you the information.
Mr. Babin. How much has NASA paid DOE since 2011 when
Congress began to provide funding to restart domestic
production for civil space applications?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, we'll get you the information for the cost
and----
Mr. Babin. And then how much plutonium-238 is being
produced this year, and how much has been produced since the
restart in 2011?
Mr. Reuter. Again, I'll get you the exact information as we
go along. What we've done is we have five active missions that
use radioisotope power systems. We've had over 30 over the
years, and we know Dragonfly is coming up. We'll use it. And,
you know, the exploration of the Moon and beyond is really
going to--really help our need--and so what we've done is got a
kind of a 10-year rotating supply, you know, average so we have
constant production rate from DOE that really services our
needs, and then we'll be glad to get you the total mounts of
how much we're producing and the cost.
Mr. Babin. All right, thank you. DOE uses the High Flux
Isotope Reactor (HFIR) at Oak Ridge and the Advanced Test
Reactor at Idaho National Lab to produce plutonium-238. Has
production at these facilities been constant or has it been
interrupted for maintenance, servicing upgrades, or safety
concerns? And do you anticipate any interruptions?
Mr. Reuter. Again, I'll get you the exact information, and
I'll be glad to come talk to you and get all the questions
answered. What I would say is we--with going to the constant
production rate, what we're anticipating doing is smoothing out
those interruptions as we go through it. And we really think
that will service our needs in the future, and we can adjust it
on a yearly basis but kind of keep a production rate looking 10
years in advance.
Mr. Babin. So you do anticipate some interruptions then
going forward?
Mr. Reuter. You can't say that--anticipate interruptions.
What we're trying to do is make sure that we have the supply we
need when we need it and do so at a constant production rate.
You never know with the unknowns, and so the--you never know
that there won't be any, but right now, we're confident in our
plan.
Mr. Babin. Have you had any interruptions that you know of?
And has that had an impact on production?
Mr. Reuter. We'll get you the information when we come with
a complete story.
Mr. Babin. OK. If NASA was constrained by the availability
of plutonium-238 for exploration missions, how would this
change the space science program and the design of future
missions?
Mr. Reuter. When we do--when we go to future missions that
are beyond--you know, out to Mars and beyond, it's critical for
us to have a supply of--a constant supply of power and heat
energy in order to be able to use these because we don't have
the ability to utilize sunlight out there. And so all those
missions are--as we advance them and as we're going through
these things are critical for that need for us.
Mr. Babin. OK. And then you've hit--alluded to some of
this, but what's being done to encourage the development and
use of low-cost commercially available nonplutonium
radioisotope power systems?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, we actually are looking very seriously at
that. It offers a potential to go to a more cost-effective
solution as we go through this, and it's one that would be--
that some members of our--you know, it's easier for the
commercial community to--so we're looking very seriously at
that.
Mr. Babin. OK. And then one more for you, Mr. Reuter. Last
May, NASA announced that it would reexamine the viability of
space-based solar power. What is the status of that review?
Mr. Reuter. We have studies going on that--to look at that.
We've had--held workshops for power--space power. And we're
looking very seriously, especially as you go to the Moon,
application--lunar applications when you don't have cables
present and stuff. We're looking very seriously as--are there
places there that we can use power, power beaming and wireless
power, basically, as we go through it. It's a key part of what
we're looking at. It's not necessarily the only way we'll go.
But we're looking very seriously at that. And then the--
further, the extrapolation of what that can be for the
commercial----
Mr. Babin. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr. Reuter. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. I yield back.
Mr. Williams. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from
Ohio, Mrs. Sykes, for five minutes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, to you and
the Ranking Member, for assembling this presentation, as well
as to our witnesses for your testimony.
My first question is going to you Mr. Reuter. We in Ohio
are certainly proud of the NASA Glenn Research Center, and it's
just north of my district, Ohio 13 in Akron. And we know that
the road to Mars goes through Ohio. I think that's what
somebody said or unless I just made that up today. That's fine,
too. Oh, I have more. I have more. So the research and
development that you all are facilitating certainly has some
far-reaching impacts, particularly for Ohio and our advanced
manufacturing sector, which has benefited immensely from
technology transfers that NASA has engineered and helped spin
off, and we thank you for that.
But in particular, I want to talk to you about--or want you
to talk to us about the Defense Advanced Research Project
Agency (DARPA) where you all are focusing on nuclear
propulsion. And can you discuss a bit more about NASA's
partnership with DARPA, and can you share with us what lessons
we should take from the interagency cooperation that we can
apply more broadly for the Federal research ecosystem that
you're discussing today?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman. And we
wholeheartedly agree the Glenn Research Center is one of our
absolute best research centers at NASA. We do a great deal of
work with them, over $2.5 billion dollars of economic
development, over 10,000 jobs in the area as a result of that.
And it's really a tribute to those. And for us, we utilize
their expertise in propulsion systems, in power, in thermal, in
situ resource utilization on the Moon, communications, and so
on as we go through this.
Now, you asked about the particular agreement we have with
DARPA, and that has been, you know, several months in the
making. What I would say is this is a revolutionary time for
potential of using nuclear systems in space to change the way
we think about traveling in space. And so we're really excited
about doing that. And, as a result of that, it's something
that's multiagency interest. Department of Energy we work very
closely with on this and in DARPA. The nice thing about the
DARPA agreement was we've recognized over the last couple of
years that we have common interests, and we worked really hard
to get the objectives we have overlapping to the point.
So what we're trying to do--what we recognize them as we
were going through this development, and they have the DRACO
(Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar Operations) program
that we're co-partners with now and is a great opportunity for
us to combine our resources. So neither one of us could afford
to do this on our own, but we've done so and outlined the
objectives that each of us will--and requirements each of us
will have, and then--and we're working with a common contract
but different parts of it that we fund, and so there's no
exchange of funds between us, each to the partners. And it's
really--it's--we're really excited about it.
I think it's--you know, when you have the need together and
you have the willingness to compromise a little bit on where
your objectives are, then, you know, it's the way--especially
in these times where budget will be restrictive. It's the way
we're really looking at as how do we utilize the whole of
government?
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you very much for that answer and
specifically for your conversation about the budget and using
it in the most efficient way and working across agencies. And
if you could just dig a little bit deeper into how some of the
research and development at NASA is benefiting our local
communities. Like I said, I don't represent the district where
NASA Glenn is, but I'm confident our district is receiving
benefits and participating in the pipeline and getting us
closer to Mars as we were first in flight. Isn't that right,
Congressman Jackson? I had to. I had to do it.
[Laughter.]
Mrs. Sykes. Well, thank you for allowing us, Mr. Chair, to
have a moment of levity there. But if you could just discuss
how these partnerships are helping local communities throughout
northeast Ohio and probably----
Mr. Reuter. Sure.
Mrs. Sykes [continuing]. Throughout other areas in the
country who benefit from NASA's research?
Mr. Reuter. What I would say is a core part of our--NASA's
mission is to transfer our technologies and--for the benefit of
the economy, the space--the economy--both the space economy and
the rest of our economy. And Glenn Research Center is one of
our most active participants with--across our centers on trying
to help us on technology transfer. We view our technology
transfer program, which I run, as being an essential part of--
and not just about numbers of this number of patents, licenses,
or this many software licenses that we've released, but really
taking that and helping the economy directly.
So we really have--we look for regional economic
development across the country hoping to try to reach the 50
States, but one of the core areas that we've done a lot of work
is in Ohio. One of the ways we do that is these programs that
they're helping us run and things like what we call T2U
(Technology Transfer University.) We work with universities,
take NASA technologies into the business schools and use that
as test cases for them for things, and it's actually produced
companies out of it. So that area is especially good for some
things like that. We also have a Fed Tech program that takes
NASA technologies, working with entrepreneurs and stuff. And so
it's kind of our core for what we're trying to do and broaden
from there.
Chairman Lucas. I thank the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Fleischmann, for five minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank
this distinguished panel. It's great to be with you all today.
I started many years ago on this Committee under Ralph Hall. As
most of you know, I'm Chuck Fleischmann. I represent the great
DOE reservation at Oak Ridge and all it does. I am also the
Chairman of the Energy and Water Subcommittee on
Appropriations, so as an appropriator, we fund all of your
endeavors, and I think this is probably one of the best Federal
investments I've seen in my congressional tenure. We've got Oak
Ridge National Lab, the Y-12 plant, we're building the UPF,
uranium processing facility. We have a great legacy cleanup.
Science is critical to all of this, and I thank each and every
one of you for your advocation.
My first question is going to deal with supercomputing. I
was there when we launched Frontier at Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. This was the first supercomputer in the world to
break the exascale barrier. The machine unlocks new
possibilities to benefit our country's economy,
competitiveness, and national security through scientific
advantage. We will be able to take more data than ever before,
analyze it faster than ever before. For everyone's knowledge,
this is the fastest smartest supercomputer in the world. We
have beaten the Chinese and our other competitors.
Dr. Kung, can you tell us how the Department of Energy
plans to integrate these new capabilities into our existing
system so we can take advantage of big datasets, artificial
intelligence technologies, and machine learning, for example,
to solve big problems? Thank you.
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. We're indeed so
excited and so proud of the accomplishment at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory delivering Frontier, the world's very first
exascale computer system. But the job in delivering exascale
computer is not done. We have another system that needs to be
deployed at Argonne National Laboratory at the same time. In
addition to deploying the hardware, we're also supporting a
suite of applications. We want to make sure that these
scientific applications can take full advantage of the super
power that these high-performance computers are delivering, and
the suite of application ranging from a new code for predicting
cancer, new codes to be used for discovery of new forms of
materials, new accelerated technologies, and so forth. So our
emphasis has been how do we really maximize the investment we
have made already in exascale computer?
And you have also mentioned AI machine learning, and that's
such an absolutely excellent accelerator. We can even derive
even more higher performance and efficiency out of systems such
as Frontier. So that is our current focus, making sure to
really maximize the precious taxpayer dollars that we have
invested in the wonderful machines----
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Dr. Kung [continuing]. At Oak Ridge and others.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you very much.
This next topic I'm going to open up for the entire panel,
but I do want everyone on the dais to understand this. Isotope
facilities, we're talking medical isotopes, scientific
isotopes, defense isotopes, manufacturing isotopes, the Oak
Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee plays a central role in
the Department of Energy's isotope program. In fact, Oak Ridge
provides 283 of the 325 isotopes produced by the Federal
Government. Why is this important? Because the only other
source of many of these in the world is Russia right now. So
Oak Ridge is the source of these key isotopes. It's critically
important.
Without Oak Ridge's unique facilities, including the High
Flux Isotope Reactor--that's what we call HFIR--nuclear hot
cells, and radiological facilities, the United States and many
of our allies would have to turn to other sources, particularly
Russia, to obtain many of these important isotopes.
My question is this. Would you agree that maintaining these
facilities used to produce isotopes at Oak Ridge should be a
priority to the Department of Energy? Would you also agree that
if the United States doesn't maintain our ability to produce
isotopes domestically and has to rely on foreign sources, that
it could have significant national security implications? Thank
you.
Dr. Kung. Congressman, thank you for that question. We
fully agree that extremely important, our role, both stable
isotope and radio isotope contribute to the U.S. economic,
health, energy, and national security, as you noted. And we
take our responsibility and stewardship of the isotope
production capability very seriously, including stewarding our
facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratories.
As you noted, we are facing a global challenge in producing
these isotopes domestically, especially since the Russian
invasion of Ukraine. We already are dramatically seeing that
challenge further cutting into the supply, the dwindling supply
of the U.S. available supply chain of these isotopes. And the
DOE isotope program actually has been working on a strategy for
six years. We didn't wait until the Russian invasion of Ukraine
to start worrying about the isotope. In fact, we have six years
of planning and getting a head start in making sure we have a
strategy that really can alleviate the U.S. dependencies on
these foreign sources, especially from Russia.
So with that, with the funding appropriated to Office of
Science, we actually have a number of projects ready to stood
up, including the SIPRC (Stable Isotope Production and Research
Center), which is a--we just had a groundbreaking at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory. We're making sure that these stable
isotope which impacts science and technology, impact many, many
important applications, including oil exploration, that we have
a stable and adequate supply of stable isotopes. So this SIPRC
facility will be a flagship facility when it's constructed.
We're very proud of the progress it's made. Thank you.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Lucas. Gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now turns the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms.
Caraveo, for five minutes.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for putting this hearing together. And thank you to
the witnesses for taking time to come and speak with us today.
I represent Colorado's new 8th District, and have a
scientific background, though it is in medicine. And while
preparing for this hearing, I really started to think back to
my days in medical school and learning about the impacts of
radiation exposure and in particular exposures in--at work.
Obviously, a frequent exposure to radiation leads to harmful
effects on the human body. And in 2018, the Department of
Energy Research and Innovation Act was signed into law, which
required DOE to reestablish a Low Dose Radiation Research
Program to enhance the scientific knowledge of and reduce
uncertainties associated with the effects of low dose radiation
exposure.
Since then, other bills have been signed into law
authorizing more specific program requirements, including
authorization of appropriations through 2027. The line
instructs DOE to carry out agency-specific program--an energy
agency-specific program in line with underlying statute that
authorizes interagency coordination mechanisms on low dose
radiation via the National Science and Technology Council,
specifically identifying DOE, NASA, and NSF. I was encouraged
to see that the National Academies released a report which
recommends a long-term strategic and priority--prioritized
research agenda for DOE's Low Dose Radiation Program in
response to the Energy Act of 2020.
So for Mr. Reuter and Dr. Kung, understanding the risk and
mitigating the harmful effects of in-space radiation to human
tissue is really going to be critical for human spaceflight
programs and our astronauts' ability to explore deep space from
the Moon to Mars and beyond. What more is needed to advance
this research, and what are the unique capabilities, expertise,
and/or facilities of the Department of Energy that can benefit
NASA's efforts?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman, for that
question. We certainly agree at NASA that this is one of the
most critical areas of research needed in order to help us
sustain a Moon-to-Mars program and then--and beyond, absolutely
one of the most difficult things and challenges we have.
We work closely with DOE on this. The Brookhaven facility
in particular is a great facility for us to help, and it has to
be a multiagency look at it. We also have learned a lot from
our experiences on the International Space Station. It's for a
long-duration stay. We've had had astronauts stay for a year,
and we go through that. And then actually also then in the
recently very successful Artemis 1 flight, we were heavily
instrumented there to really understand the radiation effects,
as the Orion capsule goes through the Van Allen radiation belts
and onto the Moon.
So it's absolutely essential we do this. It's something
NASA takes very seriously. It's also one of the more
challenging problems, especially collected cosmic radiation and
stuff of how to provide shelters and stuff as we go through it.
But it's active research and one of the top risks we have.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you. Dr. Kung?
Dr. Kung. Thank you. Let me just echo my colleagues. I
think this is a very important topic. And we actually really
value the partnership we have with NASA, as well as with
National Cancer Institute (NCI). For the Office of Science, our
approach has been utilizing and capitalizing our high-
performance computing, and also genomics and microbiology
expertise. We're actually utilizing high-performance computing,
artificial intelligence, and also really exploring the big data
techniques so we can assemble big data sets for us to really
analyze partnering with NASA and also NCI to probe the
molecular signatures of cancer associated with low dose
radiation as people associate exposure and dosage across
multiple available datasets.
We are currently funding a multi-laboratory team at Argonne
National Laboratory that actually partnering with NCI has the
benefit that they have the human health angle that we can
actually tap into their perspective and expertise. And
actually, as Reuter just mentioned, the NASA expertise and the
use cases they have is actually providing a very rich data set
for the multi-agencies to work together, and we're continuing
to explore that partnership. Thank you.
Ms. Caraveo. Perfect. Thank you, Doctor, in particular for
mentioning the funding. I know that in 2010 there was a
termination of low dose programs and joint projects between DOE
and NASA, and so I was glad to have you touch on funding for
what is going to continue to be important research.
I yield back my time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Collins, for five minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you can tell, I'm
new. I'm just a small businessperson in the trucking industry,
so I'd like to focus from a business standpoint and see if
there's any problems or solutions.
And I understand that the exascale computers are expected
to greatly enhance our ability to do things like predict
weather and innovate across several industries from energy to
healthcare. And I'm told the United States will have three
operational computers by the end of 2024, while China will have
10 by 2025. And, Dr. Kung, is the United States or China in the
lead when it comes to developing supercomputers, and what is
the disparity?
Dr. Kung. Congressman, thank you for that question. As
Congressman Fleischmann just mentioned, we are the current lead
in the high-performance computing. We have the world's first
exascale computer. But the Chinese competitions are really
fierce, and they are really chasing after us. And that's why
it's very, very important that we keep up our investment in
computing because computing really underpins most of the modern
science and technology. But we also--I think our system really
has the advantage is when we're designing these hardwares. We
have the software to go with it. So these hardwares, the
computers do not just stand alone. They are designed to really
advance the cutting edge of science and technology so we can
deploy the hardware computers but also applying them to the
most challenging science and technology problems that the
country is currently facing. Also, pairing was the mission
space was our sister agency, not just benefiting DOE's mission
but the NASA mission, the NOAA mission, USDA mission, and NSF
mission.
Mr. Collins. So the fact that they have more doesn't mean
that they're better. Is that what you're saying?
Dr. Kung. I think quantity is one thing. Quality is
another. Impact is yet another. For us, one of the challenges
is the Chinese system is relatively opaque. It's kind of hard
for us to really gauge except the numbers that we're seeing,
the level of impact because some of the applications are
military, and it's not really in the open domain. So I think
our strategies, we need to run as fast as we can. So we
actually are already jumping--leapfrogging the competition.
So--and that--the American system is really that secret sauce.
It's that open system for us to really outcompete our
competitors is to have that, the best ideas, the best machines,
the best application for it.
Mr. Collins. When you were talking about unintentional
sharing, was that a reference toward China?
Dr. Kung. To a great degree, but there are other countries
that do not play with the same rules that we have with--in
terms of respect for the intellectual properties. And we need
to guard against not just the Chinese Communist Party but all
other adversaries that do not really adhere to the same code of
conduct that most of our allied countries and U.S. adhere to.
Mr. Collins. So what role should the government play in
helping us stay in the lead and with the--as far as China? And
how is that different from the private sector in what their
goal is?
Dr. Kung. So I think we can really look at it from two
aspects. One is the protection. We need to make sure that we
put in all the protective measures and guardrails, and that is
an area of very active interagency collaboration. I may turn to
my colleagues to also comment on that. There are common forms,
disclosure policies that we're working on not only from the
NSPM-33, but also the provisions in the CHIPS and Science Act
that we're implementing.
In addition to the--putting in the protection measures,
we're also making sure that within the Department, for example,
we have a working group that are actually coordinating across
not just Office of Science, but all elements in the Department
that similarly for my--the sister agencies. And at the
interagency level, we're also making sure that we have a clear,
consistent approach because in order to maximize researchers'
security, we need to have that consistency across interagency.
So that is the protection part. And the promotion part is
really trying to outcompete and out-innovate our competitors by
really staying at the cutting edge in science and technology,
and the partnership with our interagency partners are going to
be key.
Mr. Collins. All right. Thank you, ma'am. Mr. Chair, I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. My thanks the gentleman from Oklahoma. Thanks
to all our witnesses for being here. The--I am--I have to start
by saying that I'm so proud of the work that this Committee did
last term with the CHIPS and Science Act, so grateful for all
of your work implementing this bill. It is truly transformative
on--as industrial policy, as education policy, and I think
we've got a lot to be proud of.
That said, we didn't get it perfectly right, and I want to
just focus on an issue that I don't think we can resolve now,
but I hope that this Committee, and particularly on the side of
the Capitol, can focus on it going forward.
Dr. Jones, I don't want to pick on you, but I think you
might have the closest experience to this. Are you familiar
with the EPSCoR program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research? You might just----
Dr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Casten. You might give us a quick overview of what its
purpose is.
Dr. Jones. Well, thank you very much for that question on
EPSCoR. The EPSCoR program, which many of our other agencies
actually do have EPSCoR programs as well. The National Science
Foundation has an EPSCoR program that really seeks to address
inequities with States that have less Federal funding than some
of our larger States across the country. And so it really is
about competitiveness across the whole country.
Mr. Casten. Yes. And I think, you know, the intention of
the program, I think, is good because, as we all know, there's
a handful of really elite institutions that would gobble up all
of our research dollars otherwise.
Coming from Illinois, which is not an EPSCoR State, if I
had a university that was on the Illinois border with Iowa and
another university that was on the Iowa border with Illinois,
both of them serve the same rural population, neither of them
are that University of Chicago tier, do I have it right that
the Illinois University would not be eligible for EPSCoR, but
the Iowa one would?
Dr. Jones. That is actually correct. And thank you for that
question. One of the interesting things about EPSCoR
jurisdictions and those institutions that actually are in
EPSCoR jurisdictions, they partner with other institutions
within the EPSCoR jurisdiction, but they also partner with
institutions that are in non-EPSCoR jurisdictions. And they
partner, of course, to deliver the best science and the most
robust science for those EPSCoR projects. So it is possible
that an EPSCoR award in another jurisdiction could partner with
an institution in Illinois----
Mr. Casten. Sure, but it's not an obligation, right?
Dr. Jones. It's not an obligation.
Mr. Casten. So----
Dr. Jones. It's an opportunity.
Mr. Casten. So the concern I have--and I'm--this isn't
gotcha, it's just math, and I was running through, you know,
the total number of Americans in EPSCoR States versus non
EPSCoR States? Again, it's not a gotcha. Sixteen million live
in non-EPSCoR--in EPSCoR States. Two hundred and seventy-three
million live in EPSCoR States. Do you know the number of four-
year institutions between the two? It's a 2:1 ratio, 208 four-
year institutions versus 529 in the non-EPSCoR States. The
number of students who attend those institutions, 3.5 million
in EPSCoR States, 16 million.
And so the reason I say this matters for this side of the
institution is that we are the House of Representatives. We are
designed to represent all American people. The only thing that
EPSCoR States have more of than non-EPSCoR States is Senators.
Dr. Jones. Well----
Mr. Casten. Like--and like--and I'm all for making sure
that we spread our research dollars around. I'm all for
encouraging competition. But it is a concern that if we're
sitting there saying, our purpose is to do the best science,
our purpose is to implement science policy and industrial
policy, our purpose is to spread that through urban and rural
areas, top tier, lower tier, there is nothing in that policy
that says it is important for us to get 26 Senators on board.
Dr. Jones. Well, thank you so much for that question and
that perspective of the impact of EPSCoR States. It's
imperative as we look at STEM careers of the future and the
grand challenges of our day, we have to empower innovation and
our ecosystem across the whole United States. And so while you
do give some very compelling statistics, we have to ensure that
citizens, students, faculty, research institutions in all parts
of the United States are part of the research ecosystem. So the
EPSCoR program really does seek to help enable an all-of-
America approach to research innovation.
Mr. Casten. And so----
Dr. Jones. It's very important to the overall national
strategy for sure.
Mr. Casten. And I agree with the intent, but again, coming
from Illinois, downstate Illinois is a much more rural area
than upstate Illinois where I live, right? The fact that there
is not a state line between the two areas doesn't change the
equity that has to be covered between those areas. And I think
it's a concern we should fix, and certainly, I think us in the
House should be pushing to represent the interest of the House.
Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Jones. Thank you. I appreciate your perspective.
Mr. Collins [presiding]. So they put the new guy in charge.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Zinke, for five minutes.
Mr. Zinke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Kung, I'm a little concerned, as most of Americans are,
about China. And I'm concerned about uranium, critical minerals
that are being processed primarily in China and our dependency
upon their supply system for ours. What is the Department of
Energy doing, if anything, to look at the critical minerals
array and to reduce our dependency on China?
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. We absolutely share
your concern about being beholden to a country who doesn't play
by the same rule as the United States and the rest of the
allied countries. So we're taking the supply chain of critical
minerals and materials very seriously. Within the Department,
there are several offices contributing to developing a critical
mineral material strategy. We actually just updated our
critical minerals material strategy in 2021. We identify a
number of critical materials and minerals. And without--based
on the level of critical supply chain issue, we are designing a
whole range of R&D efforts to address them.
Speaking from the Office of Science, we're at the very low
end of the TRL (Technology Readiness Level). We're primarily
looking at finding alternatives and substitute for the critical
minerals so we no longer are being beholden to countries such
as China holding this precious supply. And that will really,
really depend on us understanding what makes these critical
mineral materials that behave so in their own way that make
them so critical for these various important applications. So
that's one thing.
And the second thing is that we really need to broaden and
develop a sustained U.S.-based domestic supply chain, so that
will actually require better mining, better processes of--
speaking from a materials and chemistry point of view. There
are a lot of advances in separation chemistry, so we can
actually be able to use better mining and processes to derive
even higher yield in--from the U.S. mining perspective. And
these are the advances basic research and science can
contribute to that. And we actually have very strong
partnership with NSF and other agencies. This--there's actually
a White House-led NSTC critical materials and mineral committee
that are working across the different agencies to come up with
a national strategy for that.
Mr. Zinke. My understanding on the EV (electric vehicle)
world alone, it would take a 2,000 percent increase of mining
for 20 years to catch up to where we are today. I'd be
interested in the Department of Energy's view on such things if
your data matches mine.
Dr. Kung. We'll be happy--I do not have those data in my--
at my fingertips, but we'll be happy to get back with you.
Mr. Zinke. And lastly, do you share the same concern about
interception of IP property from China within your department.
Dr. Kung. Absolutely. We believe that the protection of the
American-funded R&D, we need to actually enhance our protection
against those. And there are various measures that are being
put in place to make sure that we safeguard the protection of
the IP rights from foreign actors with intellectual property
theft.
Mr. Zinke. And are you pretty confident that will be in the
President's budget, protection of----
Dr. Kung. I know that--I do--I cannot comment on the
budget, but my sense that this is a very high priority, and all
parts of a department are treating this very seriously. In
fact, Secretary Granholm had put in in July of 2021 that the
innovations that come out of the energy--science and energy
investment need to have a substantial--need to be substantially
manufactured in the U.S. even though they can be sold and
utilized worldwide. So there are measures being put in place to
safeguard the protection of IP but also making sure that the
benefits are directly feeding into American people.
Mr. Zinke. I look forward to seeing the President's budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The Chair recognizes the gentlelady
of Michigan, Ms. Stevens, for five minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you so much. And what a delight to
continue this conversation on regional collaboration,
particularly on the heels of last Congress, where we were
discussing some of the benefits coming out of our CHIPS in
Science legislation. And thank you to our witnesses.
My question is for Dr. Kung. I very much appreciated your
testimony. And certainly, as we're looking at regional
collaboration and collaboration across government, regional
being what happens at the local level, cross-government, which
is exercising all of government, I wanted to ask you about some
of the barriers. You specifically talked about MOUs with other
Federal agencies. There was an MOU signed in 2020. Hurray,
because 2020 came with its set of challenges. But as someone
who has been involved in the MOU process at the Federal level,
is there any improvements that we could be making or
understanding? I know sometimes there's delays or complications
and maybe doesn't necessarily take an act of Congress, but
giving you some time to just reflect on that MOU process and
where it's necessary, and maybe where it's not necessary.
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. Reflecting on the
MOU we recently signed with NSF, this may sound a little
cheesy, but I believe collaboration and coordination is really
a contact sport. We need to have very, very close contact with
our agency partners to make sure that we communicate
frequently, we understand where each of our mission space is,
where the potential synergy, where are potential overlaps, and
that really require a lot of interaction, a lot of
communications. I think that is the basis--if Dr. Jones may
also comment. That's really the basis of the DOE-NSF MOU. And I
believe that's really a good example of how we can--not just
having a piece of paper, but really having it be applicable to
really make our Federal stewardship really efficient and also
effective.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, it's an intentionality, right. And if
folks don't realize, I mean, where you are located and where
NSF was located, you're not right next door, and you've got
lots of employees who you want to be collaborating. So yes, Dr.
Jones, if you wanted to also contribute.
Dr. Jones. Great, thank you. And thank you for the
question. I totally agree with Dr. Kung. It's about
coordination, cooperation, and collaboration. And so these
MOUs, the umbrella MOU that we signed with DOE is really all
about reducing barriers for us to actually collaborate----
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Jones [continuing]. And actually to invest better for
the taxpayer, for the American taxpayer, for example, being
able to share research proposals, being able to review with
each other to be able to co-fund things much easier to reduce
significant barriers. And so it's very important----
Ms. Stevens. Co-funding, they don't need to come back to
Congress and ask for more dollars. We'll take it. That's great.
And, Dr. Kung, we were thrilled to see the RFI (request for
information) that came out of the CHIPS and Science legislation
that your agency promoted last month, the RFI on the Clean
Energy Regional Innovation Programs. And obviously, it's not
your first go-around with promoting regional innovation
clusters but just a chance to talk about past lessons learned,
things that you're looking for, for this next round. It's
certainly galvanizing our folks on the ground in Michigan.
Dr. Kung. We are certainly very excited about the
opportunity to contribute to regional innovation. We actually
firmly believe that public resources should benefit the public
generally, and that's really behind the regional innovation
concept. And actually, from the DOE, especially from a national
laboratories' point of view, we believe that our national
laboratories really are the regional anchor and leader in
technology innovation, and they have--they could have a lot
more--they could have--contribute a lot more to the regional
innovation.
Based on the prior experiences, we know that our sister
program, the Office of Technology Transition (OTT), actually
has very substantial experience in actually surveying the
companies that involved in regional innovation. And what we
have learned is that a lot of these incubators are--actually
may not necessarily have resources that can contribute to the
traditional FOA. For example, most of our programs have FOAs,
but some of these incubators, small companies, they may not
even have resources to contribute and be able to be competitive
in FOA. And that's actually one of the areas that the OTT
program has identified. There is actually a very insightful
analysis. They have confirmed that with their stakeholders. I
think it's this type of lessons learned I think it's very
important, as all of us grapple with the regional innovation to
understand what are the barriers so we can then----
Ms. Stevens. And as we're looking at global competition,
that tech transfer point remains very important, so thank you
for that contribution.
My--the rest of my questions, I'll submit for the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Tenney, for five minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony today. I'm sorry I missed some of
it. But I want to thank you also for holding this meeting on
the Department of Energy's critical role in funding U.S.
research and development, and thank you for your insight, as
well as all of you and your work that you've been doing in your
fields.
I'm honored to represent New York's new 24th congressional
District, which includes all the remaining active nuclear
plants in the State of New York. As New York State rushes to
mandate a fully carbon-free grid by 2040, nuclear energy is
going to be increasingly a critical player in this space.
Nuclear energy is one of the few carbon-free energy sources
that works regardless of the weather, which we have a lot of
interesting weather in upstate New York. And that's why I
strongly support the nuclear and energy research being
conducted by the Department of Energy both in partnership with
NASA and through its Office of Nuclear Energy (ONE).
Additionally, New York's 24th Congressional District has a
strong history as the home to the Erie Canal, one of the first
regions of our country to enter the Industrial Revolution,
thanks to the innovations on the canal. We also have Niagara
Falls at the other end, which provides us with hydropower.
I believe that we must restore American manufacturing,
particularly in regions like upstate New York. The work that
the DOE and NSF are doing to support advanced manufacturing is
critical for our revitalization of American manufacturing,
particularly in Rust Belt regions of this Northeast, like
upstate New York.
And finally, New York 24 is the largest agricultural
district in the Northeast, and the research that DOE and USDA
do together has helped numerous farmers throughout my district
by developing more advanced 21st century farming techniques.
And so I want to direct my first question to Dr. Kung and
also to Mr. Reuter. In both of your testimonies, you discuss
the importance of interagency research opportunities. My first
question is can you just briefly tell me how the Department of
Energy's Office of Nuclear Energy and NASA has worked together
on advancing nuclear technologies benefit the future of nuclear
energy? If you could just give me a real quick capsule summary,
both of you.
Dr. Kung. My remarks will be very brief. I'm from the
Office of Science. But from my understanding, we have a lot of
great work in the Office of Nuclear Energy, especially in
preparing the space power that Mr. Reuter has talked about. And
that's really a decade-long partnership by providing NASA with
a power source so they can venture into Mars and beyond.
So with that, I'm turning over to Mr. Reuter.
Mr. Reuter. Yes, and thank you, Congresswoman. It's very
accurate. We think nuclear systems in development in space is
critical to our exploration needs as we go to the future. We
work very closely with the Office of--ONE to help develop the
systems as we go through it for both power and propulsion. One
of the critical first steps is a power system on the Moon,
where we do have--we experience long times with--a couple weeks
without any solar power and stuff. And what--and so for us, the
critical needs that we get fulfilled by the Department of
Energy include indemnification, subject matter expertise, test
facilities that are really critical to us. They really were--
it's really part of a team that works together for this. And so
it's critical for us as we go forward.
Ms. Tenney. Well, let me ask you that now since I know one
of the--my colleagues, a new colleague is a former nuclear
submarine officer, and my former husband is a former nuclear
submarine officer, and I see them as sort of modular nuclear
plants in and of themselves. Can you discuss how NASA's space
nuclear technologies can help benefit the small modular nuclear
technology? And is that something we can see as a reality for
the future in providing our energy needs, particularly in
places like New York, where we're doing this race to carbon-
free existence and with such a great need right now with about,
I don't know, 30 percent of our power grid is still coal-based?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, you're right. There's actually--there's a
very strong connection between the things we want to do in
space and having a modular reactor applied. In each case, the
basic fundamental requirements are very similar. The power
levels aren't that much different. There--it's a bit higher for
the ground applications than what we want, but they're in the
ballpark for each other. The transport--ability to transport,
ability to set up local networks and stuff like that with power
grids stuff, it's all really very common. The basic
technologies of making these reactors work is very similar
between them. And so for us--we have a bit--and both of us have
driving requirements to get the system down in size because it
needs to be transportable and so that kind of restricts it on
the ground and for us to be able to land on the Moon or launch
it, then it's got to be a certain size, too. So for us, all
those things are related. The basic technologies are things--
moderator blocks and other things are very similar between
them.
Ms. Tenney. Well, let me ask you something. So this is a
very feasible type of technology that we can use in a more
expanded way, in an industrial way. What about the cost and the
safety issues that have been raised on this issue? Is that
something that we--that NASA and our Energy Department can work
together in making those----
Mr. Reuter. Yes----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Something that would keep the
public positive about those issues?
Mr. Collins. Would the gentlelady suspend for a minute? The
clock had stopped and restarted and stopped and restarted, so
if you could finish up your question and answer pretty quick,
and then we'll move on. Thank you.
Mr. Reuter. OK.
Ms. Tenney. Oh, OK.
Mr. Reuter. All right.
Ms. Tenney. Keep--can you tell me how much time I have?
None? OK. It said five minutes for a long time, so I figured
you gave me a--this is part of the nuclear technology we're
going to have. Like we stopped the clock.
Mr. Collins. I told you that a new guy was in charge.
Ms. Tenney. I look younger already, right?
Mr. Reuter. Thank you. And if I'm allowed to answer the
question, would you repeat it, please? I forgot it.
Ms. Tenney. Yes, I was just--it was about the safety and
the----
Mr. Reuter. Oh, safety, yes.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. And the affordability----
Mr. Reuter. Affordability of the--yes.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Of having modulars, nuclear
technology.
Mr. Reuter. Look, we treat the safety of these reactors
very seriously. The good thing about this is for us in a--in an
environment for space, we don't have to activate the reactor
until we get to orbit and in a particular orbit that's far away
from any ground systems. There's lots of research we've done in
terms of fault-tolerant--managing faults and responding to it.
And the KRUSTY (Kilowatt Reactor Using Stirling Technology)
reactor that we did with DOE back in 2018 demonstrated several
of those technologies. Cost is something, as we get multiple
uses for it, it will come down. It's certainly a very expensive
proposition now, but I think, especially in the modular reactor
area with all the work that's going on, we can make real strong
advances there.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you so much. I yield back. And I wanted a
question for Mr. Jones--or Dr. Jones about Micron, but we'll
get to that next time and submit those questions for the
record. Thanks so much.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Ms. Tenney.
All right. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much, Chair Collins. Thank you,
Ranking Member Lofgren, and thank you to the witnesses for your
testimony and your expertise. We know how important Federal
agencies are to America's vital research efforts, and
interagency collaboration is so critical and can really be a
significant catalyst for positive advancement in research,
enabling innovation, more sophisticated research than can be
done by one agency alone.
Climate change, as we know, is a multifaceted challenge. It
requires a coordinated effort from multiple agencies, and I'm
going to focus on the partnership between DOE and NOAA and the
valuable opportunities there. NOAA's climate trends and
environmental conditions data can inform a Department of
Energy's efforts to develop more sustainable energy sources,
and Department of Energy's expertise and energy production and
emissions reduction can be leveraged to support NOAA's efforts
to mitigate the harmful effects of climate change.
One of the most critical aspects of this collaboration is
the joint effort to keep the ocean healthy. As the co-Chair of
the Oceans Caucus, it's--and a Representative of a coastal
district, I care about it greatly. We know how important it is
in regulating the planet's climate. As the ocean absorbs vast
amounts of carbon dioxide, it becomes a more acidic, harming,
as we know, marine life and ecosystems.
So I've been advocating for increased resources and support
for Federal agencies tasked with implementing the response to
declining ocean health, and to address this issue, DOE and NOAA
are working together to develop technologies and approaches
that can help mitigate ocean acidification, including research
into carbon capture and storage and developing technologies to
remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.
So, Dr. Morgan, I often speak about the importance of
science communication, highlighting that there is more we can
do to communicate with our constituents and the public about
the investments that Congress is making in science and
scientific research. And this is especially important regarding
climate change. So how can interagency collaboration between
NOAA and the Department of Energy be leveraged to promote
public awareness and engagement on issues like ocean health?
Dr. Morgan. Thank you for your question. And I think you
really framed it nicely. The importance of the oceans and our
climate system, they have a long-term memory, right? The heat
that's absorbed, the net heat that's absorbed warms the oceans.
The ocean is warming faster than the--on land and the
atmosphere. And so part of this understanding that we get comes
from the observations that we develop, that NOAA has access to
through observing platforms, but also from looking at the work
that DOE does with their ARM program, Atmospheric Radiation
Measurement program, which allows us to better understand the
processes of radiative transfer and looking at the energy
budget of the entire Earth.
So it's the modeling, it's the observations, and it's the
blending of those models with observations that allows us to
develop a predictive capacity for understanding what the
changing climate is.
We also have to make investments as well in the ocean.
Ocean acidification, as you mentioned, is a very serious issue,
and that's something that our--we're using modeling efforts to
understand how rapidly that acidification is occurring, as well
as using observations. And it's the responsibility of NOAA to
make sure we can report those findings to the public. And it's
the--again, the relationship, the collaborative research not
just with DOE, but with NSF that does--also is invested in
climate modeling, as well as with NASA, which has invested in
their system modeling that really helps us develop that--I hope
I have addressed your question.
Ms. Bonamici. And Dr. Spinrad is an Oregonian of course.
Dr. Morgan. That's correct.
Ms. Bonamici. I know he appreciates the importance of the
ocean.
Dr. Morgan, I want to follow up. In your testimony, you
noted that the Department of Energy has some of the world's
most powerful supercomputers----
Dr. Morgan. That's correct.
Ms. Bonamici [continuing]. And they can process vast
amounts of data quickly. So how would allowing NOAA to use
these resources to assimilate more data into their models
improve accuracy and reliability? And why is it essential to
have better weather forecasts? You might have heard, our in-
house meteorologist Mr. Sorensen--Representative Sorensen isn't
here right now, but you maybe heard from him about why is it
essential to have better weather forecasts and an improved
understanding of oceanic and atmospheric processes and better
predictions of extreme weather events?
Dr. Morgan. OK. Thank you. In my earlier testimony, I
noticed that models to a certain extent represent our
codifications of our understanding of the Earth's system. We
know actually more about that system than we can actually
represent due to computational limitations. So having access to
really robust HPC resources allows us to better represent the
processes with greater fidelity and realism, which then allows
us to provide better guidance, forecast guidance to the
country. Also, it allows us to increase the number of models
that we can run in an operational sense because by doing that,
that allows us to understand the probability, distribution of
possible forecast states, so we can actually give people a
greater sense of what the risks are for upcoming weather
events, high-impact weather events.
So the greater resources also means that you have timely
forecast dissemination and the concomitant greater lead times
for high-impact weather events, including severe storms and
hurricanes. Having this, you know, greater realism and the
processes that we can model allows us to better understand the
relationship between the atmosphere and the ocean, the
interactions that we've already discussed. And again, it
improves our predictive capability, which improves economic
output. It improves--basically improves and makes more
efficient the conduct of commerce across United States, and
while at the same time, helping to protect lives and property.
Ms. Bonamici. Sounds very beneficial. And I'm out of time.
I yield back. Thank you.
Dr. Morgan. Thank you.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Miller, for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Lofgren. It's my privilege to represent NASA's Glenn Research
Center as a part of Ohio's 7th Congressional District. In
northeast Ohio, we've had the privilege of watching NASA Glenn
lead the way on cutting-edge technology developments. This has
included taking the lead on NASA's work on nuclear electric
propulsion and fission service power through the Kilopower
project and others.
Mr. Reuter, you briefly referenced these sort of projects
in your testimony. What role do you see advanced nuclear
reactors playing in future American space travel?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, thank you, Congressman. And I will say
that Glenn Research Center is a pride for us. They do an
outstanding work, and they support my office very strongly, one
of the best research centers we have.
Mr. Miller. They're amazing.
Mr. Reuter. And what I'd say is the areas of advanced
reactors, that's what you asked, right? I blanked out on----
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Mr. Reuter. OK. Yes. So the advanced reactor for us is
really--can be fundamentally change--foundationally game-
changing for us in terms of the missions that we can enable as
part of it. A large part of what we do is always--power is
always king. And how you distribute that power and generate it
is critical to exploration of space. We also need to have it in
a compact package. And nuclear reactors are very--highly dense
energy that can really help us enable new missions as we go
through it.
So for us, we can--we see for the Moon where there's 14--
there's 14 day-long nights, if you will, where we don't have
access to solar energy, it really opens up exploration of the
lunar surface as we go through it. That same technology can
use--be used on Mars where on the surface of Mars with the dust
storms and other things in the atmosphere, it's very difficult
to get solar power. And then anything that we want to do beyond
Mars and stuff, essentially, needs to utilize a nuclear source
for power and stuff.
So for us, it's fundamental that the types of things we do.
It can enable us to go faster around the entire solar system
and open up new ways of getting there. In fact, even then, if
we can do this and go much faster to the Moon and back, to Mars
and back, then it can enable human exploration more as we go
through it.
Mr. Miller. Yes. So it seems as if it'd be--the only really
primary function that we would have to go further than where we
already are.
As a follow up question, Mr. Reuter, can you also elaborate
on the importance of NASA's collaboration with the Department
of Energy on the Kilopower project and other related projects,
as well as the need to continue this relationship in the
future?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, it's essential for us, and we really--the
project you're talking about, the Kilopower project we call
KRUSTY was something that was a test that we did together--
coordinated together for a one kilowatt power system. And we
did so at--tested at the Nevada National Security test site.
We--it was a partner between NASA and DOE where we each funded
our responsibilities as we went through this. We conducted this
entire test, including demonstrating fault tolerance of the
capabilities, transient behaviors as through it. We did that,
and it worked flawlessly. And we demonstrated that for
something that was less than $20 million total between the two
agencies as we went through it.
So for us, that has taught us an awful lot of the things
that we apply now. And now, we're looking for in a fission
surface power not just a one kilowatt system, but about a 40-
kilowatt system and the Moon. Glenn Research Center is our key
center for leading the fission power type development as we go
through this.
Mr. Miller. Yes. Thank you. And I just want to thank all
the witnesses for your time and your testimonies today. With
that, I yield back.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady of North Carolina, Ms. Ross, for five minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Madam
Ranking Member, for holding today's hearing. And I thank our
witnesses for joining us.
My district encompasses a large part of the Research
Triangle Park in North Carolina. And I know the value of
collaboration in advancing research initiatives that will
improve the lives of so many. I specifically want to draw
attention to the importance of including universities and
community colleges in this collaboration. Last Congress, I
worked to get several related measures included in the CHIPS
and Science Act from securing increased NSF grant funding for
community colleges to facilitating the commercial application
of clean energy by universities and private companies to
mandating the development of a comprehensive National Science
and Technology Strategy. My priority is ensuring government
agencies overseeing cutting-edge research can work with other
institutions to ensure that they have the resources needed to
cultivate the brilliant scientists of the future. And I
appreciate hearing from you about your work to create a more
effective and collaborative research environment and how
Congress can support it.
My first question is on climate science and computing
modeling. Across the country, severe weather events such as
lengthy droughts, extensive flooding, and worsening wildfires
are occurring every year. NOAA already requires extensive
computing to run several different models, ocean models, as we
discussed, land models, atmospheric models, and other models to
develop forecasts and inform communities of such extreme
weather events.
Dr. Morgan, you touched lightly in your testimony on NOAA's
goal to advance its Earth systems model, a model that would put
together all models and give us a better understanding of the
Earth process as a whole. How important is high-performance
computing to NOAA in achieving its mission, including assisting
our communities in becoming climate-resilient, and weather-
ready?
Dr. Morgan. Thank you for the question. And it is
absolutely critical to have the high-performance computing
resources because, again, what that means to NOAA's modeling
enterprise is--there's two aspects of it. If you currently look
at the ratio of our research computing relative to operational
computing, it's about .75 to one. We recognize that we need to
put greater investments in our research and development
computing facilities with ratios looking at five to one or
perhaps even 10 to one. Our priorities for weather research
report, which was requested by the House a couple of years ago,
identified a need for a 10 to one increase in our numerical--in
our research and development for numerical weather prediction.
What do we get from that investment if we had those
resources? First of all, we could readily make use of the
research and development computing right now if we had access
to it. And what that would give us is better use of the
investments that we've already made in our observing platforms.
And what I mean by that is how we can get that data from the
observing platforms into our models more effectively and using
a greater volume of that data to help improve our forecast.
In response to an earlier question, I talked about the
greater resolution of the models that allows us to resolve
finer scale processes with greater fidelity. That gives us more
realistic depictions of high-impact weather events that are
already impacting our Nation.
Finally, making sure that we can take that data and
effectively disseminate it to a broader--to the Nation is part
of not just the supercomputing, but our data management aspects
of this.
And the final thing I'd like to say is we're also working
with DOE, as an example, with NSF and also with NOAA looking at
issues related to the ability to take artificial intelligence
and machine learning and have them integrated into our modeling
efforts, which will speed up our ability to run the models much
more quickly, which allows those results to get out so people
can make decisions more effectively.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much. I'll try to be quick on my
next one, which is on quantum information science. And we're
likely to take up the reauthorization of the National Quantum
Initiative Act. Dr. Kung, can you talk a little bit about how
the Department of Energy coordinates with NIST, NSF, and other
agencies to advance quantum information science?
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. Quantum information
science continues to be one of our highest priorities, and we
really take a lot of pride in working with our sister agencies,
especially NIST and also NSF. In fact, through an NSTC site
committee--subcommittee on quantum information sites, we're
actually co-chairing the Quantum Information Science
Subcommittee. We actually do a lot of cross-agency----
Mr. Strong [presiding]. Thank you. The gentlewoman's time
has expired. Thank you.
I'd like to call for a five-minute recess. We'll reconvene
at six minutes after 12.
[Recess.]
Mr. Strong. We'll call our meeting back to order. I'd like
to call on Mr. Williams from New York and recognize him for
five minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to
working with you. I'm way over here in the corner. I'm not sure
what I did, but I'm over here in the corner.
I just have a series of informational questions. I don't
think any of them are controversial. But what's the total DOE
funding for the science programs sort of in your world? What's
that total budget?
Dr. Kung. Our annual budget in Fiscal Year 2023, it's about
$8 billion, slightly over $8 billion.
Mr. Williams. And I noticed in your testimony that one of
the components of your mission is national security. Can you
tell me more about how your office fulfills that national
security mission?
Dr. Kung. It's a shared mission across the whole
department. We have a National Nuclear Security Administration
(NNSA) part, which is the primary office that--our
Administration, the part of the Department that is stewarding
the national security mission. But we have very broad and deep
collaboration across the Department to make sure that we're
also supporting the national security part of the mission.
One example I can give is that for a lot of the material
qualifications, the requirements needed by the NNSA, we're
actually devoting part of our light sources to help
characterize and qualify some of these materials. So there are
a lot of these cross-fertilization of pooling our resources
together so NNSA does not need to support a standalone light
source. Instead, they can come to the light sources that Office
of Science support to help serve their needs.
Mr. Williams. Are there any other--other than supporting
NSA are there any other things that come to mind that
specifically are equated with supporting the national security
priorities other than materials, which I've been a customer of
those, so I know what those are?
Dr. Kung. Right. So if we look at the emerging
technologies, all of them have a national security component,
from quantum information science to artificial intelligence,
even biotechnologies, all of them. So from a fundamental
science point of view, we're providing that science
underpinning. Hopefully, the knowledge and the innovation can
then be translated to support the Department's national
security missions.
Mr. Williams. Those are good examples. Quantum, I think you
said digital intelligence, biomaterials. Are there any specific
programs or a laundry list of programs that I should be--that
all of us should be aware of that come to your mind
specifically that have national security emphasis or priority?
Dr. Kung. Yes, I believe the list is--could be quite long.
If it's OK, if we could get back with you with a more
comprehensive list.
Mr. Williams. Certainly. Beyond the material and supporting
NNSA, when the DOE hands out grants, and specifically the
science programs just because that's your purview, when they
hand out or make awards and grants, what factor or what
weighting does meeting the national security priorities--how
does that come into play for those awards, particularly in--
where they're competitive?
Dr. Kung. So our grant selection process follow a set of
review criteria that's codified in our 10 CFR (Code of Federal
Regulations) 605. It has scientific merits as the--No. 1,
there's--we look at the performance qualifications, their
expertise, the budget. They propose whether they're reasonable,
whether--also the relative expertise and instrumentation
setting they have, whether these are suitable to carry out
these experiments or proposed research they propose.
Mr. Williams. Sure.
Dr. Kung. All of these are our standard criteria for
evaluating the merits of the grant. But for given topics, we
can also put in additional program policy factors. For example,
quantum information science would be one that we may be looking
at potential broader applications and so forth. So given the
topical areas of the research, we can then broaden the lens of
the review criteria, especially addressing potential dual use
of example topics such as----
Mr. Strong. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Williams.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Sorensen of Illinois for five
minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you all for being here. I have spent
the majority of my career in STEM as a broadcast meteorologist
in northern and western Illinois. Much of what I accomplished
in my career, researching and presenting weather and climate
data, was only because of the collaboration between the DOE,
the USDA, NOAA, NASA, and NSF. And so today, I'd like to focus
on this working relationship that we have, how Congress can
best facilitate and shepherd more collaboration in the future.
And my first question, I'm asking this on behalf of our
farm families in northern and western Illinois, who ask me
what's next after ethanol as we buy more electric vehicles? You
know, last year, the DOE, along with other Federal agencies,
developed the Sustainable Aviation Fuel Grand Challenge
roadmap. This is a strategy for scaling up advanced
technologies to produce sustainable aviation fuels. And I
believe that our farmers are going to be heroes in this
endeavor.
What is the status of the implementation of the roadmap?
What are some of the barriers that exist, and how can we make
sure that the progress continues to accelerate? And if I could
ask this question to Dr. Kung and Mr. Reuter.
Dr. Kung. Thank you very much for that question. We're
actually very proud of the work the Department is leading in
the sustainable aviation fuel. It really capitalizes on decades
of investment across the whole department, from Office of
Science, to the Energy Efficiency Renewable Energy, which is
leading the Sustainable Aviation Fuel Grand Challenge. So I
think building on this decades-long of really science
foundation, they're able to really upgrading the biofuels in
order to add functionality, efficiency, and also performance
into the sustainable aviation fuel. I'm not personally involved
in the roadmap, but I'll be very happy to get back with you
based on my colleague's input.
Mr. Reuter. And would I would say is we do support--NASA
does support the biofuel area and stuff in the production of
those, and we certainly see a lot of opportunities there. We're
mainly in a support role to others like DOE as we go through
that.
The other thing, though, that is core to us also is zero
net carbon emissions for airplanes and electrification of the--
of propulsion system and batteries and stuff. And there, we do
play a very active role, and we have a lot of activities going
on to a demonstrator vehicle.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you so much.
Dr. Morgan, there have been proposals to separate NOAA from
the Commerce Department. Could you tell me some of the
drawbacks or some of the benefits? Should NOAA become an
independent agency and whether or not you support this move and
whether or not this meteorologist now in Congress should do the
same?
Dr. Morgan. Thank you for your question. That's--there's a
lot to unpack in that in terms of the separation of NOAA from
the Department of Commerce. I mean, as has been mentioned
earlier in my earlier testimony, the work that NOAA does, does
have--does inform how the conduct of commerce is actually done
in the United States, in fact, and, frankly, globally in terms
of our ability to produce highly accurate forecasts that allow
for ship routing, for transportation, et cetera, to be done
effectively.
I think one of the big questions that has to be asked in
any possible change to NOAA's authorization really has to focus
on what are we as an agency fundamentally authorized to do?
What are the capabilities that we would have when that actually
is--if that were realized? I think where we sit certainly is
important, but I don't--I'll be frank, I don't have a direct
answer to your question on what that looks like. But I think
the key thing is ensuring that NOAA has the authorities it has
to conduct its current mission and perhaps future missions that
are going to benefit the American public in terms of science,
stewardship, and service, particularly as it relates to the
Earth's system. That's going to be really critical.
Mr. Sorensen. And I--my final question, as a meteorologist
who spent his life on television, my constituents know that
when a big snowstorm is coming that Eric Sorensen looks at the
European computer model. That's the accurate one, right? It
should be the global forecast model. It should be our model.
How can I as a meteorologist in Congress, how can we work
together to increase the accuracy so that our lives can be
protected and people can make the right decisions during severe
weather?
Dr. Morgan. Sir, I'm a weather enthusiast. I often use the
term weather weenie.
Mr. Sorensen. I love it.
Dr. Morgan. That's never been said in the halls of
Congress. But I think what's really necessary is ensuring we
have the high-performance computing. It's also essential that
we make significant investments in atmospheric and basically
coupled data simulation for the system to make the full use of
the observations that we have. And we have, again, the
computing to allow us to look at an ensemble of forecast. I
look at the GFS (Global Forecast System). The last couple of
weather systems that have gone through the United States, GFS--
--
Mr. Strong. The gentleman's time has expired. I'm sorry.
The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sorensen. Great. I yield back.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Next is Mr. Kean from New Jersey. You'll be recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like
to thank all the witnesses for being here today and their
testimony.
It's vitally important that DOE maintain and improve their
collaboration with other key Federal agencies such as NASA,
NOAA, USDA. It is only through the efficient collaboration
between these agencies that, again, the DOE ensure that
providing America's security and prosperity by addressing its
energy, its environmental, its nuclear challenges through
innovative science and technology solutions.
Dr. Kung, how is the Department of Energy uniquely
qualified to provide leadership in U.S. biological science,
research, and development activities?
Dr. Kung. So thank you for that question. As mentioned
earlier, many parts of the Department actually have expertise
and capability in biological science and technology. Speaking
from the Office of Science where I'm sitting at, we have
decades-long of expertise and support for biological and
environmental science and actually grew out of our health
science roots. The--but the biology currently is actually
deeply rooted in our genomic science and also very high-
fidelity model that we can actually use to predict and model
biological organisms from both energy point of view, but also
just providing that broad base of biological science.
So--and I'm working between Office of Science and the
technology programs such as the ones in our Office of Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy. We are really pairing our
expertise and capability together to deliver the Department's
mission in bio-related technology. And we are working together,
along with our sister agencies, implementing a recent Executive
order on biotechnology, biomanufacturing, a really exciting
frontier, not only with our NSF and USDA partners, but across
the whole agency. We're addressing transportation fuels,
aviation fuels, even using bio as a way of decarbonizing at a
land scale. So we're--my own opinions are we're very uniquely
situated based on our past capability, core competency, but
also future opportunities.
Mr. Kean. And the multiagency partnerships you just talked
about that are in concordance and as we approach our national
priorities such as during the COVID-19 crisis, how is the DOE's
National Virtual Biotechnology Laboratory (NVBL) serve as the
mechanism to provide a number of agencies like the FDA (Food
and Drug Administration), the CDC (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention), DOD, with access to DOE research capabilities?
Dr. Kung. Thank you for that question. NVBL is really the
pride and joy of the Office of Science that we stood up when
the crisis of COVID-19 hit. This is really an excellent model
that in a very short period of time we were able to marshal all
the resources, expertise from all 17 of DOE's national
laboratories and really capitalize on the expertise, for
example, in materials, in chemistry, in biology, and also high-
performance computing to be able to address some of the key
challenges. For example, by using materials, we actually are
addressing supply chains from respirators to fibers that go
into the KN95, N95 masks. But also using our light sources,
we're actually able to decipher the very detailed structure of
the virus so we can then design countermeasure such as
antiviral drugs and vaccines.
But lastly, our high-performance computer has been so
powerful, they actually can do the epidemiologic modeling to
inform policymakers in terms of emergency response or also
whether to close schools or bars. I think that is really an
excellent example of interagency partnership, working across
different agency, pooling the resources capability together in
the moment of national crisis, so we're very proud of that
example.
Mr. Kean. OK. Thank you. Dr. Jones, given the challenge
from China and from other adversaries, should the NSF be
partnering with strategic allies on science and technology
research? And if so, what policies are necessary to facilitate
those partnerships?
Dr. Jones. Great, thank you very much for that question. So
science is a global endeavor, and so we do look to be part of
the global research environment. Submitted in our testimony,
for example, would be the LHC, Large Hadron Collider activity
where DOE and NSF partner in a very----
Mr. Strong. Thank you. The gentleman's time----
Dr. Jones [continuing]. Very important international----
Mr. Strong [continuing]. Is expired. I'm sorry. The
gentleman's time has expired. The Chair----
Mr. Kean. And if I--can you follow up--send that response
in writing, please?
Dr. Jones. Yes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you.
Dr. Jones. Yes.
[The written response of Dr. Jones follows:]

The NSF is focusing on international partnerships with
likeminded countries based on the principles of transparency,
reciprocity, merit-based competition, and openness to the
extent possible. NSF together with NIH represented the United
States on the G7 Security and Integrity of the Global Research
Ecosystem group. Through this effort, the G7 developed research
security and integrity principles and best practices. NSF also
participated in the OECD Global Science Forum effort on
research security and integrity to develop international
approaches to research security and integrity. NSF begins its
international partnerships by developing agreements with the
international partner that outlines the principles by which the
collaboration will occur, meaning outlining clearly what each
partner is contributing, how data will be shared and
distributed, and the roles and responsibilities of each
partner. These principles are then reinforced in the management
plan for the international collaboration program. To ensure
that NSF appropriately reviews proposed projects for national
security implications, NSF has announced in its draft 2024
policy guidance that it is developing a risk rubric where
proposals will be returned without review if there is a high
national security risk according to the rubric.

Mr. Kean. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, sir.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Tonko of New York for five
minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you to both Chair Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren for hosting this important discussion. And thank you to
the witnesses. You're a distinguished panel, and it's great to
hear from you.
The U.S. R&D ecosystem is directly responsible for the
security and prosperity that Americans enjoy today. When
leveraged correctly, the most incredible scientific discoveries
and technological innovations emerge directly out of our
Federal research agencies. This is especially important as
international competition grows and the climate crisis
intensifies. What we do today will determine whether we are
still leaders on the global stage tomorrow.
So I recognize the essential role that DOE plays in this
and sought to tap into its unique technical expertise with my
Micro Act, a bill that was included in the CHIPS and Science
package last Congress. With over a half a billion dollars in
new investments, the Micro Act will leverage DOE's world-
renowned national labs and their partners in industry and
academia to tackle foundational challenges in the
microelectronics R&D effort.
So with that being stated, Dr. Kung, can you talk about
DOE's role in the broader microelectronics R&D enterprise?
Dr. Kung. Thank you so much for that question. DOE actually
has a long history of supporting microelectronics, both as a
consumer because some of our world-leading supercomputers are
actually based on the cutting-edge microelectronics. But we're
also an engine of innovation contributing to the innovation of
microelectronics. For example, the most advanced EUV (extreme
ultraviolet lithography) technology that we're currently using
to produce the smallest gauge of the microelectronic is
developed--was developed by a joint partnership among several
DOE laboratories. So we feel like we are a essential
contributor to the extremely exciting but also challenging
situation with the microelectronics in terms of the leading
edge in technology development but also in addressing the
supply chain.
And we also believe that microelectronics is such an area
that is really requiring a whole-of-the-government approach
because different agencies were actually bringing different
pieces of expertise and capabilities together. And I really
appreciate the CHIPS and Science Act that passed and authorized
the Department on being able to further contribute to the
cutting edge of microelectronics, being the--for example, the
microelectronics center being authorized in the Micro Act. We
believe this is the right type of model for us to really co-
design from the very bottom of materials all the way to
application, hardware, and the whole infrastructure be able to
design the next generation of microelectronics. So thank you
for that question.
Mr. Tonko. Oh, thank you. And, Dr. Jones, in your
testimony, you talk about the importance of long-lasting
partnerships with industry to meet the challenges of today and
tomorrow. Can you explain to us more about the TIP Directorate
and the potential programs and partnerships with private
companies to develop the transformative solutions to
semiconductor manufacturing challenges?
Dr. Jones. Great, thank you so much for that question. And
we're very grateful for the support of the National Science
Foundation in establishing the Technology Innovation
Partnership Directorate. It's actually the first directorate
created in 31 years. And so we're very, very grateful for the
support of Congress to establish the new directorate.
Translational innovation is actually part of the DNA within
NSF. It always has been. But with this new directorate, we will
be able to partner with entities like other Federal agencies
but also industry to translate fundamental basic research at a
much faster pace and at a much larger scale than what we have
done before. So our new directorate has already been very
successful at forming new partnerships with industry, such as
our Intel partnership and Micron partnership, looking at
semiconductor workforce issues, as well as leading the way with
our Engineering directorate on our FuSe (Future of
Semiconductors) solicitation, again, looking at semiconductors
where we're partnering with four industry partners already,
Ericsson, Samsung, Intel, Micron as well. And so we're very,
very proud of the equities that we'll be able to do through
this new directorate to further partner with industry.
This directorate also houses our SBIR (Small Business
Innovation Research) and STTR (Small Business Technology
Transfer) programs where we're able to support small businesses
and those businesses then grow into larger businesses, but also
partner with larger entities. In addition, this new directorate
is starting a new program, the Regional Innovation Engine
program, which----
Mr. Strong. The gentleman's time has expired. Thank you,
Dr. Jones.
Mr. Tonko. Mr. Chair, I had a question for Mr. Reuter, and
I'll give that to the Committee in writing about aviation
systems, so thank you.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Tonko.
The Chair recognizes himself for five minutes.
Dr. Kung, Mr. Reuter, Dr. Morgan, Dr. Jones, I want to
thank each of you for coming before us today. It's been very
informative.
As mentioned, NASA and the Department of Energy have held
formal research partnerships for over six decades.
Additionally, NASA has long history of collaboration with DOD's
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, or more
affectionately known as DARPA. Mr. Reuter, how does the most
recent partnership announcement between NASA and DARPA leverage
the space nuclear development that NASA and DOE has been
conducting in recent years?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, yes, thank you, Congressman. What I would
say is we've got a great opportunity now to advance nuclear
systems in space and really revolutionize the way we travel
around space and the way we operate on foreign lands. And we've
been--over the last several years had a lot of joint activities
with DOE in terms of developing the reactors, the fuel elements
and stuff that went through that can enable these type missions
at the very high efficiency that we demand. In fact, we had
some starts and stops with this. We had to change technology
paths and stuff, but we've gotten to the point where we're
actually confident in this. So for us then, it's become a time
now, let's go demonstrate this thing.
And the fortunate thing we had is--because we try to work
across all agencies--DARPA has a very similar objective, a
little bit different than the requirements and objectives that
we have but close enough that we could work it out together.
And so what we're doing is building off those--the technologies
that we've been developing over the years and applying it to a
joint development, primarily between us and DARPA, for the
next--for a flight demonstration. Now, DOE will still be along
with that. There's still key roles for that, their critical
expertise as we go forward.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. It's my understanding that the
Fiscal Year 2023 President budget was the first time a line
item was included for these developments. Would you say, Mr.
Reuter, that for NASA to be successful in the Moon-to-Mars
mission and for DOD and DARPA to be successful in cislunar
space that continued support and growth for space nuclear is
necessary?
Mr. Reuter. Yes, absolutely. I think space nuclear systems
are fundamental to us achieving the objectives for Moon to
Mars.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. How would this partnership
accelerate development of human transport to Mars?
Mr. Reuter. Well, what we're doing--looking at this, I view
this as kind of an experimental vehicle if you will. It's the
first step. You got to take a big step, and getting something
that's actually flying and operating in a relatively short
timeframe over the next few years is something that can get--
put us on a path and then the next step will be just achieve
the actual requirements and go on toward other distant--Mars
and beyond.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I'll reclaim my time. And the Chair
recognizes Ms. Salinas of Oregon.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to the
panelists. I apologize for not being here for your oral
testimony, but I did review your written testimony.
Dr. Kung, billions of dollars are spent each year in the
United States on agriculture, food research and development,
but a lot of this is focused on food product manufacturing,
crop protection, and food safety, all worthy and valuable. But
relatively little is spent on climate mitigation and
breakthrough technologies that really have the potential to
radically change the impact of our food systems. What forms of
innovation policies are needed to deploy future agricultural
technologies to decarbonize the sector?
Dr. Kung. Thank you so much for that question. Actually,
that is one of our major priorities and emphasis is really
utilizing our biotechnologies and expertise to decarbonize the
agriculture is one of the aspects that we are looking into. I
have just mentioned that the Executive order on biotechnology
and biomanufacturing was just released September 2022. Multiple
agencies are coming together in terms of furthering the
societal goals for climate change solutions. There are four
aspects. There are four kind of bold goals. One is to address
the need to develop more carbon-neutral transportation
stationary fuels. The second is to use biotechnology to produce
chemicals materials from renewable biomass. And the third is
climate-focused agriculture systems and plants. And the fourth
is the carbon dioxide removal really from the landscape scale
of removing carbon dioxide out from the agriculture sector. So
we are laser focused on these very important issues and look
forward to providing additional information as the plan comes
together.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And I'm going to dive a little bit
deeper. Our Nation's centralized freshwater infrastructure is
deteriorating due to climate change and other factors. Water,
food, and energy form a nexus at the heart of sustainable
development with agriculture as the largest consumer of the
world's freshwater resources. And this really speaks and goes
to the complexity at the energy water nexus and demand for a
Federal coordinated approach. How does DOE partner with USDA to
decarbonize the ag sector with a focus on that nexus between
food, energy, and water?
Dr. Kung. I am not the right expert to address the
question. I do understand that the Department has a very active
energy-water-food nexus activity. So if it's OK, we'll get back
with you based on the experts from the Department.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And then just, again, following up
a little bit in kind of the same agriculture question and maybe
a little bit more general and higher level. How should our
Federal Government ensure that an integrated and sustainable
management of water, food, and energy is balanced with the
needs of people, nature, and the economy?
Dr. Kung. Again, I think I would defer to the experts in
the Department to answer. I do agree that's a very important
question and important issue.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. OK. And then turning to--since I do
have a couple minutes left--to DOE's Bioenergy Research
Centers. What do you see as the central role of the BRCs within
the spectrum of bioenergy technology and development? And how
is this research vital to the mission of DOE?
Dr. Kung. In the--I really liked the way that you're
framing this, the spectrum. So on the BRC, which is funded by
the Office of Science side, we're very mindful. We're focusing
on the lower Technology Readiness Level, really addressing the
knowledge gaps that are really preventing us to really deriving
the maximum benefit from renewable biomass. And that knowledge
really need to be able--we need to be able to translate any of
the innovation to the technology progress so they can then
develop that commercial technologies.
I mentioned earlier about the BRC partnership with USDA.
This is really an excellent way of really combining the
biotrays that we're trying to engineer and insert that function
into the plants was the USDA, where they're coming from, the
agriculture, the land and the water usage. So this is really an
excellent example--I gave earlier a pennycress example, as--but
I think there are multiple example not only from Office of
Science but also from the Technology Office. We will be happy
to provide additional information to you.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Ms. Salinas.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Mullin of California. Mr. Mullin,
you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for your
testimony.
I'm from the San Francisco peninsula. California has been
experiencing a long drought cycle, interrupted by a very wet
winter. Even as we speak, we're bracing for an apparently
relatively warm atmospheric river. We're concerned about snow
melt and flooding and so forth. So we're sort of living the
extremes when it comes to climate. And, fortunately, FEMA
(Federal Emergency Management Agency) has been engaged.
So my question is with Dr. Morgan. And just can you
describe how you partner with the agencies not represented here
like FEMA, like HUD (Department of Housing and Urban
Development)? You know, we have these communities that are--
their infrastructure is simply not equipped to deal with the
volume of water that we're seeing, and just how you share your
models so groups like--entities like FEMA can get ready for
these megastorms and abnormal events that can affect our
communities and just what kind of collaboration and
coordination with the other entities so we can get ready and
brace appropriately for what might come?
Dr. Morgan. Yes, thank you for your question. And I think
I'm going to ensure that a more complete response is given to
you in some questions for the record. But as we anticipate
significant weather events, Weather Service offices located all
around the country, we've been focusing--let me back up, NOAA
has been focusing on impact decision support services. And what
this means is forecasters at individual forecast offices are
prepared to go to emergency management centers within States'
Federal Emergency Management to relay the information and the
likely impacts of high-impact weather events are going to have
on communities all across the country. So I imagine that there
are currently meteorologists in the Monterey forecast office
and other ones, Reno area as well, that are looking at the
upcoming event with this relatively warm atmospheric river and
the likelihood of significant snow melt, which may lead to
flooding, and they're beginning to prepare folks for that--for
this inevitability or this likelihood--excuse me--of
significant flooding. So we have meteorologists that are
basically deployed within particular emergency management
offices to basically convey this information. But we also make
use of social media. We make use of, you know, all ways of
contact to make sure that our communities are well aware of
upcoming significant weather events.
Mr. Mullin. I appreciate that, sir, and thank you for that.
That is reassuring. And I look forward to getting more
information about that ongoing coordination because this will
be a--clearly an ongoing challenge for all of us. So thank you,
sir.
Dr. Morgan. Sure.
Mr. Mullin. And I yield back.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Mullin.
I want to thank each of the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and for the Members for their questions. The record
will remain open for two weeks for additional comments and
written questions from Members.
With no further questions, this meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:40 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Harriet Kung
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. James L. Reuter
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Legislation Discussion Drafts
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Letter submitted by Space Nuclear Power and Propulsion industry
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
