- ENHANCING FIRE WEATHER PREDICTION AND COORDINATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

ENHANCING FIRE WEATHER PREDICTION
AND COORDINATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 12, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-19

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-705               WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

July 12, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     5
Written Statement............................................     6

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     6
Written Statement............................................     8

Witnesses:

Mr. Mark Goeller, State Forester/Director, Oklahoma Department of
Agriculture, Food and Forestry
Oral Statement...............................................     9
Written Statement............................................    11

Mr. James Peverill, Founder/CEO, GreenSight
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Ali Tohidi, Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering and
Wildfire Dynamics, San Jose State University
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Discussion.......................................................    38

Appendix: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Max Miller, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Tim Donovan, President and CEO, Competitive Carriers
Association................................................    72

ENHANCING FIRE WEATHER PREDICTION

AND COORDINATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 12, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.003

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Committee at any time. I recognize myself for five minutes for
an opening statement.
Good morning, and welcome to today's Full Committee hearing
examining fire weather prediction tools and capacities. Today's
discussion will help us assess the collaboration and
coordination between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and other Federal departments and
agencies, and State and local officials, to ensure the safety
of people and property. Today's hearing is timely as we enter
the summer months, which have traditionally marked the
beginning of wildfire season.
However, I'm sure many of my Western colleagues would agree
that there's not much of a true wildfire season anymore. They
seem to occur year-round. In 2022 alone, the National
Interagency Fire Center reported almost 69,000 fires that
burned 7.5 million acres of land in the United States. Over the
past month, the United States has had some of the worst air
quality numbers in the world due to smoke from Canadian
wildfires.
By advancing our weather capacities, we have a chance to
limit the size and scope of future fires, as well as improve
research into air quality changes that come with fires.
Lengthier droughts, hotter temperatures, and poorly maintained
Federal lands are all contributing to a greater frequency and
intensity of wildfires across the country and around the world.
There is no silver bullet to completely prevent fires, but
we can make significant progress in protecting our communities
if we improve the forecasting and prediction of weather
conditions that lead to fires. Our witnesses today are involved
with State emergency management, commercial sector innovation,
and academic research to enhance the sustainability and
accuracy of fire weather information. Their testimony will
inform our work on legislation to better prepare communities
and regions facing the rapid spread of fires.
Let me be clear, the objective of this hearing and any
future legislation related to wildfires is not for the Federal
Government to make decisions for people. But by providing State
and local emergency managers the most accurate information
possible, the Federal Government will be able to give local
community leaders and everyday citizens the knowledge and
understanding they need to make their own decisions.
NOAA and the National Weather Service cannot tackle this
problem on their own. Long gone are the days of fire watchers
sitting in towers with binoculars scanning for smoke. A robust
partnership with the commercial sector is necessary to help
boost our forecasting and prediction capacities. I look forward
to hearing about the advancements that the commercial sector
has made with new technologies, including unmanned aerial
aircraft. These are the types of innovations that will
inevitably save the lives of firefighters and other emergency
officials.
Today's hearing is important because it allows us to
examine a wide range of sectors that partner with Federal
departments and agencies to utilize different types of fire
weather data. Their input will help us ensure the direction and
resources we provide NOAA end up benefiting most Americans and
avoiding wasteful duplication.
I thank our witnesses for sharing their expertise with us,
and I look forward to a productive discussion.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning and welcome to today's Full Committee hearing
examining fire weather prediction tools and capabilities.
Today's discussion will help us assess the collaboration
and coordination between the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), other Federal departments and agencies,
and state and local officials to ensure the safety of people
and property.
Today's hearing is timely as we enter the summer months,
which have traditionally marked the beginning of wildfire
season.
However, I'm sure many of my western colleagues would agree
that there is not much of a true wildfire season anymore, with
fires occurring year-round.
In 2022 alone, the National Interagency Fire Center
reported almost 69,000 fires that burned 7.5 million acres of
land in the United States. Over the past month, the United
States has had some of the worst air quality numbers in the
world due to the smoke from Canadian wildfires.
By advancing our fire weather capabilities, we have the
chance to limit the size and scope of future fires, as well as
improve research into air quality changes that come from fires.
Lengthier droughts, hotter temperatures, and poorly
maintained federal lands are all contributing to a greater
frequency and intensity of wildfires across the country and
around the world.
There is no silver bullet to completely prevent fires, but
we can make significant progress in protecting our communities
if we improve the forecasting and prediction of weather
conditions that lead to fires.
Our witnesses today are involved with state emergency
management, commercial sector innovation, and academic research
to enhance the sustainability and accuracy of fire weather
information.
Their testimony will inform our work on legislation to
better prepare communities and regions facing the rapid spread
of fires.
Let me be clear, the objective of this hearing, and any
future legislation related to wildfires, is not for the Federal
government to make decisions for people.
But by providing state and local emergency managers the
most accurate information possible, the Federal government will
be able to give local community leaders and everyday citizens
the knowledge and understanding they need to make their own
decisions.
NOAA and the National Weather Service cannot tackle this
problem on their own. Long gone are the days of fire watchers
sitting in towers with binoculars scanning for smoke.
A robust partnership with the commercial sector is
necessary to help bolster our forecasting and prediction
abilities. I look forward to hearing about the advancements
that the commercial sector has made with new technologies,
including unmanned aerial aircraft. These are the types of
innovations that will inevitably save the lives of firefighters
and other emergency officials.
Today's hearing is important because it allows us to
examine a wide range of sectors that partner with Federal
departments and agencies to utilize different types of fire
weather data. Their input will help us ensure the direction and
resources we provide to NOAA end up benefiting the most
Americans and avoid wasteful duplication.
I thank our witnesses for sharing their expertise with us
and I look forward to a productive discussion.

Chairman Lucas. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentlewoman from California, for an opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, good morning. And thank you, Chairman
Lucas, for holding this really important hearing. And I want to
thank the witnesses again for coming to share your expertise on
this topic which is of such importance to our country.
Every year, wildlife--wildfires take lives and cause
billions of dollars in damage. Perhaps most concerning is that
the frequency and destructiveness of wildfires are increasing
due to climate change. Now, I'm from California, and I see the
impacts of wildfires and communities firsthand. In 2020, Santa
Clara County where I'm from experienced the fourth largest
wildfire in California State history. The SCU (Santa Clara
Unit) Lightning Complex fire burned over 396,000 acres,
destroyed 225 structures, damaged a further 26 structures, and
injured six people. And that's in addition to other very
destructive wildfires that resulted in deaths to individuals.
Now, thanks to brave emergency responders, these fires are
dealt with. But despite the critical role, emergency responders
and wildland firefighters play in protecting lives and property
and the considerable danger they put themselves in in doing so,
they're significantly under-resourced. Support for our
firefighters is far from the only challenge when it comes to
reducing risks from wildland fires. Many agencies and
organizations from local to Federal level play a role in
mitigating and responding to wildfires, posing challenges for
interagency coordination and efficient use of finite resources.
At the Federal level, while there is coordination when it
comes to wildfire response, there are significant gaps in
coordination when it comes to increasing scientific
understanding, prediction, resilience, and communication for
wildland fires. We can't just keep responding to disasters. We
need to invest more in preventing them where we can. And that's
why I'm reintroducing this week the National Wildland Fire Risk
Reduction Program Act. This bill would strengthen the Federal
coordination of research and operational efforts across
multiple Federal science agencies and support a more efficient
and effective whole-of-government response to reducing wildland
fire risk. And I am looking forward to working with our
Chairman to move a bipartisan package of wildland fire bills
through the Committee and hopefully on to the Congress itself.
Some of the most important information for wildfire
detection, mitigation, and emergency response comes from
observational systems and predictive models. Now, we have
mountains of data currently collected from assets owned and
operated across academic, private, and the public sector, but
there are considerable gaps in data, and there's also
inadequate coordination and dissemination of that data. For
example, many datasets lack the desired spatial and temporal
resolution for maximum utility in modeling applications.
Wildfire forecasting models also need to be improved to better
predict wildfire ignition and behavior. Coupled wildfire
models, which integrate our best understanding of the physics
of fire, interactions between fire and weather, are promising
tools for improving real-time predictions of fire behavior.
I'm so pleased that Dr. Tohidi, who is an expert in coupled
fire weather modeling, is here from my own San Jose State in my
district, and he is doing impressive work at the university
about how Congress can help support innovations in modeling,
along with our other two excellent witnesses.
The increasing threat of wildfires poses to our community
and our brave firefighters on the frontlines requires the
Nation to effectively understand and predict fires, manage our
wildlands safely, and expeditiously respond to them. I very
much look forward to our testimony.
And just a note, all of us are in multiple Committees, and
another Committee is meeting at this very moment, so I'm going
to take a brief recess to go to that Committee and I'll be
right back. This is one of the most important things before
this Committee and before this Congress.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning. Thank you to Chairman Lucas for holding this
important hearing, and thank you to the witnesses for coming to
share your expertise on this topic of utmost importance with us
today.
Every year, wildfires take lives and cause billions of
dollars in damage. Perhaps most concerning is that the
frequency and destructiveness of wildfires are increasing due
to climate change.
Coming from California, I see the impacts of wildfires on
communities first-hand. In 2020, Santa Clara County, which is
part of my Congressional District, experienced the fourth
largest wildfire in California state history. The SCU Lightning
Complex Fire burned over 396,000 acres, destroyed 225
structures, damaged a further 26 structures, and injured 6
people. Thanks to the brave emergency responders the fire was
contained with no fatalities.
Despite the critical role emergency responders and wildland
firefighters play in protecting lives and property--and the
considerable danger they put themselves in to do so--they are
still significantly under resourced.
Support for our firefighters is far from the only challenge
when it comes to reducing risks from wildland fires. Many
agencies and organizations from the local to federal level play
a role in mitigating and responding to wildfires, posing
challenges for interagency coordination and efficient use of
finite resources. At the Federal level, while there is
coordination when it comes to wildfire response, there are
significant gaps in coordination when it comes to increasing
scientific understanding, prediction, resilience, and
communication for wildland fires. We can't just keep responding
to disasters. We must invest more in preventing them where we
can. That is why I am reintroducing this week the National
Wildland Fire Risk Reduction Program Act. This bill would
strengthen the federal coordination of research and operational
efforts across multiple federal science agencies, and support a
more efficient and effective whole-of-government response to
reducing wildland fire risk. I look forward to working with
Chairman Lucas to move a bipartisan package of wildland fire
bills through the Committee this Congress.
Some of the most important information for wildfire
detection, mitigation, and emergency response comes from
observational systems and predictive models. While mountains of
data are currently collected from assets owned and operated
across the academic, private, and public sectors, there are
still considerable gaps in data. For example, many datasets
lack the desired spatial and temporal resolution for maximum
utility in modeling applications. Wildfire forecasting models
also need to be improved to better predict wildfire ignition
and behavior. Coupled fire-weather models, which integrate our
best understanding of the physics of fire and interactions
between fire and weather are promising tools for improving
real-time predictions of fire behavior. I am excited to hear
from one of my constituents, Dr. Tohidi, who is an expert in
coupled fire-weather modeling, about how Congress can help
support innovations in observational data and wildfire
predictive modeling. The increasing threat wildfires pose to
our communities and to our brave firefighters on the front
lines requires our nation to effectively understand and predict
fires, manage our wildlands, and safely and expediently respond
to them.
I greatly look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
on how Congress can support these endeavors. Thank you to our
committee members and witnesses for joining us today to engage
in this important discussion. I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Our first witness today is Dr.--sorry, Mr. Mark Goeller.
Mark is the State Forester and Director of the Oklahoma
Department of Agriculture, Forest--Food and Forestry Services
Division. While earning a bachelor of science and agriculture
forestry management degree from Oklahoma State University, Mark
began fighting wildfires with the U.S. Forestry Service in 1980
and has served as an incident commander on literally hundreds
of multiagency, multijurisdictional fires.
Our second witness is Mr. James Peverill, founder and CEO
(Chief Executive Officer) of GreenSight, a technology company
that builds products built on a common technology platform
applying robotics and AI (artificial intelligence) to solve
high-impact problems in agriculture, defense, and weather
monitoring.
And our third witness is Ali Tohidi, an Assistant Professor
of Mechanical Engineering at Santa Jose State University and
co-Principal Investigator at their Wildfire Interdisciplinary
Research Center. His current research is based on developing
the next generation of operational wildfire weather behavior
models.
So now that I've slaughtered your last names, let's move
on. I now recognize Dr.--Mr. Goeller for five minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. MARK GOELLER,

STATE FORESTER/DIRECTOR,

OKLAHOMA DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,

FOOD AND FORESTRY

Mr. Goeller. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, Members of the Committee, for inviting me to this
hearing today and the opportunity to testify on behalf of
Oklahoma Forestry Services and the National Association of
State Foresters. I'm Mark Goeller, State Forester, Chair of the
Southern Group of State Foresters, and member of the National
Association of State Foresters Executive Committee.
Nearly every State Forester is required by their individual
statutes to deliver wildland fire prevention, detection,
suppression, and investigation. State Foresters also support
Federal land management agencies nationwide through cooperative
agreements to conduct wildland fire operations.
My wildland firefighting career began in 1980, and I've
fought wildfires in 22 States. I'm currently qualified as a
Type 1 Incident Commander and serve on both State and national
incident management teams. These experiences, along with
serving as a Fire Management Chief for 13 years and now as
State Forester, I have an advanced understanding that the key
to minimizing loss of life and property depends on fire weather
forecasting, early wildfire detection, wildfire preparedness,
and response.
Wildfire is common in Oklahoma. Prior to 2015, I would have
an on-average one day's warning that areas of the State would
experience high to extreme fire danger. That changed in late
2015 when the National Weather Service officials approached our
agency to inform us of their research and new findings related
to impactful fire weather systems. Because of this relationship
with the National Weather Service, my fire management staff now
has from three to seven days to pre-position firefighting
resources for response. Red flag warnings have transitioned
from strictly meeting hot, dry, windy criteria to currently a
threat index of where the probability of high impact wildfires
will occur in the State, early warning where fire effective
weather systems will intersect. High severity wildland fuels
also allows for focused fire prevention messaging and
firefighter safety briefings. Firefighter and public safety is
greatly enhanced through this improved situational awareness.
Oklahoma's wildfire detection system traditionally is
limited to our commercial timber lands in far eastern Oklahoma,
and we have lost all of our fire towers and man those and have
gone strictly to other means. New wildfires are now detected
statewide by the National Weather Service's GOES (Geostationary
Operational Environmental Satellite) 16 and 17 satellites and
typically within 1/4 mile accuracy. Often, these emerging
wildfires are detected before they're reported by the public to
911 dispatch centers.
These advances in fire weather forecasting and wildfire
detection by the National Weather Service during high to
extreme fire danger has allowed State, Federal, and local
firefighting agencies to target aggressive initial attack in
areas where wildfire would have the greatest potential and
impact of loss of lives, values at risk, and natural resources.
Another innovation employed in Oklahoma is to issue fire
warnings utilizing an integrated warning team approach. This
warning system involves the local National Weather Service
forecast office detecting and communicating to partners the
location of a potentially dangerous wildfire. Oklahoma forestry
services utilizing Wildfire Analyst, a commercially available
modeling software to predict the potential spread from
wildfire's ignition point. We contact the incident commander
and local emergency managers to confirm the warning need and
also to provide the relevant evacuation information. And
finally, State emergency management broadcasts the fire
warnings through the Emergency Alert System to a targeted area
jointly identified by the National Weather Service and Oklahoma
Forestry Services.
While this seems pretty cumbersome, the fire--fire warnings
issued in just 6 minutes on a recent wildfire occurring in a
heavily populated wildland urban interface (WUI) area in the
Oklahoma City metro. Oklahoma is the first State in the Nation
to utilize this system. Using our legacy process, it often
required approximately 90 minutes to issue the fire warning.
As an incident commander responsible for recommending
evacuations in advance of an approaching wildfire, it's
imperative that local officials with evacuation
responsibilities and the public are provided with the greatest
advanced warning and most accurate evacuation information
possible to minimize the loss of life. Oklahoma's fire warning
system gives the time and decision space to facilitate an
orderly, safe evacuation.
These advances in Oklahoma and Texas would not be possible
without the close relationship between the National Weather
Service forecast offices, Oklahoma Forestry Service, and Texas
A&M Forest Service. The ability to utilize each other's
resources is critical to success in providing for firefighter
safety and minimizing loss of life and property. This
collaborative approach and technological advances in fire
weather forecasting and detection can be easily applied to
preparedness and response actions nationwide.
In closing, I appreciate the Committee holding this
important hearing to investigate how National Weather Service
and other entities will impact future wildland fire
preparedness and response nationally through improved and
emerging technologies. I look forward to answering any
questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goeller follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.006

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.008

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. We now turn to you, James, for
your five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JAMES PEVERILL,

FOUNDER/CEO, GREENSIGHT

Mr. Peverill. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for inviting GreenSight to
testify today before the Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology to discuss innovative products and services provided
by the commercial sector and how they can partner with the
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration for the
improvement of fire weather nowcasting and prediction. I'm
James Peverill, co-founder and CEO of GreenSight.
At the outset, I'd like to mention that it is a very
exciting time in the United States for new and innovative
technologies, especially for drone technologies, robotics, and
artificial intelligence. For both civil and defense
applications, these systems are showing tremendous value.
Whether it's the unmanned drone conducting missions on the
surface of Mars or military drones playing increased roles in
our national security, these systems have a proven record for
aiding government missions.
GreenSight is an innovative small business based in Boston,
Massachusetts, that specializes in exotic robotic systems for
transformative business applications. We're focused on several
different markets, including agriculture, weather, and defense.
We have several product lines, all based on a common platform
of USA-made hardware and software components that empower end
users to solve their mission requirements.
As it pertains to the mission of environmental prediction
in today's hearing, GreenSight is currently collaborating with
the Air Force Weather Service and Defense Innovation Unit using
our WeatherHive system for prototype development. GreenSight's
WeatherHive is a unique sensing technology that uses swarms of
nanosized drones to directly measure atmospheric conditions.
This system can sample up to 200 square miles per flight,
generating a dense 3D cube of measurements. This technology was
initially developed through a National Science Foundation-
(NSF-) funded SBIR (Small Business Innovation Research) grant
and has now been selected by the U.S. Air Force and Defense
Innovation Unit for prototype development, contract, and
potential procurement. This selection was made under the
Peacetime Indications and Warning: Global Weather Sensing
commercial solutions opening.
WeatherHive data shows promise to enable new breakthroughs
in weather forecasting and climate science. Armed with data
from WeatherHive, forecasting models may be able to much more
accurately predict tornado formation, severe storm behavior,
wildfire movement, and hurricane paths. It is a promising new
tool against increasingly common severe weather conditions that
cause property damage, injuries, and deaths every year.
For the specific mission of fire weather, NOAA would
benefit from an enhanced mission focus to improve their
detection and forecasting capabilities. As a commercial
company, we feel we can assist NOAA with this mission by
providing critical data that improves the accuracy and
timeliness of information to inform the public and safeguard
lives and property. Previously, our conversations with NOAA
have been centered around other weather events such as
tornadoes, but applications for fire weather are equally as
beneficial, if not more.
The unique aspects of fire events place a greater emphasis
on remote sensing. Fires are inherently dangerous and often
happen in remote areas that are difficult to reach. Using
sensing technologies such as drone swarms will allow NOAA to
continuously monitor and collect various forms of data in a
safe and efficient manner. The data collected by the
WeatherHive system can be streamed in real time and used for
both nowcasting events and in forecasting prediction systems
and models. The data that WeatherHive collected is also
compatible with many existing analytical tools, so there'll be
minimal need to redevelop forecasting infrastructure to ingest
these new types of data.
By establishing research partnerships, NOAA would be able
to harness the ingenuity of American industry. These
partnerships can be mutually beneficial and lead to
breakthroughs in technologies that improve our scientific
understanding of fire weather. Likewise, the establishment and
coordination of mechanisms for commercial data buys will allow
NOAA to quickly ingest new sources of data to improve
prediction of fire weather events. GreenSight stands ready to
assist and partner with NOAA to improve their mission
requirements for both research and operations.
Lastly, an issue that must be addressed when moving these
types of innovative technologies into widespread operational
use is complying with the associated regulatory framework.
Historically, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has the
regulatory authority to grant the use and restriction of drones
in the United States. Utilizing novel and unique use cases for
drones means that the FAA needs to address potentially outdated
Federal regulations and look for creative solutions to offer
integration into both public and private missions.
WeatherHive is designed to operate with minimal risk to
aviators, people, and property, while promising to offer
significant overall benefits to public safety. I look forward
to working with the FAA to ensure that our progress in these
technologies is not limited so that we can continue to partner
with the Federal Government to improve mission success.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee,
I thank you for the opportunity to testify you--before you
today, and I'd be pleased to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Peverill follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.013

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. I now recognize Dr. Tohidi for
five minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ALI TOHIDI, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR

OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND WILDFIRE DYNAMICS,

SAN JOSE STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Tohidi. Thank you. Good morning, Chairman Lucas,
Ranking Member Lofgren, and other distinguished Members of this
Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear as a witness
in this hearing on a topic of growing importance to both the
Nation and the world. We appreciate the Committee's attention
to wildfires and the efforts you have undertaken over the last
few years to invest in wildfire science.
My name is Ali Tohidi, and I'm an Assistant Professor of
Mechanical Engineering at San Jose State, and I'm also co-
principal investigator of Wildfire Interdisciplinary Research
Center at San Jose State. My background is in fluid and fire
dynamics, and my research and development efforts over the past
10-plus years have been dedicated to understanding the
fundamentals of wildfire spread mechanisms, particularly a
phenomenon called firebrand shower, also known as ember attack.
In this testimony, I present a concise overview of wildfire
physics and modeling approaches and elaborate on some of the
identified challenges by the fire science community. Then I
provide recommendations to overcome them.
Wildfires are an important part of the ecosystem globally.
However, detrimental effects of the climate change, poor land
management practices such as fire exclusion, and continuous
growth of the wildland urban interface or, as we call it, WUI
areas, have transitioned wildfires regimes to extreme and high
impact events leading to loss of lives, severe disturbances in
biological systems, and--biological systems, and causing
billions of dollars in damages. The impacts are projected to
grow in severity and magnitude. Thus, we need our communities
to become more resilient to wildfires.
A key component to achieve this is the ability to
accurately estimate the potential progression of the fire
through the landscape and our communities. Fire models--fire
weather models fulfill this objective by simulating fire spread
mechanisms and their secondary effects on their environment.
Briefly, wildfires are spread by the progression of the fire
front through heat transfer from flames and hot gases to
onboard combustibles and ignition of spot fires far ahead of
the main fire front by firebrand showers.
While our fundamental understanding of some of these
processes is improving and findings are partially implemented
in models, it is still challenging to deliver a high fidelity
forecast. This is due to the multiphysics, multiscale, and
stochastic nature of wildfires, leading to current knowledge
gaps that are stated in my--in detail in my written testimony.
From the operational fire weather modeling standpoint, the
main cause of unreliable forecasts is partly due to the
oversimplification of the fire dynamics in models and model
formulations and partly due to their design objectives. Most
fire weather models, including the data layers, are designed to
simulate wildfires in large spatial temporal scales tens of
meters in space and hours in time. This may be appropriate for
wildland fires in remote areas, but not for the current regime
of fires we experience at WUI zones, as fire dynamics occur at
flame scale, meters in space, and seconds in time.
To enhance the current state of fire weather models, we
need to invest in the cross-disciplinary initiatives to design
and deploy sensors and observe and measure wildfire behavior at
flame scale with unsaturated clean and high resolution data.
Such continuous and high resolution measurements nationwide can
also serve as a reliable situational awareness platform for
first responders. We need to invest in multiscale laboratory
infrastructures, controlled field campaigns, and rapid data
collection teams nationwide to study wildfire dynamics at,
again, flame scale. These measurements and observations are
crucial for defining the canonical cases of wildfires and fire
weather model development validation and verification.
We need to invest in improving the quality, frequency, and
resolution of the current data layers for fire weather models,
leveraging the advances in scientific machine learning and AI.
We need to establish infrastructures to centralize,
standardize, and integrate wildfire-related datasets and
provide access to the scientific community for model
development. Support is needed for data collection efforts on
the exposure of communities and infrastructures to wildfire
risk, post-incident damages, and suppression activities and
their effectiveness during events. These are key datasets for
informing and calibrating the risk models, particularly in WUI
zones.
We must encourage and support community-driven and open-
source wildfire model development that co-produces with the
relevant stakeholders. Co-production is essential for success
of our models, as definition of success differs from one
stakeholder to the other.
The need for rigorously validated and reliable wildfire
models is increasing, and accurate estimation of fire behavior
across the scales has invaluable benefits for communities and
stakeholders. My view is that the key to developing high
performing models is the comprehensive application of
fundamentals of fire behavior and safety sciences, leveraging
insights from field and experimental observations at flame
scale, along with efficient implementation of these findings
with co-production in mind.
Thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Tohidi follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.015

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T2705.026

Chairman Lucas. I again thank the witnesses for all your
testimony, and I recognize myself for five minutes.
Mark, from one Okie to another, welcome to the Nation's
capital, and thank you for taking time to share our State's
great work on this topic.
I want to dig a little deeper on the value of collaboration
and partnerships in the area of fire weather prediction, your
experience in Oklahoma, and the development of the tools you
mentioned in your testimony, who all needed to be at the table,
including the Federal, State, and local parties. How did this
come together?
Mr. Goeller. It started out as a result of the 2005/2006
dormant fire season in Oklahoma where we had multiple wildfires
impacting the State, not only Oklahoma, but Texas and others in
the Southern Great Plains. As a result of that episode that we
had, there were a number of individuals that formed what was
called the Southern Great Plains Wildfire Outbreak Group that
included at the time individuals from the Texas Forest Service,
now Texas A&M Forest Service, Oklahoma Forestry Services,
National Weather Service Forecast Offices out of Norman,
Amarillo, Abilene, Midland, and a number of others to start
looking at that phenomenon that we experienced there in
Oklahoma. And so as time went on, the partnership that
developed between those offices, individuals, just continued to
grow and really start to look into the weather dynamics of how
that affected our firefighting response in this--in those
States.
The missions between our agencies and the National Weather
Service, they meet in the protection of life and property. And
so the one thing with the National Weather Service is,
obviously, they have the tools to look at the weather, weather
patterns, and so on and analyze such. We have the wherewithal
to evaluate our wildland fuel conditions. And so the meeting of
those two groups and agencies, along with State and other local
emergency managing--and management personnel is what formed
that, and it was critical to be able to do that to put us to
where we are today.
Chairman Lucas. One last question along that line. Can you
share some of the lessons that you learned from other States
who might be interested in developing similar tools for forests
and communities?
Mr. Goeller. One of the things that--the lesson learned as
traveling around the United States and working on fires, it's a
little bit different when you're involved with an incident
management team assigned to a fire in Montana, California,
Oregon, wherever it is. We do have Incident Meteorologists
(IMET) through the IMET program with the National Weather
Service that are assigned to the fire team, the incident
command team.
But, you know, the things that I would emphasize for
lessons learned is for other State forestry agencies, local
emergency management agencies to get to really working closely
with their National Weather Service forecast offices. Look at
the model that we employ in Oklahoma, look at the process that
we went through. It's applicable anywhere in the United States.
The same parameters that we have in Oklahoma would not
necessarily work in other States, but the process would. And
the research that went into what affects our weather systems
would be absolutely employable in other places.
Chairman Lucas. And to my other two witnesses, you know,
it's not hyperbole to say that each of you conduct work that
saves lives, directly saves lives, whether its citizens in
affected areas or firefighters. Could you briefly touch on how
you engage both first responders and everyday communities to
get their input on your products or research and ensure that
what you offer is useful to both groups?
Mr. Peverill. Well, part of when we developed WeatherHive,
we engaged with a lot of end users. Actually, when we
participated in the NSF SBIR program, part of that was engaging
with a tremendous number of end users, both first responders,
public entities, as well as universities and other types of
forecasting entities. And that was really part of the project
from the outset. We really wanted to engage with users and make
sure that the data that we were generating with the system
would be very relevant for public applications and for weather
forecasting applications. And the excitement that we saw during
that process has really driven us to push even harder to get
the technology into use with the public. And so that has been--
it's been part of our engagement since the beginning.
Chairman Lucas. Absolutely. Doctor?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. This is exactly why
we started the Wildfire Interdisciplinary Research Center at
San Jose State University. And part of the mission that we have
is to include the stakeholders, know their problems and what
they are dealing with in facing wildfires and try to address
those questions. For example, CalFire is also part of the
center, and we hear their problems, and we try to tailor the
models such that it can address those questions that they have.
They want to know where the fire is exactly and what are the
projections for the forecasts, and we are trying to address
those.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you. My time has expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici,
for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
witnesses for your expertise. I agree with the Chairman that
the work you do helps to save lives and property.
The climate crisis is certainly contributing to making
wildfires more dangerous and frequent, putting lives and
property and the environment at risk. And in my home State of
Oregon in the Pacific Northwest, we're expected to see longer-
term hotter and drier weather, making our forests more
vulnerable. Accurate fire weather and air quality forecasts are
extremely important to our region, and I know NOAA needs to be
able to continue this work and improve it, especially
coordinating with other Federal and State agencies to support
the rapid containment and suppression of wildfires.
We're using some remote cameras right now, increasingly
using those. We have about 93 remote cameras now spread over 64
locations with a target of 110 cameras by the end of the year.
In addition to digital fire outlooks, some of the programs have
various levels of artificial intelligence. For example,
Portland General Electric is now investing more than $20
million in its wildfire mitigation and resiliency plan. And
that includes high definition AI cameras to detect wildfires
across the region.
So I want to ask you, and I have a question for each of
you. Mr. Peverill, as AI advances, how can we leverage the
technology to better predict, locate, and battle fires? And how
can we streamline and improve interagency coordination?
Mr. Peverill. Well, the types of data that we're generating
with our system is really what we call nowcasting. So instead
of generating data that needs to be run through a lot of
forecasting models, which takes time, we're actually directly
sampling the conditions, which is very suited to use by
artificial intelligence algorithms that would feed into first
responders. It's really about delivering the data rapidly that
can be used immediately for first responder planning
activities. And I think directly collaborating between
companies like us that are generating data and agencies like
NOAA and CalFire that are used--that are involved with fire
control directly is really critical.
Ms. Bonamici. That's great. And, Dr. Tohidi, your work on
modeling and the whole physics of fires, really interesting
and, I think, important. How does your work intersect with what
NOAA is doing? NOAA does, you know, the weather modeling, and
then you're doing the sort of physics and modeling of how the
firewall progress. How does that intersect, and how do you work
together with NOAA on that?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. We use a lot of
data layers that NOAA generates to initialize our fire weather
models, and those are going to be used to set the initial
conditions. And the models basically solve the conservation
laws and do the forecasts. We also use a variety of different
data layers from other institutions such as U.S. Forest
Service, the fuel layers, fuel moisture, and, you know, some--
we have some aesthetic layers such as training typography that
we also use. And that's basically the relationship that we have
in the capacity of fire physics modeling.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. Thank you for your work.
And, Mr. Goeller, I want to ask about the timing of
warnings. And you mentioned in your testimony something about
what you call innovative and probabilistic approach that
results in earlier warnings than the old red flag system. So
after the wildfires caused some horrific damage in Oregon in
2020, in September of 2022, our State requested access to
Federal funds for wildfire response in preparation before the
growth of the number of wildfires expanded beyond what the
State could handle, you know, especially related to emergency
declaration. I think this is important because that opens up
Federal resources.
So many fires were already burning. Vital staff and
resources were stretched thin. And the State was concerned that
without the Federal resources, they would not have what they
needed to provide emergency power generation, communications,
evacuation support, et cetera. So based on your experience, how
can improvements in wildfire prediction enhance the mitigation
but also prepare States with more adequate response efforts?
And I'm really concerned about this timing because we did not
get the emergency declaration. It's typically done after the
fire happens, not always but after. So are there enough Federal
resources available so States could use disaster mitigation to
engage in suppression efforts before they happen? And how can
the Federal Government improve our efforts to pre-deploy
assets?
Mr. Goeller. There's a lot to unpack there. The--there's a
couple of things. One is in regards to timing issues is the
ability to obviously model the fire weather that is impactful
to your State, is looking at what conditions and parameters are
involved when we have the situations that we experience large
fire growth. In Oklahoma, the National Weather Service--the
duties that--the work that was done was collateral to their
normal duties, the bunch of dedicated individuals that put
their heads together and started looking at the parameters that
existed during those times that we had the high extreme fire
danger and what weather systems caused that, and then the
ability to look at that out three to seven days and even
farther. And then as we got closer and closer to the day that
was predicted, we would be able to really hone in where that
would impact the State and then pre-deploy resources to support
aggressive initial attack and keep the fire small.
And so looking at Oregon's situation, it would be where you
would need to have the Weather Service officials or whoever
that might be look at those parameters that caused those
conditions for large fire growth, to see those and predict them
into the future.
The declaration that you spoke of may be the Farm
Management Assistance Grants (FMAGs) through FEMA (Federal
Emergency Management Agency). There are two different things at
work here. FMAGs are--have to be applied for when the fire
emergency starts. It has to be when it's ongoing, and then that
is a separate process, then deploying resources to a particular
fire. So how can we best utilize our meager resources that we
have? And I've fought fire in Oregon many times. It would be to
know where those conditions are going to occur in advance and
then have those resources prepositioned such as we do in
Oklahoma and other States.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. And I yield back. Sorry
about that.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Garcia, for five minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to
thank the witnesses today, and thank you for this very
important topic.
I come from southern California, north L.A. County in a
district which--it's probably the largest wildland-to-human
interface in the Nation in terms of wildfire risks, and met
with the Department of Forestry personnel leadership in SoCal,
throughout California as well last week about the upcoming
season. In the fall, it's bad for us with the way the winds and
the environment changes in the fall through the winter. And
fire season is almost becoming a year-round thing. We just had
a fire yesterday. Actually it was put out, a 30-acre brush
fire. And I want to, first of all, thank the firefighters and
the folks at the Angeles National Forests, L.A. County for
containing that one very quickly.
And so it's been a good news story for California in terms
of the water, right, the rain that we've gotten. And I--we see
that as a good thing helping us mitigate the drought, but we
also know that that beast on the horizon is all of those fuels
drying out during the summertime, becoming effectively the BTUs
that are going to burn in the fall. And so this is a problem we
see coming. And so what you're doing is very important for us
to save lives.
And I do see these fire operations as literally combat
operations. You know, God bless our firefighters out there on
the frontlines, putting their lives on the line and saving
homes. I myself have been evacuated from my home a couple of
times in the last couple of decades because of these wildfires,
so we can't support them enough. And because these are combat
operations, you have to treat this almost like an entire kill
chain from the predictive behavior of your threat. In this
case, it's the fires. It's the brush. It's the prescribed burns
to mitigate in advance of, but especially the predictive
modeling that you're doing on the weather side that feeds
information to the warfighter, in this case, the firefighters
to make real-time decisions that ultimately save their lives
and the lives of our constituents.
So I can't thank you guys enough for doing what you're
doing and want you to know that anything we can do to support
you on the predictive modeling side, especially through NOAA
and other agencies, don't hesitate to let us know. And we're
happy to do that. We need all hands on deck right now.
Especially with AI and some of the other capabilities coming
online now, we probably aren't fully leveraging the
technologies that are available to us. And while we can't
replace the firefighter with a shovel and a hose, and, you
know, in our case, we've got bulldozers out there doing the
fire breaks and C-130's and DC-10's flying overhead literally
like a combat operation. We can't replace those folks. We need
more of those folks. We need to pay them better, treat them
better, but also give them these tools.
So to that end, I guess two questions. The first is with
the fast-moving development of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
and frankly even unmanned surface vehicles, ground-based
vehicles, is there something that we can be doing and not just
with these drone quadcopters that are five, you know, 10 pound
widgets, but bigger class, you know, type two, type three class
UAVs that are carrying sensors and infrared sensors, for
instance, that can help feed information. And again, not to
replace the firefighter on the ground, but to help be a force
multiplier to give the firefighter information like where
hotspots are, to give 24 hour persistence and surveillance
overhead when maybe a helicopter flying over mountainous
terrain is not the safest thing to do.
What are you guys seeing, I guess, from an art of the
possible, not necessarily state-of-the-art, but also
incorporating the state-of-the-art and the art of the possible
in terms of ConOps to support the firefighter in terms of these
drones? And I shouldn't call them drones because everyone
thinks these are smaller things, but there are larger, you
know, 10-, 15-foot wingspan UAVs, and then surface-based
tractors, et cetera, that are unmanned. But, Mr. Peverill, if
you can--and frankly, anyone--if anyone wants to chime in here.
From that technology perspective, what does the future of
firefighting look like?
Mr. Peverill. Well, one of the major barriers right now is
actually the regulatory side, and I think what needs to be done
is we need to take into consideration the relative level of
safety for these types of operations, whether it's operating
with something that's fairly benign like our Nano Drone here or
some of the larger aircraft that can carry out--carry larger
sensors or maybe even drop firefighting materials. You know,
the Federal Aviation Administration needs to put a framework in
place where they can consider the relative safety of what's
being attempted by the unmanned aircraft, you know, safety to
the public, and also take into consideration the public safety
benefits because in many cases, you're talking about a--
deploying a technology, which has some level of risk, but the
risk is far outweighed by the benefits to the public by what
you can get out of it.
Mr. Garcia. Would you say that the FAA is being too
conservative right now in the regulatory--regulation of these
things and almost adopting a zero risk mentality instead of
leaning forward a little bit?
Mr. Peverill. I think they are.
Mr. Garcia. OK.
Mr. Peverill. You know, the FAA is not currently tasked
with taking into consideration the overall risk benefit. You
know, they're tasked with maximizing the safety of aviation. So
any amount of risk is often considered unacceptable, which is
really not--you know, the appropriate way to carry about it if
you want to deploy these advanced technologies in a reasonable
amount of time.
Mr. Garcia. OK. And I'm out of time, but thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Stevens, for five minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to our
witnesses. You know, we're here talking about wildfire
detection and how to do it better, and I really appreciate the
emphasis on interagency. I'm in Michigan, and it's been quite
sobering over the last month because we haven't really
traditionally been one of the States that has been subject to
wildfire smoke. And this was wildfires that began in Canada in
late May and took a month and the smoke spread down to our
region and across many parts of the Midwest, leading to some
head-scratching realities for folks, upticks in asthma
incidences, hospitals being filled up.
And I was wondering if any of you could talk about some of
the interagency efforts vis-a-vis international relationships.
We've got one of the great longstanding partnerships with
Canada, an allied friendship with our neighbor to the north.
But the question that was being posed at home is, is there
anything that we can do to work with the Canadian Government to
better detect fires? And are there existing mechanisms within
our Federal Government, within NOAA or some of the other
agencies that are stepping up that allow them to work with
international governments? Go ahead, Mr. Goeller.
Mr. Goeller. Yes, thank you. The--there's a couple of
different things. Early in--within the last year we've had
three different calls with Alberta to talk about the use of AI
and some of the advances that Alberta has used in their
province to detect wildfires and to evaluate smoke conditions
and so on. And that is pretty exciting research in regards to
us also, especially where we are starting to employ cameras to
facilitate fire detection. So that is on the forefront and will
be continued to be investigated.
As far as international response, the United States has,
through the cooperative agreements with the U.S. Forest
Service, sent numerous resources to Canada beginning in early
May to help them with their fire situation. And that was
limited at the time to specifically Federal employees only,
which the States have numerous resources that could also assist
in those firefighting efforts. And just this week, we did
receive some news from the U.S. Forest Service and through the
Office of General Counsel that also State employees would be
able to be deployed to Canada to assist them with their
firefighting efforts. So opening up the door to allow more
resources to go there to help them with their situation is
beneficial also to help limiting the smoke that impacts the
United States.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and particularly as we talk about
standards, and we want to make sure that we're all speaking as
best as possible from the same page of standards. And some of
the research has shown that, since the beginning of this
century, a million-plus acres of forests have burned every
year. I think 2015 was the first year that we hit 10 million
acres of forest fire. And just wondering, you know, Dr. Tohidi,
you know, is there anything that we could better do as we look
to detect, but as we also talk about prevention to bring into
this conversation? And I know we're moving into this quarter
21st century mark here, as we recognize, right, the planet is
getting warmer, and we want to responsibly lead and put into
place sustainability practices.
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. There are a couple
of things in my view that we can do. From the fire and weather
modeling perspective, I think if we can improve the modeling
such that it can represent a better--we can characterize the
risk better and represent the risk in our communities better,
that can be really helpful for the stakeholders to optimize the
preparedness and mitigating actions that they are taking. Also,
we need to invest in home hardening and prepare our communities
for different scenarios that can happen. For them, there are
some guidelines available that can--that communities can
follow. But we also need social sciences to really educate our
communities about these guidelines and also consider the
vulnerabilities. You know, not all people in those communities
are going to afford those guidelines and do these home-
hardening practices.
So in my view, it becomes a game of optimization. And the
best way to do it is to have a better characterization of the
risk throughout the landscape and figure out where we need to
do forest management, where we need to spend the money on
community management and home hardening.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from New York, Ms.
Tenney, for five minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member,
for this hearing.
And I represent New York's 24th Congressional District, so
we're grateful for the Small Business Innovation Research
program and also for the Mesonet program. I do have a question.
I'd just like to jump right in. And I wanted to ask--and Ms.
Stevens asked the question. We had obviously a lot of poor air
quality from Canada coming in from the forest fires that we had
there throughout our whole of upstate New York, which I
represent. And I just had a question for you, Mr. Goeller
first. Is there a way that we can detect or predict where
forest fires will be worse in spreading in a--maybe a region
that has a lot of extra underbrush or thatch? Is that something
that we could use this technology to say this should be a
warning area?
You know, I have friends that are forest rangers, a number
of them actually, who said you know, the only reason the
Adirondacks doesn't go up in flames is because you're so--it's
so humid because of the failure of the State of New York to
really manage it properly. And I'm not talking about thinning.
I'm talking about the thatch underneath and the underbrush. Is
that something we could identify or detect in using the--this
program?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, there's--the fire environment is made up
of three different--largely three different components, each
with multiple facets underneath them, but it basically fuels
weather topography. The weather portion of this we've discussed
at great length, and the fuels is something that we need to
look at not only in New York, but across the country. If you
start to look at the forests across the United States, both
either forests and rangeland both, if you start to evaluate
where the fuel buildup is, and, as we have, it was mentioned
earlier about lacking forest management. Anywhere that we don't
practice active management, the fuels will continue to build.
It's----
Ms. Tenney. So would you say that this lack of management--
and I know there's a leave it untouched by mankind but, you
know, obviously the Adirondacks are a beautiful place where,
you know----
Mr. Goeller. Absolutely.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. We hosted the Olympics. We have a
lot of people that are engaged in winter sports up there,
whether it's hiking and snowshoeing and all kinds of stuff.
Would it be a good idea to invest in management of those
forests using--you know, managing the thatch, managing the
underbrush, and minimizing the risk of forest fire?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, ma'am, it would be.
Ms. Tenney. And is that something that you have an
experience that New York is doing or not doing if you----
Mr. Goeller. I do not have with New York. I can attest from
personal experiences what we've just recently done in Oklahoma
using hazard mitigation work to remove hazardous fuels in and
amongst communities. Especially we recently completed a project
in Washington County north of Tulsa, Oklahoma. Less than a
month later after we removed the hazardous fuels, we had a
wildfire impact the area, and when the fire made it to the area
that was treated, the fire basically--I won't say went out, but
it was such of a low impact that local firefighters were easily
able to stop any spot fires that crossed the lines. And then
also we saved numerous homes and prevented loss of life and
property in that area where we did the hazard mitigation work.
That's easily transferable. And a lot of States are
starting to do the hazard mitigation work because it is
important. We--it's much cheaper to do the mitigation work than
it is to spend millions of dollars fighting the fires as they
occur.
Ms. Tenney. Well, thank you. That's a great answer.
Mr. Peverill, Dr.--is it Dr. Peverill? Mr. Peverill, OK.
Thanks for being selected by the Air Force for the Defense
Innovation Unit prototype development. That's a great
achievement. Just wanted to speak a little bit on the role of
the SBIR and what--with WeatherHive. So in my district, our big
concern is snow. We have a lot of lake effect snow coming off
Lake Erie and also Lake Ontario. Everyone remembers, I'm sure,
that we had 7 feet of snow alone in Orchard Park, which forced
the Buffalo Bills to play in Detroit it was so bad. But we're
just--I'm just questioning what kind of--what can we do is--
with that technology, would the WeatherHive be able to help us
know what we're getting in--would that be effective in helping
us mitigate and then solve that issue when it actually comes
into play?
Mr. Peverill. It could certainly help improve predictions.
One of the things that's unique about WeatherHive is that we're
able to really more accurately sample the boundary layer, which
is the part of the atmosphere that's, you know, closest to the
earth. And a lot of those type of effects that you're talking
about, a lot of those mechanisms happen in this boundary layer
region. And it's the least monitored area of the atmosphere.
You know, the only data we have on that area is really mostly
from ground sensors, which are very low and pretty spread out.
Ms. Tenney. So are we doing that now? Are we able to do
that?
Mr. Peverill. We can do it with ground sensors. You know,
people have towers. There's sensors on----
Ms. Tenney. Is that technology we can use in our region in
upstate New York?
Mr. Peverill. Certainly. Yes. The WeatherHive system is
designed to spread sensors all over that boundary layer
atmosphere, and you can sense atmospheric gradients, you know,
temperature, humidity, and pressure, and that can be used to
feed into new types of forecasting models that can really
more--much more accurately track and predict what's going to
happen in those types of areas.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you so much. I think I'm out of time. I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina,
Mrs. Foushee, for five minutes.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
Committee hearing today. And thank you to our witnesses for
your testimony and for appearing before us this morning.
I am proud that my district, North Carolina's 4th, includes
the U.S. Forest Service Southern Research Station. It is an
RTP- (Research Triangle Park-) based Federal research center,
whose research on Federal wildfire and suppression expenditures
was cited in last year's OMB (Office of Management and Budget)
climate risk exposure assessment.
Today, I would like to mention a little bit about their
research. But first, I would like to thank all wildland fire
first responders who make such tremendous sacrifice and
commitment on the frontlines of what we are discussing today.
My husband is a retired firefighter, having served for 31
years, so I know firsthand the kind of dedication that this
takes, and we commend them for their service.
Mr. Goeller, Forest Service researchers in my district
looked at available data from the U.S. Forest Service and the
Department of Interior on wildfire area burned and Federal
suppression expenditures to project and calculate the effect of
climate on Federal lands burned and subsequent Federal
expenditures in the mid- and latter half of this century. Their
findings indicate that if this troubling trend continues,
Federal spending on wildfire--on Federal lands is expected to
rise by double or triple by the mid- to late century. To put
this into context, Federal spending for the Forest Service and
Department of the Interior would rise from a historical median
of $2 billion per year currently to $5.7 billion per year by
the end of this century.
As the cost of wildland fire suppression continues to
increase faster than inflation, how can the Federal Government
better coordinate its efforts to protect Federal lands? I
understand from reading your testimony that National
Association of State Foresters helps to partner with Federal
land management agencies through cooperative agreements and
good neighbor authority. Can you please elaborate on this
collaboration?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, ma'am. We--one of the things that is
critically important, as you mentioned, is the management of
those Federal lands and the expenditures that occur as a result
of wildfires is increasing. One of the things--if you look at
the statistics for timber harvests on national forest lands
over the--since 1940, the amount of timber harvested has
decreased dramatically, beginning in the late 1980's. And
there's well-published data that will support that in numerous
publications that show what timber has been harvested. Again,
as the management and the harvest decline in areas, the fuel
continues to build. It's--that's just nature happening. And the
ability for us to remove those products for forest products is
one way to reduce the amount of fuel loading, it'll reduce the
size of--the potential size of the fire.
For the firefighters working on the frontlines, when we are
able to utilize an area that's been treated either through
forest management through timber harvest, hazard mitigation
work, whatever it is, it's much easier for us to construct
control lines. The fire is easier to control. And, typically,
we have to go back to an area that--if you look at fire control
and start thinking about, you know, why are we having trouble
and why--where can we best stop a fire, it's where we have a
favorable change in fuels, weather, topography.
So talking specifically about fuel, the more that we can
utilize the material out of the forested areas for products
and--that reduces the fuel loading, it reduces the fire
intensity, it allows us to more easily construct control lines
and control the fires in those areas. Not only that, but we're
locking up that material into--instead of releasing the carbon
from the forest fires back into the atmosphere, we're locking
that up into products that we use for our daily lives. And so
there's the win-win there in regards to forest management and
how that impacts not only our daily lives and the products that
we use, but also for fire intensity and fire control and the
expenditures on that.
So I would encourage the use of forest management practices
and forest, you know, timber harvesting to help as part of that
puzzle to reduce the amount of expenditures for wildland fire.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. And that's my time, Mr. Chair. I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Collins, for five minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As someone from Georgia, I don't think we really experience
wildfires. But I want to reflect on something that was
personal, and that was the fact that in 2017 in November, we
had a fire up in Gatlinburg, Tennessee. And fortunate and
unfortunate, my wife and I had a home up there that we had sold
earlier in that spring that was one of the homes that was
consumed in that fire and burned.
And I don't really know who I want to direct my question
to, and it may be more personal, Mr. Chairman, than anything,
but I'm just trying to learn where we had the failure at in
that fire because we had people that lost their lives. And it
spread so fast. So was there--is there a communications gap
that we were missing that we've learned from that we've
improved on? And the severity of that fire, is there something
that, I don't know, NOAA or someone could have been doing to
help locals understand just how bad that fire was and how quick
it spread?
Mr. Goeller. I'd be glad to answer that question. I was--
happened to be in Gatlinburg 2 weeks before the fire occurred
and then also a couple of weeks afterwards. And we were there
as a part of a National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG) Risk
Management Committee meeting, a meeting with the Great Smoky
Mountain National Park, and also the Gatlinburg Fire Department
and Pigeon Forge and a number of others to look at the
potential for loss there in that area. Being that it's a resort
community and many of those cabins and houses that were up in
that fire area are traditionally rented and a lot of
transitional folks going through there, the ability for them to
understand what the potential was, was very low because of just
numerous factors.
The situation there in the Smokies, traditionally with
their humidity, the rainfall, the climatological conditions
that exist don't really contribute to a fire of that magnitude.
But however, in November 2016 when the fire occurred, they were
experiencing a long-term drought. Therefore, there in the Smoky
Mountains, the fuels and terrain were just ripe for the loss
that occurred from that incident, along with the fact that the
evacuation information, the routes in and out, mostly single
access, one way in, one way out that limited the evacuation
possibilities for the folks that perished in that fire, that
those were lessons learned that have been carried on in other
places now because of that tragedy.
The things that we can do now and the things that actually
existed then were more to alert the public as to what the
potential is in the areas that they either visit or live. The
National Fire Protection Association has a site called Firewise
USA that promotes the things that they can do personally, that
individuals can do personally around their homes for defensible
space, to protect their homes from wildfire approaching. The
National Cohesive Wildfire Strategy is employed across the
country in order to protect communities and make them more
resilient.
When we talk specifically about that fire and others that
have occurred, it goes back to evacuation information, warning
the public as to what they have. Gatlinburg at the time had a
siren that was to be sounded when they needed to leave and to
alert the public that there was an issue. And when that fire
occurred and electricity went out, the siren died. And so, you
know, there were multiple failures there that now, I'm sure,
have been addressed that would allow the public to be more
alerted and warned. We've taken those lessons back home to be
able--we have an area that's very similar in southeast Oklahoma
that we're--we've purchased evacuation signage and we're
working with cabin owners to alert them what the possibility it
is for those that come from the Dallas-Fort Worth area that
have no idea what wildfire means to them in an area like that
that is really intended in their minds just for recreation, but
they don't realize the risk that they're putting themselves in.
So State forestry agencies across the country are well
aware of the situation, and we're doing a lot to alert not only
the public, but those that come in for recreational
opportunities, what the dangers are for wildfire. And we--and
Georgia is a great supporter of fire across the United States.
Georgia Forestry Commission, Tim Lowrimore is your State
forester, he's great guy, and they do a lot of work with
wildfire in Georgia and also support Florida and all the
southern States. So thank you for them, and anything you can do
to support them would be greatly appreciated.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member from
California, Ms. Lofgren, for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And
thanks to all of you for your excellent testimony, which I've
read.
Now, Dr. Tohidi, in your testimony, you highlight some of
the concerning gaps in our knowledge about the behavior of
wildfire at the wildland urban interface. Specifically, you
mentioned that we have a poor understanding of the differences
between released energy from structural burns versus vegetation
clusters and that none of the current fuel layer inputs for
operational models consider structures and urban developments
as flammable. Can you elaborate on the knowledge gaps, what
they mean about the--our ability to accurately model fires as
it transitions from wildland to urban areas? And if you're able
to address this--certainly not--we don't have wildfires in
every part of the United States, but we have smoke in every
part of the United States. And what kind of mix of fuel leads
to toxic reactions to that smoke?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. To address the
first part of your question on what are the knowledge gaps, as
I stated in my written testimony, there are significant
knowledge gaps in knowing how much energy is being released
when you have a structure that is on fire and kind of scaling
it up to the different layouts of the structures, different
types of materials that, you know, structures that are--that we
have in our communities and try to map that into the current
fuel layers. So that's been challenging, and I think it needs
more work.
There are some works being done in different institutions.
I think Berkeley Fire Lab is working on it and also Colorado
State University. They are building risk platforms that can
estimate the risk of wildfires going through the WUI areas. But
we still need to know a lot about the specificity of the
structures and how it translates to heat transfer processes and
map it accordingly.
To address the second part of your question in terms of how
we can improve this, as I mentioned, a lot of the fire models,
especially the operational ones that we use, are designed for
the objective of predicting the fire behavior in the remote
areas. So we have these large pixel sized fuel layers of 30
meters by 30 meters. When it comes to wildland urban interface
areas, we need to reduce it down to meters of scale, you know,
the--or sometimes even smaller to have a really better
understanding of the fire behavior in those areas. So if we can
just work on these low-hanging fruits and improve the quality,
resolution, and frequency of the data that currently goes to
our operational models, we can improve our predictions and
characterization of the risk by a lot.
In terms of the smoke and which type of vegetation releases
the--more toxins, it really depends on, first, the type of the
vegetation and also the conditions of the fuel, the fuel
moisture content that that vegetation has, how well it is being
burned, what is the combustion efficiency of that? So it's
different depending on the properties of the fuel and weather.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me just get one more quick question for
anybody who has an answer. The Wildlife Fire Risk Reduction Act
is being reintroduced, and it asks the Federal Government to
play a coordinating role. I was at a very interesting
discussion at NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) Ames several months ago with Federal agencies,
local agencies, academic, including San Jose State, as well as
private sector, and one of the issues that they identified was
that we don't really have a way to distribute even the data
that we have, put aside the data that we're missing. Do you
have thoughts on how we might better coordinate the
distribution and the standards for which the data is
distributed? Any of you?
Mr. Peverill. Sure, I think Federal collaboration on
development of new standards for--and data platforms for the
distribution of this data is very important. A lot of that's
happening at the State level right now. I think that's the
place where NOAA could do very well to build some new platforms
and data standards around that type of information because
there's really not a Federal standard for that currently.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The Ranking Member's time has expired
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Obernolte, for five minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
would like to say a special thank you to you for conducting
this hearing on a topic that is really critically important to
me and the people that I represent. I represent a very rural
district in California. As I'm sure everyone is aware,
California has experienced some of the worst wildfire seasons
in the entire history of our State just in the last couple of
years. And unfortunately, that situation is predicted to get
worse, not better, as climate change exacerbates the decreasing
density of the fuel sources.
I have had the unfortunate experience of being evacuated
out of my community several times due to wildfire risk in the
times that I've lived there. Last year, in fact, we got an
aerial--an air show that we got to watch, you know, as--we had
aerial assets put out a fire that came within about a mile of
my community before it was finally stopped, so this is a really
critically important topic for me.
Mr. Goeller, thank you for the work that you're doing in
Oklahoma. I was very interested in the parts of your testimony
that concerned using technology to leverage the existing
firefighting assets that we have. You were talking about its
applicability to forecasting the severity of wildfires and the
potential for them.
But I'm--would like to talk about whether or not we've
considered the use of technology to more quickly detect forest
fires because, you know, we have tremendous capability now,
aerial assets that we can dispatch very quickly to get to
nascent fires. But if we detect them early and we have a flame
front that's like an acre, we can use those assets to quickly
put those fires out. If we don't detect them and we don't
dispatch them until the flame front is tens of acres or
hundreds of acres, then we can't do it with just aerial assets.
We have to coordinate with ground-based assets. And that allows
the time--the fire time to spread and get out of control.
So I'm very interested in the possibility of using these
new low-Earth orbit satellites that have the resolution to
detect with thermal sensors a flame front of less than an acre
and maybe pairing that with artificial intelligence to be able
to distinguish between a large campfire and--you know, and
lightning hitting a tree. Is that something that you've
considered, and do you think that that's a worthwhile effort?
Mr. Goeller. Absolutely. And we do utilize the GOES 16, 17
satellites that the National Weather Service employs to do
wildland fire detection now statewide. The--when we first
started doing this in 2016, the satellite resolution, our
detection capabilities was typically 2-mile accuracy, and now
it's down to oftentimes within a 1/4 mile and even closer, and
sometimes even able to detect a car-sized fire. So the use of
those satellites and AI--with AI would be absolutely awesome to
help you with detecting those fires while they are small and
then the aggressive initial attack to keep them small when
they're able to do something with them is critical.
So yes, if you can--the one thing with the system that
we're currently employing in Oklahoma and using the National
Weather Service, that is available in a number of other States.
Not every State is using that, as we are, our offices, forecast
offices, Oklahoma, Texas, and now Kansas. Whenever they do
detect a fire on the high to extreme days, they send us a text
that shows us the location, shows us the nearest fire weather
conditions from the Oklahoma Mesonet, which is a system of
remote weather stations across the State. It gives us a map of
where the fire is located and then also tells us how it was
detected and some other basic information on that particular
fire. We're able to get that information to the local
responders, the emergency management, the fire departments,
oftentimes before it's reported by the public to the 911
dispatch centers.
Not only that, but the forecasting that they're doing
allows us to pre-position those resources because they base
that on a probabilistic system as opposed to deterministic. And
so as we see those systems developing, our forecasters, in
conjunction with this Southern Great Plains Wildfire Outbreak
Group, which would be transferable to your State as well, they
show us within a certain percent, this is where the large fire
occurrence can--will happen, 30 percent, 50 percent, and they
dial that in to the point that we can have those resources pre-
positioned for those quick initial attack. We've seen a
reduction in those large fires in those areas because of that
focused effort that we've had. So yes, it's--would be easy, I
believe, to do that with California as well.
Mr. Obernolte. Right. Well, I think that, you know, a lot
of the assets you're talking about are geostationary assets.
Mr. Goeller. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. With low-Earth orbit, we have the potential
of having much higher resolutions. And even with the drone
technology that I know we've been testifying about, you know,
I'm very encouraged about the possibility of having drone
swarms, not sampling weather, but also detecting fires. I see
I'm out of time. Let's continue to work on this issue. Thank
you very much for your testimony. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Frost, for five
minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The recent Canadian wildfires are an example of the growing
destruction of the climate crisis, a threat that transcends
borders, can't build a wall around it. And it's not just that.
These fires show how, when it comes down to climate change,
we're all--we're not all on the same boat. Seniors, folks who
have respiratory issues are part of the most vulnerable
community when we talk about this. That even includes me as
someone--like millions of Americans, I'm asthmatic, and I've
been my entire life.
People with breathing problems or people who may need help
evacuating also need the earliest possible notice. Mr. Goeller,
can you speak to the role NOAA plays in getting critical
information about wildfires to the public and first responders?
Mr. Goeller. Their mission with protecting lives and
property in the cooperative agreement--well, not cooperative
agreement--cooperation that we enjoy with them is what allows
us to be able to get the information to the public in a very
timely and fast manner. And so to be able to foster those
relationships, it'd be--it's imperative that the local forestry
agencies, Florida Forest Service, for example, to be able to
get with the various National Weather Service forecast offices,
get those relationships built, and also work on that warning
criteria. The ability to transfer to the public the information
regarding where fires exist or could exist is critical.
Mr. Frost. Can you elaborate a little bit on the State--the
current State and effectiveness of the fire hazard
communication system?
Mr. Goeller. The--it varies across the country. And I guess
I really can't speak a whole lot to the way Florida works right
now in regards to communicating the hazards to the public. But
in other areas of the country, is it going to vary State by
State and also how the State forestry agency, the local
emergency State emergency management, local emergency managers,
the relationship that they have with one another in
communicating to the public, what the hazards are, either
current or forecast. So, again, it's going to be incumbent on
the agencies to work together to improve that process.
Mr. Frost. Yes, just a few weeks ago here in D.C. when the
smoke was incredibly thick, you know, I had my staff work from
home, but not many people have that choice. And folks had to,
you know, commute through the toxic yellow haze. Another group
of important workers who face such health threats are first
responders and firefighters. Mr. Goeller, can you speak to the
challenges firefighters face in their career and how we in
Congress can better support their efforts on protecting others,
especially when it comes down to wildfires?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, we in--the National Wildfire Coordinating
Group has a Smoke Committee that has been established and has
been for a number of years, and the Smoke Committee looks at
the various aspects of the wildland fire smoke. Obviously, it's
a lot different for vegetative material and the smoke produced
and especially now that we have to also address the smoke
issues related to the wildland urban interface when homes burn
cars and so on. It's a much different picture than we used to
have back in the early days of firefighting here in the United
States.
And so the Smoke Committee does a lot of work in regards to
not only predicting the smoke impacts to communities, the
notification of communities when a large fire exists.
Typically, it's those that are what we used to call campaign
fires, those that lasted for weeks, weeks on end, and how those
would impact various communities across the--not only the
State--the local area, but also the State as well.
The--we have now air resource advisors that are put in
place and smoke monitoring equipment to be able to provide the
public with the most accurate information possible in regards
to particulate matter and what would impact their lives on a
day-to-day basis and when to issue those warnings when they
need to stay inside and so on.
Mr. Frost. Thank you.
Dr. Tohidi, better forecasting means faster evacuations.
I'm curious how we can more quickly deploy new and effective
promising modeling.
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. In my view, the
fastest way is to really build on what we currently have. We
have models that are operational, and they are working with
some level of uncertainty. But if we can reduce the uncertainty
in the predictions of these current models, then we'll probably
have a better understanding of the risk and also do a better
job on forecasting.
So the highest priority from the modeling standpoint would
be to improve the resolution quality and frequency of the data
layers that goes into these models and improve them. And then
if we can invest on the observational campaigns, the
experimental campaigns to better observe these processes, free
from contamination from suppression activities, then we can
have a better understanding of the physics, and then we can
implement them in the models.
Mr. Frost. Yes, thank you all for your lifesaving work. I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Weber, for five minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Goeller, I guess these are for you. I came in late. Is
it Geller or Goeller?
Mr. Goeller. Goeller.
Mr. Weber. OK. Forgive me if some of this is redundant. I
was in another markup.
Regarding Mesonet, we know it's in Oklahoma. I think you
said in your testimony it's in other States. How many other
States?
Mr. Goeller. I'm not exactly sure how many other States
employ a system like that.
Mr. Weber. OK. And how long has Mesonet been in existence?
Mr. Goeller. I'm going to say since the late 1990's maybe
or early 1990's. I'm not exactly sure, but 20 years.
Mr. Weber. OK. And there's--according to what I read,
there's 100 weather--it uses basically 100 weather--but it's
not in Texas, right?
Mr. Goeller. No, I don't----
Mr. Weber. Nothing you know about like that in Texas?
Mr. Goeller. I don't believe so.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Chairman Lucas. It is kind of amazing, actually.
Mr. Weber. Well, I know because things are bigger and
better in Texas. I can't believe that.
But--so you say it's been there about 20 years. Are they--
are those 100 weather stations, are they--do you know how
they're positioned? Are they in concentric overlapping zones or
those zones where they--those weather stations are--just
happened to be there already?
Mr. Goeller. They were deployed across State. Every county
in the State has at least one or two.
Mr. Weber. OK.
Mr. Goeller. They're internet-accessible 24 hours a day.
They update every five minutes. And that gives us the ability
for--as fire managers--you know, prediction of fire weather is
critically important----
Mr. Weber. Sure.
Mr. Goeller [continuing]. To know what's coming, and the
Mesonet stations give us the ability to look during a fire
event to see what the--how the weather is changing across the
State and when it will impact the actual fire location. So we
transition from, say--depending on the National Weather Service
to tell us--they still do, don't get me wrong. And there's
still a critical piece of that puzzle to give us the advanced
warning of weather systems, frontal passages, and so on. But it
also--the--just the general--the guy out in the field working
on the fire can pull up his phone, iPad, and look at those
Mesonet stations and see how the relative humidity, the wind
speeds, the temperature will be changing throughout the course
of the day and see when that'll impact their fire.
Mr. Weber. I got you. And maybe you may or may not know the
answer to this. How many counties in Oklahoma--and maybe that's
a Chairman question--number of counties in Oklahoma?
Mr. Goeller. Seventy-seven.
Mr. Weber. Seventy-seven? Well, there's 254 counties in
Texas, you know, I think--we said Texas is bigger. I don't know
if we could get one--all 254 counties----
Mr. Goeller. I hear that a lot.
Chairman Lucas. A century ago, we picked up three counties
from Texas in a Supreme Court ruling, so just a side note.
Mr. Weber. Yes.
Mr. Goeller. Yes.
Mr. Weber. Well, don't get any more ideas because those
days are over.
But the reason--is NOAA very proactive in doing this, in
trying to get other States and more counties involved or do you
know?
Mr. Goeller. Well, NOAA is--for the Mesonet, it's Oklahoma
State University, University of Oklahoma, and Oklahoma
Climatological Survey. Those are the three entities that
actually began the Mesonet. It was a collaborative effort
between those. And so as far as NOAA in Texas, I could not
address that.
Mr. Weber. OK. Just curious. And is there any kind of cost
estimate involved as to what the system costs or what it does
cost?
Mr. Goeller. I don't know the answer to that.
Chairman Lucas. It's a bargain.
Mr. Weber. Oh, it's a bargain, absolutely.
Mr. Goeller. It is a bargain.
Mr. Weber. And if you--and I see where you actually had the
background of going to work for the--was it the U.S. Forest and
Wildlife in 1980?
Mr. Goeller. Um-hum.
Mr. Weber. So you were 10 years old when you started,
right?
Mr. Goeller. That's correct.
Mr. Weber. So I guess you're--you've watched it for a long
time. All that said, you've been paying attention a long time.
How would you rate the success rating of this system? Is it
good, bad, better, the best thing out there since sliced bread?
Give us your thoughts.
Mr. Goeller. The Mesonet system?
Mr. Weber. Um-hum.
Mr. Goeller. It is a great tool, fantastic tool. And as we
bring resources into Oklahoma to help us during some of our
fire emergencies and other fire behavior folks and other
firefighters, they are amazed that we have this available to
us, and they wish that they had it in their State as well.
Mr. Weber. Anything better in the country?
Mr. Goeller. Not that I've seen.
Mr. Weber. Not--you haven't seen anything better.
False alarms, let's move over to false alarms. One of the
questions was how false alarms or even bad information--how do
false alarms or bad information impact the allocation of
firefighting resources and general response? Have you--have
we--has that system experienced false alarms? Can you give us
examples? And how do you respond to those?
Mr. Goeller. You know, typically, we do have false alarms,
yes, but it's not as many as you might think. And it really has
not caused us a tremendous amount of impact that hurts our
system or causes us to miss one fire because of a false report
somewhere else.
Mr. Weber. OK. Mr. Chairman, I'm going to yield back 10
seconds.
Chairman Lucas. I would simply note to my colleague from
Texas that Lynda Lucas runs the farm. She is the herdsman, and
I never call home without checking Mesonet first to see what
her attitude is going to be.
The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair now recognizes
the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms. Caraveo, for five minutes.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, and Ranking Member
Lofgren as well. And I appreciate our witnesses today taking
time to discuss fire weather prediction capabilities, a very
important issue in Colorado where we have experienced some of
our largest wildfires in State history in the last five years.
I have to start off by sharing that I recently visited NIST
(National Institute of Standards and Technology) at their
Boulder campus, and I had a wonderful time learning about some
of the projects that they have been working on, including their
work on leveraging VR (virtual reality) tech to help first
responders such as firefighters digitally map out areas
affected by fire. These types of technological advancements
help firefighters suppress wildfires and in turn save lives and
properties. But it also helps limit the health impacts on
firefighters by limiting their exposure and giving them more
information as they navigate fire-affected areas.
Mr. Goeller, in your testimony, you touch on the State Fire
Assistance and Volunteer Assistance Programs. Based on your
experience, can you discuss some of the health impacts that
firefighters specifically face and how those impacts could be
mitigated?
Mr. Goeller. Some of the health impacts that we face is the
environmental impacts from not only the fire itself, but also
working in the extreme conditions that we must fight fire in.
During a drought, during summer months when we have high
temperatures, the problems that are--usually that we face are
heat stress type--heat-related injuries, those that we have to
try to mitigate through messaging to our firefighters on
hydration and taking care of themselves, cooling, and so on.
There's a lot of work done by the NWCG Risk Management
Committee and the National Interagency Fire Center and the Fire
Lab in Missoula, Montana, that has--that looks at the stress on
firefighters and what we can do to reduce that as they work
during those hot months. But also in many areas of the country,
especially in the South when we fight fire during the winter
months, we have to work in extreme cold as well. And some of
our heavy equipment operators that have to operate a piece of
equipment during very cold temperatures, especially the open
cab, the older dozers, it's extremely hard on them. Those are
the environmental impacts of smoke.
Again, the NWCG Smoke Committee has done a lot of research
on the impacts to the lung functions. The one thing that is
somewhat of an issue for us is the fact that we don't have a
lot of information regarding firefighter mortality after they
retire on what happened. You know, there's a lot of information
there that we're not party to that we don't have accessible to
us, and so to understand the long-term impacts of smoke
exposure to wildland firefighters has been a little bit
difficult to ascertain. We know what the immediate impacts are
and how to mitigate those, but as far as long term, that
research is going to be--is ongoing and--to try to figure out
what that would be, so--thank you.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, I'm certainly glad that that research is
ongoing. We need to know the health effects on the men and
women that save property and lives, especially in places like
Colorado.
Switching gears, I would like to discuss fired hazard
communications. Many of us have focused on that today. So this
question may also be for you, Mr. Goeller. Like many of my
colleagues, I believe that it is critical to have effective
communication systems to ensure first responders and residents
can act quickly. And like many families in my district, I come
from a bilingual household, and many of my constituents are in
households that really prefer one language over English to be
frank. Do you know of any current State--the current State and
effectiveness of multilingual hazard communications for
families like those?
Mr. Goeller. I can't speak to the effectiveness. I do know
that when we're in an area that are public information officers
and we're working in an area that has various languages that
are spoken there, that we do employ multiple language public
information releases to try to impact--or try to inform the
public. You know, when we're in an area like Arizona and
Spanish is the primary language, we do a lot of media releases
and so on in Spanish. In Oklahoma, I've done probably more
interviews with Telemundo and some of the other Spanish-
speaking media outlets than sometimes I do with the traditional
media outlets in Oklahoma. And so it does--we do pay attention
to that fact and try to get that information out as we can,
depending on what areas of the country that we're working.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, I certainly appreciate all of your work.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Miller, for five minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
First, I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
letter from the Competitive Carriers Association regarding the
importance of wireless service and wildfire detection and
mitigation.
Chairman Lucas. Seeing no objection, so ordered.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. Thank you very much, and thank you
to our witnesses for being here today. It's great to have you.
Question for Mr. Goeller. I'm hearing more and more of this
term fire year instead of fire season, recognizing that we are
starting to see fires at unusual times and unusual places. The
current wildfire smoke issues we have seen all the way in Ohio
from fires in eastern Canada are a prime example of just that.
We've never seen that before. Can you talk about the prevalence
and nature of wildfire in different parts of our country? Is
wildfire the same in the East as it is in the West? Are we
seeing more fire? And why is that?
Mr. Goeller. The difference--the fire year term has come
about because we do actually fight fire across the country for
the entire year. The southern United States, for example, our
fire season is from January first through December 31st, but we
break that into two distinct seasons, the dormant season and
the growing season. Other parts of the country where snowfall
and snowpack limits firefighting during the winter months, it's
a little different. But as you look at the United States and
how fire transitions across the country during the course of
the year, the fire season, if you wanted to call it that, it
moves around. As--earlier, one of the Representatives from
California mentioned October, November that in southern
California is when the change in the seasons there affects the
fire growth, the winds change, and so on. So we are very aware
and have been for a number of years on how fires move across
the country and where those impacts will be.
The one issue that we face sometimes is when we start to
see weather impacts, drought in various parts of the country
and some--when the drought impacts two or more areas at once,
it starts to become an issue as far as resource deployment. So
those are things that we constantly are watching and seeing how
we can do that. Fire is different in various parts of the
country, difference in fuels, difference in what burns.
Southern United States, especially along the coastal areas, we
look--palmetto, gallberry, things like that, that are waxy and
have--they're volatile fuels Florida, Georgia, South Carolina
going up across the coastal areas. But as you move inland, we
start to transition into pine fuels, hardwoods, and so on.
And so the fire managers in the various States are well
aware of what their primary fuels are, when their fires are
most active, and what they need to do in terms of resource
deployment and bringing in--when they need to bring in resource
to supplement their State agencies or the Federal agencies to
be aware of and be prepared for any fire response. The Federal
agencies, they call it the fire severity. They bring in
severity resources to pre-position to be ready. States, we use
our forest fire compacts to do that. And so as one area of the
country is burning and the other is not, then we support each
other.
And so, again, it all is based on fuels, fuel conditions,
the management of the forested areas, the range lands. It's all
a very complex issue that we constantly are trying to maintain
our situational awareness of where those issues will occur.
Mr. Miller. Thank you for that detailed answer. It's much
appreciated.
Mr. Peverill, are there obstacles to the widespread
implementation and use of drone technologies? How might the
government facilitate the use of these technologies? Are there
regulatory hurdles that you could see happening because of it?
Mr. Peverill. Absolutely. You know, the regulatory
framework currently doesn't allow advanced operations of drones
like we were talking with our system. You know, there's no path
in place for us to have widespread use of a system like
WeatherHive nationally. Those have been in development for
years now at the FAA, but they have yet to produce a real
framework to do that. And as I mentioned before, I mean, it's
really important for them to put in place a system that
considers both the risk of a given operation when planning the
method by which you allow permission and also consider the
public safety benefits, which they don't currently do. You
know, this is a system that has significant public safety
benefits and minimal, if any, safety implications once
implemented properly.
Mr. Miller. Thank you for that. I have a couple more
questions, but I'm going to submit them for the record.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you very much.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Pennsylvania, Ms.
Lee, for five minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panel of witnesses today for your time and your expertise on
this subject matter.
Back home in western Pennsylvania, we don't experience
wildfires, but that doesn't spare our communities from the
significant and far-reaching effects that these disasters have.
Large amounts of smoke, pollutants, and particulate matter are
released into the air, having severely detrimental effects on
air quality. This poses health risks to those throughout my
district, which is already known to have some of the worst air
quality in the Nation. Wildfire smoke can exacerbate
respiratory illnesses and contributes to smog, leading to
various health problems for vulnerable populations such as
children, the elderly, and individuals with pre-existing
respiratory conditions such as asthma, bronchitis, or COPD
(chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) of course.
The raging wildfires in Canada are still burning and have
been for weeks. The smoke from these fires have led to several
code red air quality alerts, which indicates unhealthy levels
of pollution across the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Not too
long ago, many of us woke up to the scenes of hazy orange skies
akin to those in sci-fi movies. Residents were advised to
frequently check their local air quality through resources such
as airnow.gov, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Allegheny County Health Department. The
work that agencies and governments at all levels do to protect
our communities are invaluable, and every tool at our disposal
must be utilized to support them.
So we can't deny that growing frequency and severity of
wildfires are influenced by climate change. While we're here
today to discuss pathways forward to improve quality, U.S.
distribution and accessibility of fire weather data, real
solutions will lie in addressing the root causes of climate
change. Implementing effective mitigation and adaptation
strategies will be crucial in preventing future wildfires and
reducing their impact. Unprecedented extreme weather events are
becoming alarmingly normal. This is not sustainable for Earth
or humanity. If we don't stand up now to change how we interact
with this planet, there will be nothing for future generations
to inherit.
So, Dr. Tohidi, how is climate change affecting how we
train and educate emergency response officials in the field?
And can you highlight specific changes that you have
experienced in academia?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. I can answer this
to the best of my knowledge. I'm not an expert in educating
first responders. But in San Jose State University, we have a
new minor called wildfire minor, and the College of Science
hosts this, so the students who go through this minor, they get
familiarity with five other indices that are available, and
they can assess the situations, the atmospheric situations that
are conducive to fire, and they can transition some of this
knowledge to the work that they do. If some of them choose to
be first responder, that will be very helpful for them.
And in terms of the education, we definitely need to do
more work on workforce development in this area because the
more awareness we have about the problems that we are dealing
with and the more awareness that we have, the urgency of the
problem, the better answers we can have for them.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Mr. Peverill. What opportunities exist
for input from private citizens for quicker wildfire response
and improve fire hazard communication?
Mr. Peverill. Well, I think better access to data about the
boundary layer, you know, the areas that impact movement of
wildfires, I think would significantly enhance the ability to
inform the public about where they're going to go. You know, as
you mentioned, the air quality is a major challenge. It's
obviously in the--you know, in the air the public is breathing.
But being able to study the boundary layer using tools like
drones and other systems will really allow us to better predict
and influence urban planning around air quality.
Ms. Lee. Yes, your company provides products like--that
utilize robotics and AI to create solutions to problems. Could
you share what you think the potential is for integrating data
and solutions from fields like agriculture into fire weather
data to utilize cross-cutting approaches?
Mr. Peverill. Yes, well, you know, we were talking about
the Mesonet system. It's a great example of a data platform
tool that's been used to inform fire weather for decades. A
system like ours is sort of like a Mesonet enhanced. You know,
you can gather data throughout the atmosphere between Mesonet
stations and really deliver a much more dense matrix of data
that can be used to enhance predictions. You know, that sort of
data source really doesn't exist right now. It isn't available
to researchers, and it isn't available to inform public policy
and, you know, planning tools.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. That's my time. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia, Mrs.
McClellan, for five minutes.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member,
for planning this hearing, which, as we've heard, is very
timely, given the experiences we had recently with the
wildfires. And while we have some familiarity with wildfires in
Virginia, I don't think we've ever had smoke travel from Canada
before, or at least not in my recent memory. And we know that
that as we continue, the air quality impacts that we saw that
were historic and unprecedented are probably going to be much
more prevalent going forward.
And as we've touched on but I want to explore a little bit
deeper, you know, I'm concerned we're going to continue to see
increasingly severe wildfire years as a result of climate
change, which is exacerbating heat and drought conditions and
making it much easier for fires to catch and spread.
So, Dr. Tohidi, could you describe in a little more, you
know, specifically, the ways in which climate change has
impacted fire dynamics?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. Yes, the climate
change effects and the way they are affecting the fire dynamics
or the regime of fires that we see these days is a confluence
of a lot of different parameters. But the general consensus is
that the climate change leads to prolonged droughts, warmer and
hotter temperatures, and that leads to drier fuels and lowers
the fuel moisture content in our landscape and really builds up
the platform for any ignition with any source that can happen.
And then it goes from a single ignition point to large
weather--fire weather systems that we have these days. So these
are the main, you know, factors that we all know and there is
evidence for it.
Another factor that climate change makes an impact on is
the soil moisture. Soil moisture is also known to be a very
important parameter in the health of the biological systems
that we have throughout the landscape and also having some
correlations with the fuel moisture and how the fire dynamics
changes.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you for that. And do you see any
updates to data collection or modeling needed to account for
these changes, or do you think the modeling is OK as-is?
Dr. Tohidi. The modeling, we do need to do a lot more in
modeling perspective. And one of the avenues that we can
improve the current State of the models is exactly that. We
need to address the quality, resolution, and frequency of the
data layers for these current models that we have. We do need
to better understand the dynamics of the fire at different
scales. As you know, fire happens to be a multiscale process,
starting with the flame at very small scales and then how it
grows to be large weather systems such as pyroCbs. We still
have a lot to learn and fill that knowledge gap, so yes.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you. And touching on community
resiliency a little bit, Mr. Goeller, could you discuss steps
that Congress could take to better support vulnerable
communities in anticipating wildfire scenarios and preparing
mitigations?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, one of the things that we can do, one,
the vulnerable communities, is the hazard mitigation, removing
fuel. We've talked about climate change and the effects of
climate change. One thing we can do to reduce the severity and
impact of wildfires and how much smoke is generated and how
much particulate matter is to remove fuel. And right now, our
fuel buildup in the forested areas of the United States and in
the rangeland areas where management has been largely reduced
over the years--there's a number of reasons for that. There's
cultural changes. There's changes in the demographics. The
family farms aren't as prevalent as they used to be. We've got
people moving into the city areas, and therefore, a lot of land
is relatively unmanaged and left alone just to grow and produce
fuel, whether it be the rangelands or the forest lands of the
United States. And the communities that are out in and amongst
those areas, the hazard mitigation work that can occur is
critical to protect those communities from the impacts not only
from fire directly impacting or directly impinging into those
areas, but also to limit the smoke generated from any wildfires
in the areas that would cause them to have issues with that.
And so addressing the one component in the fire environment
that we do have the wherewithal to do is working on fuel
reduction work and doing that ahead in advance of fire
occurrence.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair next recognizes the gentleman from California,
Mr. Issa, for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'm going to follow up on that. Since--you're in Oklahoma,
right?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Would you say you do a pretty good job of brush
removal?
Mr. Goeller. We're doing a lot better job. The one
problem--the one thing that we have in Oklahoma is mostly
private land, and the--there's some difficulty in addressing
those issues on private lands where the landowner really does
not want to do anything. And so getting the word out, the
information to them on what they can do and what we can do for
them, we do have some grants now available to us and through
the Federal Government and also some of the State things that
we're doing to affect the fuel work on private lands.
Mr. Issa. But, as you know, California is the opposite. We
are mostly public lands.
Mr. Goeller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Native American, Federal, and State. And we don't
do a very good job. We don't use the funds to clear the brush,
just the opposite. We can't get a permit to do it most of the
time, right?
Mr. Goeller. That is an issue, yes.
Mr. Issa. And the smoke goes from west to east, so the fact
is that our annual fires, because we don't abate the brush, in
fact, affect most of the rest of the country with the flyover
smoke.
Mr. Goeller. We do have issues, yes. And some of the things
that you could do, some of the things Congress could do would
be to make that a little easier for those public land, U.S.
Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, others to be able to
affect that hazard mitigation work on Federal lands to reduce
the amount of----
Mr. Issa. Would you----
Mr. Goeller [continuing]. Fire danger.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. Suggest that we preempt State law in
this case because it flies over other States when we find ways
to stop it on a State level?
Mr. Goeller. I'm sorry, I didn't understand the question.
Mr. Issa. California seems to stand out for a reason, and
that is that you go into our courts, you get one after another
delays. I was asking do you think that that Committees here in
Congress should consider, on behalf of the other 47 lower 48
States that we should potentially preempt the State of
California from its willingness to not clear brush as an
Oklahoman where the smoke flies over you?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, fortunately, our wind speeds, typically,
we don't have many issues for very long in Oklahoma. It's
usually in Kansas or Nebraska by the time that it starts to be
a problem. But that aside, you know, there are things that we
need to do across the country. One, you know, when you do have
regulations in one State that are more stringent than what the
Federal Government offers, they have to look at what is the
impact of that to the State? Is it something that we--they can
do to reduce those impacts from wildfire, from smoke issues,
and whatnot? Are they causing more harm than they're doing good
by the regulations that they impose? And so, no, I would not
suggest that the Federal Government come in and tell the States
what to do. But again----
Mr. Issa. But a common 50-State standard would probably
make sense, at least as to how you go about it and how long it
takes to get a permit?
Mr. Goeller. Are you talking about for burning or for----
Mr. Issa. Well, for clearing brush. You know, California
uses the Environmental Protection Act, Endangered Species Act,
and so on. They use it to go further than the Federal
Government does in your home State. Well, look, enough about
California. Let me ask you another question. Direct hire
authority for firefighters, do you want to give us the idea of
how important it is to be able to ramp up and do this without
going through a long process?
Mr. Goeller. It's--it is a great thing to have that direct
hire authority. We--the number of wildland firefighters across
the country, whether it be State or Federal, has diminished
greatly over the years. And part of the issue is the--not--is
the pay. You know, the--nowadays, a lot of wildland
firefighters could make more money doing something else,
working at just about anywhere. And so we have been focusing on
increasing wildland firefighter pay, which would go a long ways
to help that.
We've lost a number of hotshot crews over the years. Our
crew strength has diminished greatly across the country. You
know, we're--the 20 person crews, not only type one, type two,
type two IA crews has continually decreased over the years, so
our ground firefighting efforts has greatly been diminished. So
direct hire authority would be great.
Mr. Issa. OK. Mr. Chairman, I think I got my two points
across. And I appreciate the entire panel. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina,
Ms. Ross, for five minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this hearing. And thank you to the
panelists for joining us today.
Canada was not the only place facing wildfires in June. In
North Carolina, tens of thousands of acres of the Green Swamp
nature preserve burned, causing road closures and air quality
issues in the southeastern portion of our State. The number of
annual wildfires in North Carolina has steadily increased over
the past two decades, and it's imperative to understand the
behavior of wildfires to effectively predict where they will
start and how they will behave.
My first question is for Dr. Tohidi, and you touched on
this a little bit about the gaps that we might have in wildland
forest fire model modeling. So could you go back to those gaps
and just list them out for the Committee? And then also let us
know whether investing more in this modeling would be helpful.
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. Yes, in terms of
the major gaps that we have, as I alluded to, one of the main
knowledge gaps that we have currently in dealing with wildland
urban interface fires is that we don't have a physics-based
representation of how these fires go from the intersection of
the wildland to the communities and how they spread. This
transition to the community is called urban conflagration. So
if you can invest in studies that can improve our understanding
of the dynamics and the physics for this process, we can
implement that in models and improve our forecasting
capabilities for the communities.
The other area that we can do improvement and we are doing
improvement in San Jose State University is to provide physics-
based representation for one of the mechanisms of wildfire
spread called firebrand showers. These are degeneration and
transport of tiny embers that are still burning and land and
accumulate part of the main fire front. They ignite another
fire, which we call spot fires. This is a process that is
arguably the most complex and fastest mechanism of fire spread.
And there has been some improvements, but we need to do more
studies on how we can come up with a physics-based
representation of this process in our operational models. The
complexity of this process, and also the computational costs
has been the primary deterrence for us to consider in our
operations.
Also, we need to invest in experimental and observational
campaigns at flame scales, such that we can observe the
evolution of fire from the single ignition point to larger
scale flame topologies, as well as the interactions with the
boundary layer and basically evolving to becoming larger
weather systems. These are the main things that I can elaborate
on.
Ms. Ross. OK, great. Thank you. And as we've heard from
you, responding to wildfires is complex, and critical equipment
and personnel must be moved to fire so that they can be brought
under control before they grow. Mr. Goeller, can you expand on
the considerations that must be made when responding to fire
detections? And do you utilize any NOAA products when managing
wildfire response efforts?
Mr. Goeller. Yes, we do. We typically utilize the
information that they provide regarding weather systems
approaching the fire. We depend on the National Weather Service
to let us know when, say, for instance, any thunderstorms,
any--that might be in the area are collapsing or building that
would impact our fire operations. So there's a--there's two
differences. One's the initial attack efforts that we have.
Those--typically, we use National Weather Service products and
information either prior to or immediately during a wildfire.
As we transition into extended attack where a fire lasts for
several days to several weeks, then we become more dependent on
some of the day-to-day, hour-by-hour products that they can
provide us on an incident to be able to--not only our strategic
operations, but our tactical operations. And those are critical
for firefighter and public safety.
Ms. Ross. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Issa [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
We now go to the gentlelady and acting Ranking Member from
Oregon.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank
Chair Lucas and Ranking Member Lofgren for holding this hearing
today, and thank you to the panelists for being here.
You know, this is a really important hearing, especially
for my State of Oregon. Wildfire risk is a key concern of many
of my constituents in the 6th District, and I remember the
fires of 2020, the Labor Day wildfires. I remember having my go
bag, learning very quickly--and I don't live in the WUI. I was
in the Portland suburbs, and we all had our go bags, and we
were ready to go, but we weren't sure where because that's how
bad this was impacting the entire State. You know, it was one
of the most destructive on record, resulted in at least 11
deaths, over a million acres burned, and the destruction of
thousands of homes. And of course, the Western United States
has always had wildfire season, but climate change-induced
weather impacts like droughts, heat domes are intensifying
them. And fires--and the so-called season is expanding. I--you
know, I looked yesterday, and I think we had 22 wildfires
burning in the State of Oregon right now, burning thousands of
acres. I don't know what it is today.
So before I dive into the questions, I'd also note--and I
think a few of my colleagues have also touched on this--that,
you know, wildfires don't just impact the areas where they're
burning, right? We see the effects of--Canada's wildfire smoke
travels far and wide and can endanger cardiovascular systems of
people who are vulnerable. So my first question is--so,
essentially, this is not just a Western States issue, as we've
all heard today.
My first question is for Dr. Tohidi. In your testimony, you
outline the importance of fire physics for developing accurate
wildfire models. Can you expand on your work integrating fire
physics into models and identify where scientists'
understanding of the subject might be lacking?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you. Yes, specifically, my work relates
to the phenomenon called firebrand showers. We have been
studying their generation, their transport, and now spot
ignition, and trying to implement them in our operational
models. Improving this process and represent--a physics-based
representation of this process in our operational models really
help us to understand the contribution of this phenomenon in
the actual rate of spread. You know, fire, usually as being
perceived by public, is like a ball of flame that goes through
the combustibles. But these particles that land ahead of that
wall or that fire front can play an important role in the
dispersion or the propagation of the fire in the community. So
we have been trying to improve that part and at least provide a
physical representation in our models.
Specifically, the areas of improvements, as I mentioned, we
can--if we can improve the quality, resolution, and frequency
of the data layers for these models, that can really help to
see better forecasts in the short term. And in the long term,
we need to really invest on better observations at flame scale
using multispectral sensors, remote-sensing satellites to
really observe the fire behavior at that scale. And the
knowledge that we get from those observations and as well as
the experimental campaign can be incorporated into the future
or the next generation of fire models that we have.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. That's really helpful.
Mr. Goeller, as you know, responding to wildfires is a
complex undertaking. And I think you've touched on this a bit.
Personnel and equipment must be moved rapidly to fires to bring
them under control. Can you talk through the considerations
that you must make when responding to fire detection?
Mr. Goeller. Some of the issues that we face responding to
when a fire is detected, in particular, if we are transporting
equipment across State lines, we do need some help in regards
to being able to rapidly move in particular State and Federal
equipment across State lines without having to go through the
onerous process of receiving permits to be able to do that. And
that does limit us on response, especially in those
interagency, interstate deployments. The fire detection part of
it for initial attack, to have that advanced knowledge of where
the worst and the most probable occurrence of fires will happen
is critical for us to pre-position equipment and resources,
aircraft, equipment, personnel to make those aggressive and
rapid initial attacks, keep the fire small to prevent those
large-scale incidents from occurring.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And thank you all so much. I yield
back.
Mr. Issa. The gentlelady yields back.
We now go to the gentleman from New York.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank Chair Lucas and
Ranking Member Lofgren and our witnesses for being here today.
As I know my colleagues have highlighted this morning,
wildfires and wildfire smoke impact communities and economies
in every corner of the Nation. And they will only worsen,
putting our communities at more danger if we do not address the
threat of a climate change--of climate change with the urgency
required.
Earlier this summer, the communities that I represent in
New York's capital region experienced some of the worst air
quality days in history due to smoke from the ongoing Canadian
wildfires. And make no mistake, this was not a one-time event.
My district is fortunate to have state-of-the-art weather
research at the University at Albany, which houses the New York
State Mesonet. It's a program that has a network of 126
observing stations across the State and 17 Doppler LIDAR (light
detection and ranging) sites that are critical for monitoring
air quality and smoke. Last year, the university released a
study using Mesonet data from 2021 and 2022, noting the ways
that wildfire smoke from the Western United States is already
impacting air quality across our Nation, reaching as far as the
East Coast.
So, Mr. Goeller, how can Mesonet data be used to track and
respond to wildfires and wildfire smoke?
Mr. Goeller. Well, for--to use the Mesonet data, especially
as we--if--you know, looking at initial attack, for example,
initial attack wildfires, using the Mesonet data would allow us
to prioritize which fires might be addressed first. As we see
where they occur and looking at the data that is generated
through a Mesonet, it shows us what the weather system is doing
at a particular time, where the most impactful temperature,
winds, and humidity and--are occurring, and that would allow us
to do some prioritization of resources and where they would
most be efficient and utilizing in that.
For tracking smoke, I'm not sure if the Mesonet does that
or not. I think that we would have to use some other modeling
and other systems--National Weather Service would be key in
that--to address where the smoke is located, what the movements
are. You know, we do have a number of airsheds across the
United States, Oklahoma, seven, and I can't address how many
other--what other States have, but we do know through our air
quality organizations where this--where the smoke will be
moving and then what we would need to do in advance of that to
warn the public and make the most appropriate--or take the most
appropriate actions prior to that impacting the areas.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And are there any challenges or
limitations to using Mesonet data for these purposes? And how
might a Mesonet program be strengthened and better prepared to
address those challenges?
Mr. Goeller. I think having more sites would be great,
having the ability to sample other data. We do use Mesonet not
only for the--just the basic fire data, but we also have a
program called OK-Fire. It's another--kind of works off the
backbone of the Mesonet. I'm not sure if New York uses this or
not since they do--you mentioned the Mesonet there. But OK-Fire
also has the fuel moistures. It has some of our energy release
component data, burning index, a number of other products that
are critical to fire managers for not only prescribed burning,
but also for fire response.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And, Mr. Goeller, can you speak more
broadly to the role that smoke management typically plays while
responding to a wildfire or carrying out a prescribed burn? How
can we optimize these processes to mitigate harmful smoke in
communities nearby and farther away?
Mr. Goeller. I'll just specifically address the prescribed
burning aspect of that, wildfire smoke being--it's an unplanned
ignition, and we do have those issues as far as addressing
that. That becomes a little more complicated because it's
something that we are responding to and not being proactive
for. And so using the Mesonet products and planning for
prescribed burning, we can utilize the weather data that's
generated from the Mesonet stations and also the National
Weather Service forecast offices to look at what the best days
are for prescribed burning to limit smoke management impact.
Most States do have voluntary smoke management guidelines. We
try to live by those in order to keep those from becoming
mandatory. And by utilizing the weather information from
National Weather Service, NOAA, and our Mesonet stations, we
can do that to limit those impacts.
When we have the--we don't want to have exceedances that
are identified by our State air quality organizations and EPA
(Environmental Protection Agency) because once we begin to have
those exceedances, then the likelihood of our air quality
regulations becoming mandatory become more real. So we want to
do everything we can on prescribed burns to limit the smoke
impacts to communities, values at risk as we do those
activities, which, as you can imagine, it becomes more and more
difficult as our weather systems change, as we have drier and
drier fuels and more fuel to burn. It becomes a little more
challenging to effectively prescribe burn and not have smoke
management issues.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. I appreciate that. And I had
questions for Mr. Tohidi that I'll get to the Committee,
Subcommittee. And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
We now go to the gentleman from Georgia, who has been
patiently waiting.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
This is actually a fun topic for me because my dad was a
special investigator for the forest fires and timber thefts.
And so I remember growing up literally watching the retardant
drop pictures, of big buckets held up from helicopters being
dropped on fires, and knowing the unpredictable nature of both
the start of forest fires and how you control them with the
crews. With all the challenges we have right now, I'm actually
really excited about your technology. I'm really interested to
hear how you've used something that can actually save us money,
save us time, and more effectively fight forest fires. I mean,
what can be bad about any of those things?
The one concern I have is how we're managing this from a
political aspect and making sure that we get out of your way in
order to execute what you're going to do to help us fight
forest fires, which is coming back to the FAA and how we're
monitoring and how we might get in your way. What kind of
things do we as Congress need to eliminate as--like antiquated
rules, regulations, things that would get in the way of you
being effective with your new technologies?
Mr. Peverill. I think streamlining the use of advanced
drone operations, you know, is really necessary to deploy these
technologies. You know, they're deployed kind of in research
bases mostly now, but widespread deployment is possible. And we
could have one of these hives placed at every Mesonet node, for
instance. But that's not possible under the current
regulations. There really needs to be advancement there. The
limitation is not really the technology at this point. It
actually is the regulations. And so, you know, progress is
needed there to get this technology out and benefiting the U.S.
public.
Mr. McCormick. As far as you know, since you'd be more
ready on this than myself, which I'm changing here today, right
now, as we're talking, is there any movement right now from
Congress to make that effectively happen to get the regulation
out of the way?
Mr. Peverill. I think there is movement in the FAA
reauthorization bill----
Mr. McCormick. Perfect.
Mr. Peverill [continuing]. To bring more parties to the
table to help the FAA move that forward.
Mr. McCormick. Hopefully, that'll be a great bipartisan
effort as we move forward to do something good for the Nation.
Thank you.
With that, I yield.
Mr. Issa. The gentleman yields back.
We now go to the gentleman from Illinois.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Acting Chairman, and to all of
our witnesses.
So I just got back a couple days ago from a CODEL
(congressional delegation) up to Alaska talking about the
impacts of climate change up there, and, as you might imagine,
a lot of focus on permafrost melt and what happens to methane
releases. But we got into this really interesting conversation
with folks from NASA and permafrost researchers who said that
what they've found is that the--in addition to the methane
risk, or maybe in lieu of the methane risk, they've observed
that when you get on the regular fire cycle, so, you know, in
the before times before the climate was so hot, the fire would
come through, it would essentially burn up the forest later
that had been deposited since the last fire cycle. But as the
fires are coming more frequently and you've got fuel that's on
the ground, you've lost some of the protections of the canopy
to slow down the fire. They're now--you--they're now saying
that you burn all the way down into the soils and release, you
know, hundreds or thousands of years of soil carbon, which of
course raises all sorts of concerns about agricultural
solutions to ameliorate climate change.
I've now told you everything I know about the topic. So if
you think I sound smart, don't ask me any more follow up
questions.
But I guess I'd like to start with Mr. Goeller. Is that--
and I saw you nodding, but is--do I have the basic facts of
that right and the risk? Are you familiar with that phenomenon?
Mr. Goeller. Well, what I was nodding on is the phenomena
that we see, you know, really anywhere in the country during
the course of a year, and as we transition into a drought, the
amount of fuel that will be burned during a wildfire. In some
cases, as you mentioned, when we have adequate soil moisture
and we have occasional rainfall, we may only burn one part of
the fuel complex on the ground. But as we transition into
drought, no matter where it is in the United States, we can
burn the fuel all the way down to the soil surface, which
releases more carbon and then also, it--more particulate matter
into the atmosphere. And it becomes much more difficult to
control those cases.
Mr. Casten. And just to be clear, what they were saying is
not just out of the soil surface, but all the way down to the
mineral layer----
Mr. Goeller. Well----
Mr. Casten [continuing]. And exhausting the carbon that's
locked in the soil.
Mr. Goeller. And that will depend on where you are in the
United States. In Alaska, North Carolina, some of the coastal
areas where we have--there's three different types of fires.
There's surface fire, there's crown fire, and then there's
ground fire. Ground fire is where it does actually burn below
the surface of the soil, you know, burns below the soil
surface. In those cases in Alaska and North Carolina where they
have peat bogs and a lot of the peat and other types of organic
material that is below the soil surface, that will burn, and
then there goes a release. In many parts of the country, we
don't have that. We just have the fuel laying on the surface.
And that's what go--where basically--the fire basically stops.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, if--I think it sounds like I got most
of it right, but I'll--you know, correct me if I'm wrong. But I
guess what I'm wondering is if we want to make sure that the--
that we keep as much of that carbon that's locked up in the
soil consistently locked up, then do we have--and maybe this is
a question for Dr. Tohidi. Do we have enough sort of geospatial
precision in our fire maps that we can say, OK, this particular
region is at risk of these deeper fires and we should maybe
take more precautions in this area, anticipate something's
coming, and sort of prioritize resources where the fires are
going to be particularly intense and particularly--I'm not sure
what the word is I'm looking for--likely to reverse centuries
of carbon storage in soils?
Dr. Tohidi. Thank you for the question. We definitely can
improve on the resolution of these data layers. You know,
currently, from what I'm aware of the highest resolution that
we get from the fuel layers--and that includes Alaska, too--is
30 meters by 30 meters. And you can imagine that there's a lot
can--that can happen in a 30 meter by 30 meter area. So
increasing the resolution of these data layers can improve the
current State of the forecasts that we have.
I'm not aware of the work that we can identify the
peatlands that will undergo peatland fires, but that's a very
important type of fire that we need to consider because these
peatland fires, they burn for months and months and their
suppression is extremely difficult, and we don't want to get
into that situation. So preventive actions are the best.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, I'm out of time, but if any of the
witnesses have specific thoughts on areas we should be
prioritizing research funding or otherwise that might address
that, I'd welcome them for the record.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman.
And for the record, I want to thank our witnesses for their
testimony and let you know, pursuant to Committee rules, the
record will remain open for 10 days for additional comments,
written questions, and of course, your various answers that you
may want to put in further for the record.
With that, that Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Max Miller

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT
