- REAUTHORIZING THE WEATHER ACT: DATA AND INNOVATION FOR PREDICTIONS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REAUTHORIZING THE WEATHER ACT:
DATA AND INNOVATION FOR PREDICTIONS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MARCH 28, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-6
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

51-881PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           PAUL TONKO, New York
TOM KEAN, New Jersey
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Environment

HON. MAX MILLER, Ohio, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina,
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas                  Ranking Member
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                MAXWELL FROST, Florida

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

MARCH 28, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Max Miller, Chairman, Subcommittee on
Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S.
House of Representatives.......................................     6
Written Statement............................................     7

Statement by Representative Deborah Ross, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Written statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    12

Witnesses:

Mr. Richard Jenkins, Founder & CEO, Saildrone Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15

Ms. Meredith Bell, Atmospheric Program Manager, FLYHT Inc.
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Written Statement............................................    27

Dr. Antonio J. Busalacchi, Jr., President, University Corporation
for Atmospheric Research
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35

Mr. Michael Eilts, General Manager for Weather and Earth
Intelligence, Spire Global
Written Statement............................................    56

Discussion.......................................................    63

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Michael Eilts, General Manager for Weather and Earth
Intelligence, Spire Global.....................................    78

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Max Miller, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Environment, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives

The Commercial Weather Alliance..............................    86

REAUTHORIZING THE WEATHER ACT:
DATA AND INNOVATION FOR PREDICTIONS

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 28, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Environment,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Max Miller
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare recesses of the Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Reauthorizing the
Weather Act: Data and Innovation for Predictions.'' I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
I want to welcome everyone to our first Environment
Subcommittee hearing today of the 118th Congress. I am honored
Chairman Lucas has placed his trust in me to lead this
Subcommittee, and I'm excited to work with my colleague on the
other side of the aisle, Ranking Member Ross, to continue the
productive bipartisan history this Committee has enjoyed.
Today's hearing will be the first in a series that touches
on a very important topic, U.S. weather policy. As the
Committee with the sole jurisdiction over the National Weather
Service and the scientific activities at the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, we have the privilege
of shaping the future of weather forecasts and modeling. This
is a responsibility I do not take lightly. The stated mission
of the National Weather Service is to provide services that
protect life and property, as well as to enhance the national
economy. And I can promise you, any legislation we pursue will
only help them succeed in this mission.
In '22 alone, there were 18 separate billion-dollar weather
events that took the lives of 474 people and cost a total of
$165 billion in damaged infrastructure, homes, businesses and
more. In fact, a typical year in the United States sees 26,000
thunderstorms, 5,000 floods, and 1,300 tornadoes. That's more
extreme weather events than any other country.
So if it wasn't obvious already, weather forecasts provide
much more valuable information than indicating if you need an
umbrella or not. Weather information directly saves lives and
protects entire communities like the ones I represent in
northern Ohio from economic devastation. The good news is that
many parties involved in this work understand the value of
forecasting and come together to improve the timely delivery
and overall accuracy of weather products and services.
Collectively known as the United States Weather Enterprise,
each sector--public, private, and academic--plays a critical
role in understanding, observing, forecasting, and warning
communities of extreme weather. There is no single sector or
provider who can effectively develop and deploy all the tools
needed to predict and communicate weather patterns or extreme
events.
Today's hearing will focus primarily on one particular
piece of the puzzle, the private sector and what they bring to
the table for NOAA and the Weather Service. The data and
innovation they offer can make immediate and impactful
improvements to the status quo. For example, we'll hear about
how atmospheric temperature data collected from satellites is
processed and integrated into operational models. We'll also
hear about high altitude water vapor data collected from
sensors on commercial planes. And we'll even hear about the
development of uncrewed vehicles that can go right into the eye
of an active hurricane to collect the data there.
It's all very exciting stuff and truly on the cutting edge
of scientific innovation. But completing the transition from
initial demonstration of these technologies to long-term
commercial operation requires policy that encourages Federal
partnerships. That is what I hope to take away from today's
hearing, how we in Congress can empower the Weather Enterprise
to innovate and excel through public-private partnerships.
Doing so will enable our economic growth and protect the
essential pillars of our economy like agriculture that are
dependent on knowing what the weather will be tomorrow, as well
as the next season.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here today.
I look forward to each of your testimonies.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Miller follows:]

I want to welcome everyone to our first Environment
Subcommittee hearing of the 118th Congress. I am honored
Chairman Lucas has placed his trust in me to lead the
subcommittee and I'm excited to work with my colleague on the
other side of the aisle, Ranking Member Ross, to continue the
productive, bipartisan history this subcommittee has enjoyed.
Today's hearing will be the first in a series that touches
on a very important topic: U.S. weather policy. As the
Committee with sole jurisdiction over the National Weather
Service and the scientific activities at the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration--or NOAA--we have the privilege
of shaping the future of weather forecasts and modeling.
This is a responsibility I do not take lightly. The stated
mission of the National Weather Service is to provide services
that protect life and property, as well as enhance the national
economy. And I can promise you, any legislation we pursue will
only help them succeed in this mission.
In 2022 alone, there were 18 separate billion-dollar
weather events that took the lives of 474 people and cost a
total of $165 billion in damage to infrastructure, homes,
businesses, and more. In fact, a typical year in the U.S. sees
26,000 thunderstorms, 5,000 floods, and 1,300 tornadoes. That's
more extreme weather events than any other country.
So if it wasn't obvious already, weather forecasts provide
much more valuable information than indicating if you need an
umbrella or not. Weather information directly saves lives and
protects entire communities, like the ones I represent in
Northern Ohio, from economic devastation.
The good news is that the many parties involved in this
work understand the value of forecasting and come together to
improve the timely delivery and overall accuracy of weather
products and services.
Collectively known as the U.S. Weather Enterprise, each
sector--public, private, and academic--plays a critical role in
understanding, observing, forecasting, and warning communities
of extreme weather. There is no single sector or provider who
can effectively develop and deploy all the tools needed to
predict and communicate weather patterns or extreme events.
Today's hearing will focus primarily on one particular
piece of the puzzle: the private sector and what they bring to
the table for NOAA and the Weather Service. The data and
innovation they offer can make immediate and impactful
improvements to the status quo.
For example, we'll hear about how atmospheric temperature
data collected from satellites is processed and integrated into
operational models. We'll also hear about high altitude water
vapor data collected from sensors on commercial planes. And
we'll even hear about the development of uncrewed vehicles that
can go right into the eye of an active hurricane to collect
data there.
It's all very exciting stuff and truly on the cutting-edge
of scientific innovation. But completing the transition from
initial demonstration of these technologies to long term
commercial operation requires policy that encourages federal
partnerships. That is what I hope to take away from today's
hearing: how we in Congress can empower the weather enterprise
to innovate and excel through public-private partnerships.
Doing so will enable our economic growth and protect the
essential pillars of our economy, like agriculture, that are
dependent on knowing what the weather will be tomorrow, as well
as next season.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here. I look
forward to each of your testimonies.

Chairman Miller. Before yielding to Ranking Member Ross,
I'd like to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
three items: Chairman Lucas's opening statement, Mr. Eilts'
prepared testimony, and a letter from the Commercial Weather
Alliance highlighting important industry-related topics for the
reauthorization of the Weather Act.
Hearing no objections, so ordered.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentlewoman from
North Carolina, for an opening statement.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you so much, Chairman Miller, for
holding this important hearing on improving weather and climate
predictions. And thank you to our panel of witnesses for
joining us this morning to share your expertise.
First, I must say that my heart goes out to the families
who lost their loved ones due to severe weather storms that
occurred across the South over the weekend. Rolling Fork,
Mississippi, experienced one of the deadliest tornado events
ever, and communities were devastated across several States.
Weather forecasts help inform decisions made by Americans every
day and play an especially critical role in protecting lives
and property during extreme weather events.
These phenomenon are becoming increasingly common, and
their severity has magnified due to climate change. Last year,
the U.S. experienced 18 individual weather and climate
disasters, costing at least $1 billion each. This makes 2022
tied for the third-highest number of billion-dollar disasters
in a calendar year.
Ensuring that the National Weather Service has the data and
tools to provide timely and accurate forecasts is integral to
the safety and well-being of Americans. A key component in
advancing weather forecasting and modeling is collaboration
among the academic, private, and governmental sectors of the
Weather Enterprise. Longstanding partnerships between academia
and government had been successful in furthering forecasting.
And we will hear from Dr. Busalacchi--is that correct?
Busalacchi about fundamental research carried out by academia
that is vital to the scientific advancement and innovation in
weather science.
North Carolina's Second Congressional District, which I
represent, is home to one of the strongest collaborative
research partnerships between the National Weather Service
office and an academic institution. The National Weather
Service in Raleigh and North Carolina State University have
worked together for decades to improve the understanding of
Southeast weather phenomena and operational forecasting
techniques. Good data form the backbone of weather forecasting
and modeling.
As we will hear from several of our panelists today, the
private sector is also playing an increasingly important role
in contributing to the Weather Enterprise, in particular by
providing additional data. While there are already a wide
variety of instruments collecting data around the clock to
inform weather modeling, significant gaps in coverage still
exist. Expanding the source of data use for the National
Weather Service's watches, warnings, and advisories is crucial,
and some of that data may come from the private sector. Thank
you very much. Some companies have already entered into
partnerships with NOAA to provide weather data, and I look
forward to hearing the panelists speak about what is and isn't
working well in those partnerships and recommendations for
strengthening public-private partnerships to advance the
Nation's forecasting capabilities.
Because no great challenge has a simple answer, just adding
more data to models is not enough. The accuracy of weather
forecasts is directly influenced by the quality, quantity, and
variety of data to inform weather models. And even with a lot
of high-quality data available, data assimilation continues to
be its own research challenge. Significant research and
development of data assimilation is vital for current and
future observations. Progress in weather climate modeling will
be dependent on our continued strong support for the National
Weather Service and government-academic-private sector
partnerships.
Under the threat of increasingly severe weather events and
climate change, improving weather forecasting is paramount to
protecting the American people. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses. And I also want you to know that I will support
all improvements in weather forecasting and modeling through
innovations in data collection and data assimilation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Ross follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Miller, for holding this important
hearing on improving weather and climate predictions, and thank
you to our panel of witnesses for joining us this morning to
share your expertise.
First, my heart goes out to the families who lost their
loved ones due to the severe weather storms that occurred
across the south over the weekend. Rolling Fork, Mississippi
experienced one of the deadliest tornado events ever and
communities were devastated across several states.
Weather forecasts help inform decisions made by Americans
every day and play an especially critical role in protecting
lives and property during extreme weather events. These
phenomena are becoming increasingly common, and their severity
is magnifying due to climate change. Last year, the U.S.
experienced 18 individual weather and climate disasters costing
at least one billion dollars each. This makes 2022 tied for the
third-highest number of billion-dollar disasters in a calendar
year. Ensuring the National Weather Service has the data and
tools to provide timely and accurate forecasts is integral to
the safety and well-being of Americans.
A key component in advancing weather forecasting and
modeling is collaboration among the academic, private, and
government sectors of the weather enterprise. Longstanding
partnerships between academia and government have been
successful in furthering forecasting capabilities, as we will
hear from Dr. Bussalachi. Fundamental research carried out by
academia is vital to scientific advancement and innovation in
weather science. North Carolina's 2nd District, which I
represent, is home to one of the strongest collaborative
research partnerships between a National Weather Service office
and an academic institution. The National Weather Service in
Raleigh and North Carolina State University have worked
together for decades to improve the understanding of southeast
weather phenomena and operational forecasting techniques.
Good data form the backbone of weather forecasting and
modeling. As we will hear from several of our panelists today,
the private sector is also playing an increasingly important
role in contributing to our weather enterprise, in particular
by providing additional data. While there are already a wide
variety of instruments collecting data around the clock to
inform weather modeling, significant gaps in coverage still
exist. Expanding the sources of data for use in the National
Weather Service's watches, warnings, and advisories is crucial,
and some of that data may come from the private sector. Some
companies have already entered into partnerships with NOAA to
provide weather data. I look forward to hearing the panelists
speak about what is and isn't working well in those
partnerships, and recommendations for strengthening public-
private partnerships to advance the nation's forecasting
capabilities.
Because no great challenge has a simple answer, just adding
more data to models is not enough. The accuracy of weather
forecasts is directly influenced by the quality, quantity, and
variety of data used to inform weather models. Even with a lot
of high-quality data available, data assimilation continues to
be its own research challenge. Significant research and
development of data assimilation is vital for current and
future observations. Progress in weather and climate modeling
will be dependent on our continued strong support for the
National Weather Service and government-academic-private sector
partnerships.
Under the threat of increasingly severe weather events and
climate change, improving weather forecasting is paramount to
protecting the American people. I look forward to hearing from
our witnesses today on how Congress can support the improvement
of weather forecasting and modeling through innovations in data
collection and data assimilation.
I yield back.

Chairman Miller. I'd like to recognize Ranking Member
Lofgren of the Full Committee for an opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to you
for--and Ranking Member Ross for holding this hearing, as well
as thanks to the witnesses.
You know, California has had 12 atmospheric rivers since
late December. Damage to homes, communities, infrastructure is
widespread across California, and flooding has been just
devastating in my district. Last week, we had another type of
powerful storm, dubbed a bomb cyclone. Dozens of people died
and--as a result of these unusually intense and frequent
storms. And I got an alert on my phone just a short while ago
that another bomb cyclone is heading to my district today.
These atmospheric rivers are not new. In fact, they have a
useful role in the West by bringing water to replenish
reservoirs and snowpack in the winter months, but too much in a
short amount of time has really had a devastating effect.
Climate change means that these atmospheric rivers coming over
and over again may be the new normal and with the warming
climate.
You know, these atmospheric rivers have characteristics
that make them particularly difficult to forecast. Satellites
are a good tool for looking at weather forming over the oceans,
but satellites generally can't see through the clouds and heavy
precipitation. Satellites are also more limited in their
ability to penetrate the lowest layers of the Earth's
atmosphere, which is where the atmospheric rivers hang out.
However, the Interagency Atmospheric River Reconnaissance,
which includes NOAA's aircraft, has the capability to gather
data from within the storm, and it's been beneficial in filling
that data gap. This data has led to significant improvements in
atmospheric river forecasting, but we have aging aircrafts, and
NOAA is unable to cover the full atmospheric rivers season. We
need to increase NOAA's aircraft fleet to fly these storms
during the winter months. This will be critical to safety in
California.
For NOAA to carry out its mission to protect life and
property, it must be well-funded to maintain a backbone of
weather and climate data from a range of data collection tools,
including airplanes, weather balloons, ocean buoys, and land-
based observations. The commercial data sector can help
contribute to NOAA's data collection efforts in a very
complementary way. And I look forward to hearing from the
witnesses on your ideas specifically how commercial data can
augment our atmospheric river forecasting capabilities.
In addition, academia has been--has to be supported in
their efforts to advance fundamental understanding of the
science and innovation in weather modeling. I look forward to
discussion of the role of each of these partners in the Weather
Enterprise and what mechanisms Congress can support to increase
and expand these partnerships.
I understand this is a first in a series of hearings on the
Weather Act reauthorization. There's a lot more that could be
done across the board to improve weather forecasting. And as we
enter the appropriations season here in Congress, I'll note
that the importance of providing the National Weather Service
with the resources it needs to improve the availability of
high-quality data streams for weather forecasting can't be
understated. I know that bipartisan support for the--for NOAA
and for weather forecasting exists, and I look forward to
working with the Full Committee's Chairman, as well as all the
Members of this Committee, to make sure that we get the
information we need to prepare for these devastating events.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning. Thank you to Chairman Miller and Ranking
Member Ross for holding this hearing, and thank you to the
witnesses for your testimony.
California has experienced 12 atmospheric rivers since late
December. Damage to homes, communities, and infrastructure is
widespread across California. Flooding in my district has been
devastating. Last week we experienced another type of powerful
storm known as a bomb cyclone. Dozens of people have died as a
result of these unusually intense and frequent storms.
Atmospheric rivers are not a new phenomenon. In fact, they
serve a critical role in the western United States in bringing
water to replenish reservoirs and snowpack in the winter
months. But too much rain in a short amount of time can have
devastating effects on communities. Climate change means that
this past winter may presage a new normal for flooding-related
catastrophic damage in California. Researchers have already
established that the warmer climate is causing more intense
rainfall--and specifically wetter, larger, and more frequent
atmospheric rivers.
Atmospheric rivers have characteristics that make them
particularly difficult to forecast. Satellites are a valuable
tool for looking at weather forming over the oceans, but
satellites generally can't see through clouds and heavy
precipitation--both characteristic features of atmospheric
rivers. Satellites are also more limited in their ability to
penetrate the lowest layers of the Earth's atmosphere, which is
where atmospheric rivers hang. However, the Interagency
Atmospheric River Reconnaissance, which includes NOAA's
aircraft, has the capability to gather data from within the
storm and has proven beneficial in filling that data gap. This
data has led to significant improvements in atmospheric river
forecasting. But due to aging aircraft, NOAA is unable to cover
the full atmospheric river season. Increasing NOAA's aircraft
fleet to fly these storms during the winter months is critical
to the safety of Californians and others affected by these
powerful storms.
For NOAA to carry out its mission to protect life and
property, it must be well funded to maintain a backbone of
weather and climate data from a range of data collection tools,
including airplanes, weather balloons, ocean buoys, and land-
based observatories. The commercial data sector can help
contribute to NOAA's data collection efforts in a complementary
manner, and I look forward to hearing from the witnesses on
your ideas of specifically how commercial data can augment our
atmospheric river forecasting capabilities. In addition,
academia has to be supported in their efforts to advance
fundamental understanding of the science and innovations in
weather modeling. I look forward to a discussion of the role of
each of these partners in the weather enterprise, and what
mechanisms Congress can support to increase and expand these
partnerships.
I understand this is the first in a series of hearings on
the Weather Act Reauthorization. There is a lot more that can
be done across-the-board to improve weather forecasting. As we
enter the appropriations season here in Congress, I'll just
note that the importance of providing the National Weather
Service with the resources it needs to improve the availability
of high-quality data streams for weather forecasting cannot be
understated.
Thank you to our committee members and witnesses for
joining us today to engage in this important and timely
discussion.
I yield back.

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren.

[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

I want to thank the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Miller, for
holding today's hearing, as well as welcome him to the role of
Subcommittee Chairman. Being a farmer, working with livestock,
and living in tornado alley, the Science Committee's work on
weather and climate is very important to me. I'm confident you
and Ranking Member Ross will do great things in this area this
Congress.
When I introduced the Weather Act in 2017, it was
desperately needed because there hadn't been an update to
weather policy in over two decades. But what I didn't know was
the almost instant impact it would have in putting the United
States back at the table when it comes to global leadership in
forecasting.
But while the Weather Act had an immediate positive impact,
we still have work to do if we want to once again be the most
accurate and trusted source of forecasting in the world.
That's why as Chairman of the Committee, I am prioritizing
the reauthorization of the Weather Act this Congress. Some of
the programs will expire at the end of FY 23, while other
programs will continue without any updates.
As we write new legislation, we plan to examine both
categories-- ensuring all of NOAA's work is modern, flexible,
and at the forefront of accurate and timely weather modeling
and forecasting.
The impacts of weather are far too important to not strive
for the very best. Protecting life and property, helping first
responders anticipate extreme weather events, and ensuring that
farmers and ranchers know when to plant crops are only a few of
the reasons having the most accurate weather forecasts is
invaluable.
And we can only have accurate weather forecasts if we
continue to invest in researching weather patterns and
utilizing the tremendous innovation and data the private sector
can offer.
Before the Weather Act was signed into law, I was told
countless times that commercial weather data wasn't viable--
that no private company could provide the quality and quantity
of information NOAA needs for their operational forecasts.
Flash forward to this year, NOAA is going to invest $27 million
on either purchasing data or demonstrating its use in
forecasts. That's quite the success story and a testament to
the innovation of American businesses.
I'm immensely proud of the progress NOAA and the private
sector have made to help each other on this topic. As we look
to reauthorize the Weather Act, I will push to continue this
growth and expand the options and resources NOAA has to
incorporate private sources of data into their operational
weather models and forecasts.
Today's hearing is important because it allows us to
pinpoint the types of data and innovations NOAA doesn't need to
duplicate, but can immediately utilize, to advance their
mission of protecting lives and property. There are plenty of
examples out there, and today's witnesses represent just a
small sample of the community working in this field.
I thank our witnesses for sharing their expertise with us
and I look forward to a productive discussion. Thank you and I
yield back Mr. Chairman.

Chairman Miller. Now, let me introduce our witnesses. Our
first witness today is Mr. Richard Jenkins, who's the Founder
and CEO (Chief Executive Officer) of Saildrone, Inc., a leading
company that has developed autonomous surface vehicles for
collecting data that provides intelligence for climate,
mapping, and maritime security applications.
Our second witness is Ms. Meredith Bell, who is the
Atmospheric Program Manager for FLYHT Aerospace Solutions, an
innovative company that partners with the airline industry to
use software, weather sensors, and services to provide
actionable intelligence on weather.
Our third witness is Dr. Antonio ``Tony'' Busalacchi, who's
the President of the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research, or fondly known as UCAR. UCAR is a nonprofit
consortium of more than 120 North American colleges and
universities focused on research and training in Earth system
science.
Unfortunately, one of our witnesses, Mr. Mike Eilts, could
not be here today after testing positive for COVID before
traveling. We respect his decision to stay at home and wish him
the best in his recovery. Mr. Eilts's testimony will still be
submitted for the record, and Members are encouraged to submit
any questions for him to the hearing record as well.
Welcome to all the witnesses, and thank you for being here
today.
I now recognize Mr. Richard Jenkins for 5 minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. RICHARD JENKINS,

FOUNDER & CEO, SAILDRONE INC.

Mr. Jenkins. Thank you, Chairman, Ranking Member Ross, and
the Members of the Environment Subcommittee for providing me an
opportunity to testify today. My name is Richard Jenkins. I'm
the Founder and CEO of Saildrone, a U.S. company based in
Alameda, California. Saildrone manufactures, owns, and operates
a fleet of uncrewed oceangoing surface vehicles that are
purpose-built for ocean monitoring and measurements. For those
who haven't seen a Saildrone, imagine an uncrewed sailboat
remotely operated and equipped with a range of science-grade
pilot sensors to collect oceanographic and meteorological data
both above and below the surface of the ocean. Primarily via
renewable wind and solar, Saildrone vehicles are
environmentally friendly, able to operate 24/7 for an entire
year at sea without support from a crewed vehicle. Since 2014,
Saildrone vehicles have spent more than 25,000 days deployed at
sea and sailed nearly 1 million miles, context for which is
more than 40 times around the planet.
Saildrone has a long history of collaboration with
partnerships with the world's leading scientific, civilian,
government, and defense organizations to collect some of the
most important and hard truth data about our Earth's oceans, in
particular, at a very strong relationship and partnership with
NOAA, the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration, which has helped both advanced our capabilities
and in turn provide valuable services and data back to NOAA.
Today, as we broadly consider how the private sector can
contribute to improving weather forecasts, I think it's
valuable to put into context the importance of the oceans, both
overall and as a driver for global weather. Oceans cover over
71 percent of our Earth's surface and represent a key domain
that impacts nearly every component of the global economy from
food production to weather patterns, energy production,
transportation of goods, and many, many more. Put simply, the
Earth is a maritime planet, and the United States is a
maritime-dependent nation.
However, despite the dependence of our global ocean system,
the Earth's oceans remain largely unobserved, unexplored, and
unmapped. This is due to the fact that collecting data in the
ocean is extremely costly, and the ocean is a physically harsh,
immensely dangerous, and a complex environment in which to
operate.
From a weather prediction perspective, the importance of
the ocean cannot be underestimated. For example, the top 100
meters of the world's oceans have 40 times the heat capacity of
the entire atmosphere, and it is now widely understood that the
energy exchanges that occur in the air-sea interface are a key
driver of global weather patterns such as storms, hurricanes,
and the El Nino-Southern Oscillation. As such, any effort
focused toward improving weather prediction capabilities must
consider ways to observe the ocean domain in a better and more
efficient way.
As I mentioned, Saildrone has been partnering with NOAA as
a data-as-a-service arrangement effectively using Saildrones--
Saildrone vehicles to both augment and supplement NOAA's
traditional ocean data platforms. For example, we're currently
preparing our third consecutive mission of Saildrones to
monitor hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean, the Caribbean Sea,
and the Gulf of Mexico. These missions involve deploying
Saildrone vehicles into areas where hurricanes are known to
develop and with the intention of sending the vehicles into the
eye of the storms.
In the last 2 years, Saildrone vehicles sailed near or into
the eyes of two category 4 hurricanes, Hurricane Sam in 2021,
Hurricane Fiona in 2022. Battling 100-foot waves and winds over
130 miles an hour, the USV (uncrewed surface vehicle) sent back
live video in real-time meteorological air traffic observations
from the eyes of the storms. This was the first--this is the
world's first uncrewed vehicle and provided new data that has
enabled us to better understand and predict these very, very
dangerous storms, data that was previously impossible.
This is just one of many examples that I present to
demonstrate how commercial technologies--in this case, data
from uncrewed surface vehicles--plays an important role in
helping NOAA meet its oceangoing research operational
requirements, including improved weather forecasting.
As this Subcommittee considers reauthorization of the
Weather Act 2017, I encourage you to consider prioritizing
ocean data by explicitly identifying it as the type of data
that NOAA could and should source in the private sector by the
commercial weather data program.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify here today to
express my views on behalf of Saildrone. Thanks for attention.
I look forward to answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jenkins follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Mr. Jenkins.
I now recognize Ms. Meredith Bell for 5 minutes to present
her testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. MEREDITH BELL,

ATMOSPHERIC PROGRAM MANAGER, FLYHT INC.

Ms. Bell. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Ross, and Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting FLYHT to testify
today before the Subcommittee on the Environment to discuss the
innovative products and services provided by the commercial
sector and how they partner with the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, NOAA.
I'm Meredith Bell, an Atmospheric Scientist and an
Atmospheric Program Manager at FLYHT. In my role, I work
closely with NOAA and the World Meteorological Organization,
the WMO, to ensure the community is receiving and decoding our
aircraft data properly. We also provide monthly reports to NOAA
regarding data quantity, location, and quality.
Prior to working at FLYHT, I worked at both Panasonic
Weather Solutions and AirDat LLC, both of which provided
aircraft-based observations to NOAA through our Tropospheric
Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting system, the TAMDAR
sensor.
FLYHT provides the airline industry with innovative data
solutions to enable our partners to make smart decisions based
on actionable intelligence to improve operational efficiency
and sustainability through our extensive hardware, software,
weather sensors, and services. Specifically for weather, FLYHT
provides Aircraft Meteorological Data Reports, or AMDAR
reports, data through our Automated Flight Information System,
the AFIRS system. This includes temperature, wind speed, and
direction, as well as two solutions that include relative
humidity, the TAMDAR sensor, and the FLYHT Water Vapor Sensing
System, the WVSS-II sensor.
The TAMDAR sensor provides in situ measurements of
temperature, wind speed, and direction, relative humidity,
icing, and turbulence, as well as location and time information
from approximately 130 aircraft across the globe. FLYHT's
TAMDAR system delivers in real time a critical and unique high-
resolution data stream to provide improved atmospheric analysis
and weather observations. Due to aging systems, the number of
TAMDAR soundings are decreasing, which will have detrimental
impacts on NOAA's weather models.
The FLYHT WVSS-II sensor merges the aircraft AMDAR with
relative humidity data from the sensor to provide a complete
profile of the atmosphere. The sensor is fully automated with
high accuracy measurements and reliability for long-term
performance. It is compact in size and weight, yet highly
durable and requires low power usage and low maintenance, all
of which contribute to its low cost of operation. The cost of
AMDAR with FLYHT WVSS-II is less than 10 percent the cost of a
traditional radiosonde soundings, example, NOAA's weather
balloon program over a 10-year period.
FLYHT provides critical weather data operationally to NOAA
to improve its numerical weather prediction skill through its
National Mesonet Program, the NMP. FLYHT first began working
with NOAA as AirDat and its partners in 2006 and joined the NMP
program in 2017 through Synoptic Data PBC, or Synoptic, which
aggregates various sources of observations and datasets to feed
into the NOAA weather models. Through Synoptic, FLYHT provides
TAMDAR and AMDAR-over-AFIRS observations from approximately 260
aircraft across the globe. This provides over 28,000 soundings
per month to the NOAA program.
Given our partnerships with NOAA on multiple programs over
the years, FLYHT is uniquely positioned to comment on the
working relationship with NOAA. NOAA is a strong advocate for
increasing observations both domestically and internationally.
The WMO has also been advocating for the global weather
community to recognize the importance of this data and
advocating for other countries to participate in a water vapor
program like FLYHT WVSS-II and share this information with the
global weather community.
Aircraft data with relative humidity remains one of the
most critical observation types of rapidly updating short-range
weather models. FLYHT continues to work closely with the WMO
and NOAA so we can provide the most useful data set possible to
the weather community. NOAA understands its needs on an
observational level and strives to provide clear guidance
externally to private-sector stakeholders, Congress, and the
public.
FLYHT's global airline partners gives us unique ability to
easily approach airlines regarding expanding our network of
weather sensors over both the U.S. and data-sparse regions
worldwide. We intend to continue to work with NOAA to expand
our networks in regions they feel will bring the most value to
their--both their global and mesoscale weather models.
One area of partnership with the Federal Government that
could benefit from greater coordination is the mission of
aviation turbulence forecasting, specifically, turbulence and
relative humidity measurements. An enhanced government mission
and focus on turbulence forecasting could aid NOAA's mission of
protecting lives and property, especially since turbulence is
so inherently interwoven with weather phenomenon. In the
future, greater collaboration between NOAA and the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) and in partnership with the
expertise of private industry, our turbulence forecast could be
greatly improved, and in doing so, aviation safety would be
improved.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and the Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today. I would be pleased to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Bell follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Bell.
And I now recognize Dr. Antonio Busalacchi for 5 minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ANTONIO J. BUSALACCHI, JR., PRESIDENT,

UNIVERSITY CORPORATION FOR ATMOSPHERIC RESEARCH

Dr. Busalacchi. Good morning, Chairman Miller, Ranking
Member Ross, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today on the importance of data
innovation and prediction within the upcoming Weather Act
reauthorization. As I've testified to this Subcommittee in the
past, today's Weather Enterprise is a triad that consists of
the academic and research communities, the public sector, and
the private sector. It is important to the future success of
the Weather Enterprise that each leg of the triad continues to
grow and that any reduction in size of any leg will negatively
impact its diverse beneficiaries. My testimony this morning is
informed by my experience with and within each of the legs of
this three-legged stool.
For example, during my time at the NASA (National
Aeronautics and Space Administration) Goddard Space Flight
Center, I was the Source Selection Official for the sea-viewing
wide-field-of-view sensor satellite known as SeaWiFS, which was
one of the very first data buys not only at NASA, but also
governmentwide. SeaWiFS was a satellite mission that was
launched by Orbital Sciences Corporation in 1997 to monitor the
Earth's ocean from space. It provided unprecedented data on
ocean color, temperature, and marine chlorophyll to the
university research community. From my--SeaWiFS was retired in
2010 after exceeding its design lifetime. From my perspective,
SeaWiFS was a grand success as a data buy and, as a result, I'm
very bullish on the role that the private sector can play with
respect to data buys with the attention to what are the best
practices for such, as outlined in my written testimony.
Another excellent example of the positive feedback among
the research community, the Federal Government, and the private
sector is the COSMIC program, Constellation Observing System
for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate. COSMIC began in April
1995 when a prototype instrument designed by the Jet Propulsion
Laboratory went into orbit aboard the MicroLab-1 satellite on a
mission conceptualized and planned by our UCAR's GPS/MET team.
The GPS/MET prototype obtained nearly 10,000 atmospheric
soundings, fulfilling its role as a proof-of-concept experiment
and pave the way for the highly successful COSMIC-1 mission
from 2006 to 2020 and today's COSMIC-2, launched in 2019. The
COSMIC program has been a notable collaboration among Taiwan's
National Space Organization, NASA, NOAA, NSF (National Science
Foundation), and what is now the United States Space Force. GPS
radio occultation data from COSMIC-1 had direct and marked
improvement to global analyses of the atmosphere, especially
above the oceans, polar regions, and other hard sample areas,
leading to improved prediction of tropical cyclones, global
weather, and space weather forecasting.
As a result of the COSMIC-1 program, private weather data
companies like Spire that would have been here today were able
to use the trailblazing technology of COSMIC-1 to develop their
own observational systems for radio occultation. This
commercialization of radio occultation should be celebrated,
and it's another fine example of how the research community,
the government, and the private sector can work together to
drive innovation and create value together as technology
development moves forward.
However, it is also worth emphasizing that America's
Weather Enterprise already has a significant amount of data at
its disposal, but U.S. weather forecasting capabilities
continue to lag behind our European counterparts. This
discrepancy is not due to a data deficit compared to the
Europeans. Rather, our European colleagues have made greater
advances in what is called data assimilation, and their
forecast models are better able to utilize the data that are
already available. Therefore, it is critical that policymakers
make significant investments in data assimilation and the
modeling and forecasting workforce to enable more accurate,
predictive forecasts in service to society with the existing
observing systems we already have.
Finally, I ask the Subcommittee to consider, much like
NASA, the initiation of a decadal survey for the entire Weather
Enterprise that would include a strong emphasis on data
innovation for prediction, including but not limited to the
themes in my testimony, including data standards and data
assimilation. Given the increased prevalence of major weather
disasters across the Nation a decadal process by the National
Academies will allow us to prioritize what has to be done and
do so in recognition of current fiscal realities. The potential
upside for the Nation in implementing a more intentional
decadal survey process for the Weather Enterprise encompassing
midway assessments and a subsequent follow-on survey is
enormous. If we do it right, we can leverage every leg of the
triad to spur successful growth of the entire Weather
Enterprise. If we get it wrong, we risk falling further behind
with our prediction capabilities at a time when the extreme
weather impacts to our Nation continue to grow. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Busalacchi follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The prepared statement of Mr. Michael Eilts follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Miller. Thank you, Doctor. And I thank all the
witnesses for their testimony. The Chair recognizes himself for
5 minutes.
Mr. Jenkins, my district in Ohio 7 has a small piece of
Lake Erie coastline just west of Cleveland, but it also
contains a significant portion of the Cuyahoga River, which
some people might be familiar with because of it's catching on
fire as a result of the pollution in the late 1960's. So
staying on that theme, we've heard what Saildrone can do and
offer in terms of ocean data for weather forecasting, but what
capabilities does Saildrone have for inland waterways,
including lakes? Is continuous and holistic ecosystem water
quality monitoring, for example, the entire Cuyahoga River
drainage basin, something uncrewed vehicles are primed to do?
Mr. Jenkins. Absolutely. Saildrone vehicles can operate in
any water body deeper than 6 feet deep. The keels are 6 feet,
so you need that much water to navigate. Beyond that, we're OK.
I'd say that where we're not good is in fast-flowing rivers,
and that's much more the domain of powered vessels, powered
vehicles. We're a very long endurance platform that deals with
lakes and open ocean for long endurance missions. That said, we
operate frequently in the Great Lakes. Last year, we deployed
Lake Superior, Lake Huron, and Lake Erie, both for fisheries
management. So we had four vehicles out the two last years, and
we're going to do another two vehicles this year. So we operate
regularly. We're hoping to bring up our mapping vehicles there
soon and actually do mapping of the seabed of the lakes, which
is almost entirely unmapped.
Chairman Miller. Yeah, which would be incredible. Thank you
for that answer.
The Interagency Council for Advancing Meteorological
Services, ICAMS, was established by the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy under the authority of the
Weather Act to improve coordination of what--relevant weather
research and forecasts innovation activities across the Federal
Government. I worked at the White House and know coordination
among Federal agencies doesn't always include input from the
private sector when it should. My question to all of the
witnesses here today is have you engaged with ICAMS at all
since it was stood up in 2020? And whether you have not, do you
have any suggestions of how we can ensure ICAMS is achieving
its mission of ensuring United States' global leadership in the
meteorological services enterprise?
Dr. Busalacchi. So my last contact was when Kelvin
Droegemeier helped startup ICAMS. Since then, I've not had much
contact.
But getting to the point of your question is, you know, the
United States has invested a tremendous amount of money and
resources in weather prediction, weather observations across
the agencies, more so than our European colleagues. And, you
know, the goal and aspiration of ICAMS is to be much more
effective and efficient. So the ground has been laid. Now, we
need to take it to the next level.
Chairman Miller. Yeah. All right. Well, thank you for that,
and I'll yield back.
I now recognize Ranking Member Ross for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ross. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
My home State of North Carolina is particularly vulnerable
to extreme weather events, hurricanes on our coasts, but also
through the area that I represent, the Research Triangle area,
and a lot of flooding both on the east and the west. And that's
why accurate and prompt weather forecasting is critical to
protecting lives, property, and infrastructure.
As I noted in my opening statement, academic and government
research partnerships like the one between the National Weather
Service Raleigh office and North Carolina State University are
critical to the advancement of science and innovation for
weather forecasting, with a goal of improving weather forecasts
capabilities. The Weather Act directed NOAA's Office of the
Ocean--Oceanic and Atmospheric Research to further collaborate
and support the non- Federal weather research community and
academic partners, private partners, and public partners to
make funds available through competitive grants, contracts, and
cooperative agreements.
Dr. Busalacchi, have--how have investments like these
enabled further opportunities between academia and the
government to collaborate, and how has that benefited the
Nation's modeling and forecasting capabilities?
Dr. Busalacchi. Thank you very much for that question. I
think a great example going to your initial comment is where we
are today with respect to streamflow and river forecasting. And
so NOAA has stood up the National Water Center in Tuscaloosa,
Alabama, and the model they're using, the National Water Model
started at my organization at the National Center for
Atmospheric Research (NCAR). It started as a spinoff of our
weather research forecast model for hydrology. Barron
Industries, a private-sector company in Alabama, ported that
model to Romania and Israel. That then became the platform for
our national model. So again, perfect example of the triad,
research community, private sector, and government now
protecting life and property.
Ms. Ross. Great. I'd also like to stay with you for just a
minute because I want to follow up on your comments about data
assimilation and the importance of enhancing that to make U.S.
weather predictions more accurate. Can you help us better
understand how data assimilation works, how it affects
predictions, and why we need a new generation of data
scientists trained in data assimilation for weather
forecasting?
Dr. Busalacchi. Again, thank you very much for the
question. It's somewhat of an esoteric topic. Let me begin this
way. We do not have observations everywhere of the planet. The
models we use to predict the weather have limitations. And so
let's take the example we have an observation here and an
observation here. And in our models, we have a model grid point
here and a model grid point here. Data assimilation blends the
observations with the model to get the best possible
description of the state of the atmosphere because when we make
a prediction, these predictions are very sensitive to the
initial conditions. So it's blending the model and the
observations in space and time so that we can reduce the errors
in our initial conditions to get more accurate forecasts. The
Europeans are much more deliberate and much--have further long-
range planning horizons with respect to data assimilation.
And then with respect to the workforce, the vast majority
of our data assimilation scientists, software engineers as well
are coming from overseas. We need to invest in our
universities, community colleges for workforce development
because if we don't, we're going to continue to fall behind our
colleagues and our adversaries.
Ms. Ross. Well, that's terrific. What should be the
specific roles of NOAA versus the NSF, the Navy, and other
agencies in supporting improvements in data assimilation?
Dr. Busalacchi. So we--my organization hosts what's called
the Joint Center for Satellite Data Assimilation. It is a
multi-agency activity, NOAA, NASA, Department of Defense, but
also it comes from different appropriations lines. So as a
result, the funding for this activity is about $8 million a
year. We compare that to the GOES-R (Geostationary Operational
Environmental Satellite-R) satellite, $11 billion. So data
assimilation is just--it's like the flea on the tail of a dog
in terms of the investment, so we need to make a greater
investment in data assimilation so we can get more bang for the
buck for the--what we've already invested in these observations
so we can get more information extracted out of them, like the
Europeans do.
Ms. Ross. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Ross.
I'd now like to recognize Mr. Posey out of Florida for 5
minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Bell, can you elaborate on why aircraft data is such an
important way to collect weather data?
Ms. Bell. Thank you for that question. Yes, I mean, it is
extremely important to have in situ weather observations. There
has been numerous studies that have shown that aircraft data
remains a top-five data source when it comes to the weather
models, meaning that is one of the most important and critical
data sources that are being assimilated into our weather
models, especially when it comes to short-term rapid-cycling
weather models. So that's just showing that, you know,
satellite data that's extremely beneficial for the weather
models, especially the global weather models, but when we're
talking about short-term forecasts, we really need this real-
time observations.
Mr. Posey. OK. Can you explain the process for how NOAA
partners with the private sector to deploy weather sensors on
commercial aircraft?
Ms. Bell. Yes. So in the past, NOAA has funded the equipage
of aircraft with these weather sensors. So they did do a
program with airlines in the past. However, most of those
airlines are going through fleet replacement cycles, so a lot
of that data will be lost over the next 5 to 10 years as those
aircraft go out of service. So how FLYHT plans to do it is we
will partner with an airline and we will go to NOAA and say--
and we will talk to NOAA about where they feel data would be
most valuable. So if they say we really want--need data over
the Pacific Northwest or Alaska or other data-sparse regions,
that is where we will look for a partner airline, we will go to
NOAA with that partner airline, and then we will take care of
all the STCs (Supplemental Type Certificates), the installation
of a sensor, and then handle the data transmission down to the
ground and then back over to NOAA.
Mr. Posey. Does anybody besides NOAA benefit from that?
Ms. Bell. Yes, I mean, the FAA could definitely benefit
from having this information, especially when we're talking
about turbulence forecasts. Having more in situ observations
would benefit the FAA. We're also looking into potentially
doing some--increasing the sensitivity of our sensor, and that
would help with contrails forecasts. So the Air Force is
currently looking at better predictions of your contrails
forecasts, so they need to have those in situ relative humidity
observations to be able to better predict where they would be
forming the contrails.
Mr. Posey. You mentioned the turbulence. How would that be
measured? I mean----
Ms. Bell. I mean, so there's a few things that could
improve our turbulence forecasts. For one, having better short-
term forecasts will inherently improve your turbulence
forecasts because turbulence are so interwoven within your
general forecasts. The second way is that we can incorporate
the NCAR EDR algorithm within our sensor so that we can also
report turbulence on our aircraft. So if we have more in situ
turbulence observations, that will allow you to have better
turbulence observations and forecasts.
Mr. Posey. OK. Is there currently a government agency
tasked with the mission of turbulence forecasting?
Ms. Bell. The Aviation Weather Center puts out turbulence
forecasts right now.
Mr. Posey. OK. Would our industry and private sector
benefit from a clear government mission on turbulence? I mean,
it's pretty critical.
Ms. Bell. I mean, we definitely believe so. You know, if we
have better forecasts, if we have more of a mission to improve
our turbulence forecasts to get more in situ turbulence
observations, that could enhance the mission of saving--
protecting lives and property.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Mr. Jenkins, can you tell us about
the water temperature affecting the atmosphere?
Mr. Jenkins. Apologies. Absolutely. Oceans are driving our
weather and climate by the rate of absorption and exchange of
heat and carbon dioxide. They absorb a majority of the heat we
make, and that is delaying climate change. So if the oceans
continue to absorb heat, it delays--puts out temperature
changes in the atmosphere. If it stops to absorb heat, they
would accelerate the atmospheric warming. And likewise for
carbon, there's an issue of absorbing our carbon. If the ocean
continues to do that, it mitigates climate change on our
surface of the Earth but it also acidifies the oceans. So
carbon dioxide changes--turns to carbonic acid and it means
fish can't build bones and shells, can't build shells for the
creatures, so very significant, will disrupt our entire food
chain. And that needs to be measured very specifically.
Saildrone is the only autonomous platform that can measure that
to a very, very high accuracy. We worked with NOAA for a 4-year
period on a CRADA (cooperative research and development
agreement) to develop a sensor that can actually measure,
detect, and quantify carbon in the atmosphere and the ocean.
Mr. Posey. Very good. My time is about to expire. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
I now recognize Ranking Member of the Full Committee, Ms.
Lofgren out of California, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much. This is a very
important hearing, and all of your testimony has been
enlightening. One of the things I want to ask further about,
Dr. Busalacchi, is our lagging in actually utilizing
effectively the data that is collected. You know, we watch the
news, and we see, you know, there's our prediction, and then
there's a European prediction, and the European prediction
usually a little bit better than ours. So I'm wondering, why is
that? Is it the limited capacity to transmit large amounts of
data? Is it deficiencies in the data scientist area? I mean, I
agree with you that we need to emphasize and develop the smart
people from all over the country to be part of our technology
workforce, but I also know that the best data scientists in the
world are located in the United States. And there's some
private sector companies, I understand, are trying to develop
using AI (artificial intelligence) data. I don't know whether
that's part of the solution, so I'm interested in further
understanding your point of view and what we might do.
Dr. Busalacchi. Thank you. Let me preface my remarks by
saying I continue to be amazed with what NOAA does for what
they have for the forecast mission because their forecasting
remit----
Ms. Lofgren. Yes.
Dr. Busalacchi [continuing]. Is much broader when we talk
about the European centers, so let's put that there.
But when we speak about, let's say, weather forecasting,
the short answer is yes to all of the above, all right? It is
being able to accept more volumes of the data, so the ingest
pipes have to be bigger. That's one. The Europeans do a better
job of extracting the information out, let's say, separating
the signal from the noise, and that's as a result, let's say,
in the case of microwave data of precipitation and water vapor
in the atmosphere. They do a much better job of processing that
information.
And it just--I mentioned before the GOES program, $11
billion. At the present time, only 0.02 percent, 0.02 percent
of the radiance that are being used in an operational context.
So just making an order-of-magnitude impact, which we think is
feasible over the next several years, will have a significant
impact. So it's data ingested, it's being more innovative. AI
is part of that. And it's hiring more people and having more
high-performance computing. Keep--there's not a--it's not a----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Dr. Busalacchi [continuing]. Silver bullet. It's a
portfolio approach.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I appreciate that. And certainly we have
terrific scientists in NOAA, but--that we don't give them the
tools that computing power, and perhaps we need some additional
data scientists to be part of our crew. I'm hearing you on
that. And maybe--I see our Chairman is here, and I thank him
for his great interest in assisting NOAA. And, you know, that
may be part of what we do because, obviously, I'm concerned
that we may have gaps in the collection of data, but if we're
not giving the tools to actually assimilate the data, the
computing power, and the like, focusing on data collection
alone without utilization of that data would be a mistake.
Dr. Busalacchi. Absolutely. I'll be very blunt. When the
bits fall on the floor, we're flushing dollars down the toilet.
Ms. Lofgren. Yep. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren.
I now recognize the Chairman of the Full Committee, Mr.
Lucas out of Oklahoma, for 5 minutes.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Having introduced the Weather Act of 2017, I've been along
for the entire rollercoaster ride that has come with
establishing and implementing the commercial data program. We
purposely included language to have NOAA create a strategy to
assess the range of commercial opportunities, including public-
private partnerships for obtaining surface-based, aviation-
based, and space-based weather operations. However, while NOAA
has requested information on other types of data, they've only
purchased radio occultation.
So can each of the witnesses briefly answer the following?
Are we currently collecting data that you believe could be used
in operational weather forecasts and models? And has NOAA
utilized its data through the commercial data program? Floor is
yours.
Mr. Jenkins. Thanks for that. I think that's a great
question. So yes, absolutely, we take very, very important data
that can be used for two forms. One is assimilation as talking
about here, building model physics with Saildrones near the
surface. You collect very, very high resolution gradients that
give you insights into how the ocean works, how the heat is
transferred from the atmosphere to the ocean, and vice versa.
Those are things you need to understand to put back into the
models. There are two things, so it's a two-pronged attack. One
is data for the assimilation. One is data to understand and
improve those model physics. So yes, absolutely, we could do
that. Have we done that yet? We have--no. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. Ms. Bell?
Ms. Bell. Yes, we have been providing NOAA with data, but
it is not currently through the CVP. We provide it through the
National Mesonet Program. And again, this data is extremely
important for use in our weather models. There's another use of
what--the flight aircraft data, though, as well. We can use
that real-time in operations at the National Weather Service
centers. So the meteorologists can take in this aircraft data
and look at soundings or vertical view of the atmosphere. That
helps when you're--they were talking about very short-term
forecasts. So if--when they're in the operational center and
they're putting out severe thunderstorm watches, potential for
tornadoes, things like that, they can use this aircraft data in
real time. So it can be used in multiple ways.
Chairman Lucas. Dr. Busalacchi?
Dr. Busalacchi. Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me thank
you for your leadership on this topic over the years.
And another success story that we really haven't focused on
today, you know, started in your own backyard, the National
Mesonet Program, started in the research environment.
University of Oklahoma played a major role, started to
establish the standards and actually, you know, ended up with a
commercialization opportunity. There are now something like 36
different mesonets around the country in all 50 States, a grand
success story.
We've talked about radio occultation. However, I will say
there is a need for a culture change within NESDIS (National
Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service) at
NOAA. We need to get away from these sort of Battlestar
Galacticas that we're putting in orbit the size of a school
bus, billions of dollars, and be thinking more innovative like
radio occultation, constellation flying, formation flying,
being willing to accept more risk and starting to lower the
cost to the government.
Chairman Lucas. Reauthorizing the Weather Act is an
opportunity to make sure U.S. weather policy is up-to-date and
pursuing the research and tools best positioned to enhance our
forecasts and models. Therefore, in my remaining time, I'd like
to give each of the witnesses an opportunity to highlight one
or two things that they think are of particular need for
attention or updating in the Weather Act reauthorization. And
we'll start in reverse order. Dr. Busalacchi?
Dr. Busalacchi. Thank you very much. Another area is--we
need to continue to invest in what's called ensemble
predictions where we take a variety of models, perturb physics
because not any single model is perfect. And what we're finding
is that in order to capture the whole breadth of this nonlinear
system of our atmosphere, we need to have this sort of plethora
of models. So ensemble then is--it's computational-intensive
but relatively straightforward.
The other area is, you know, a reinvestment in the
timescale of sub-seasonal to seasonal because that's where our
water resource managers need information, agriculture, et
cetera. We haven't been making the advances in our predictive
skill on this timescale that's so critical to decisionmaking.
Ms. Bell. I mean, I think we really need to focus on the
fact that we have decreasing data. We need to look into
research on where that data--the aircraft data is most
valuable. So we do have less data in some regions, but perhaps
not equipping planes over areas that we still have data and
equipping planes over, you know, data-sparse regions, that will
be the most benefit. So we need to do research on our
observations that we're taking into the model and to see how
much value they bring.
There's also other research that is ongoing and needs to
continue about how you verify satellite data. The--I've talked
to several researchers that have said that using the aircraft
data is critical to validating satellite data, so we need these
in situ observations to make sure our satellites are also
giving out good data.
Mr. Jenkins. I think it occurs to me one is--I mentioned
carbon. Carbon is an incredibly important piece of our puzzle,
not just for short-term forecasting, but our long-term climate
forecasting. NOAA had eight objectives at COP26, and the first
object in the science category by Rick Spinrad was global
operation of a surface CO
2
reference network. That
has not started. That's a very, very important thing to get out
there and to work.
The second piece is auto the--NOAA's autonomous Uncrewed
Technology Office, have done a fantastic job of actually
fielding unmanned systems and acquiring commercially available
data from unmanned systems. Making their mission clearer and
their trajectory clarified and financed would be a fantastic
opportunity.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you for indulging me, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd now like to recognize Ms. Bonamici out of Oregon for 5
minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much to the Chair, Ranking
Member. Thank you to the witnesses here for your expertise.
I'm excited to be serving another Congress on the
Environment Subcommittee and look forward to continuing our
work together, hopefully, again, on a bipartisan basis.
I was Ranking Member of the Subcommittee working with Mr.
Lucas on the rollercoaster when we passed the original bill,
and even though it was signed into law in 2017, we know the
work was long--began long before that, and I'm proud of that
work. And I know reauthorization is critical, and I'm grateful
for this hearing today.
Now, more than ever, we need to make sure our constituents
are informed about weather-related risks. And I'm glad that
both the Chair and the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
recognize the increasing intensity and frequency of extreme
weather events. I'm thinking about Mississippi, you know,
everything is--California, as Ranking Member Lofgren noted.
It's hard to overstate the importance of the research that's
needed.
Dr. Busalacchi, welcome back. Good to see you again. We
know the Weather Act included provisions regarding the
commercial partnerships, and we want to strike the right
balance. Obviously, you talked about the three-legged stool,
certainly acknowledge the benefits of the those partnerships.
Can you summarize why the role of NOAA is important,
particularly in the area of data quality and open access?
Dr. Busalacchi. Thank you very much for that question.
First of all, the government in the form of NOAA provides that
foundational support for is the gold standard. It is--provides
the quality control so that we're not in the caveat emptor
situation. And so it's that backbone that NOAA provides that
allows the private sectors to succeed in all the different
examples in the dais up here today. And so that sort of
foundational role of NOAA has to continue so that the private
sector can continue to succeed.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And I appreciate that you brought
up the data assimilation issue. And just following up on
Ranking Member Ross' and Ranking Member Lofgren's questions
about that, it's my understanding and want some clarity here,
it's a software issue as well as a workforce issue?
Dr. Busalacchi. That is correct. We--and an investment
issue. We need more data scientists so that we can extract more
data out--more information out of the data we already have.
Ms. Bonamici. Yeah, that's something we can definitely be
working on.
Also, Dr. Busalacchi, I want to talk about--a little bit
about disaster preparedness. Now, I represent a district in
Oregon. A good portion of it is along the coast of Oregon where
we sit on the Cascadia Subduction Zone. Producing a major
earthquake and tsunami is in our future. We don't know when,
but it's in the future, overdue. So one of my first bills in
Congress was to update and reauthorize the Tsunami Warning
Education Research Act, which expires this year. We know early
warning and improving public safety, that the program cannot
only save lives, but reduce property damage.
So I know you've been a leader in oceanic and atmospheric
interactions for your career and clearly understand that
synergistic relationship between ocean and climate. So how can
the collection and analysis of ocean data contribute to the
development of climate models and forecasting systems? And what
are some examples of where this data has led to innovation in
weather and climate science?
Dr. Busalacchi. Great. So thanks for that question. And so
I appreciate the question because, as the first oceanographer
to be President of the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research in 63 years, it resonates with me because the
questions that society is asking of us today are no longer just
atmosphere by itself, oceans by itself, or land surface. It's
studying the Earth as a coupled system. So recently, we stood
up a Center for Ocean Leadership because of the importance of
the role of the ocean in the coupled Earth system. El Nino only
results a result of the ocean being coupled with the
atmosphere, providing us seasonal forecasting.
We heard about atmospheric rivers. You know, this wet
winter on the West Coast, all that moisture is coming from the
oceans. Coastal inundation, another ocean-atmosphere coupled
problem. I talked about sub-seasonal and seasonal. Bottom line,
sustained ocean observations are critical to advancing this
forecast skill, be it satellite observations, surface
observations, observations from autonomous vehicles, and
subsurface observations.
Ms. Bonamici. Again, I see Mr. Jenkins nodding his head
because I know your testimony. You acknowledge that the ocean
covers 70 percent of the planet.
And just finally, Dr. Busalacchi, I don't have much time,
but I wonder if you could comment on the importance of the IPCC
(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) Sixth Assessment
Report was just released last week, and how can we learn from
these recommendations? When we work on reauthorizing
legislation, how should our approach be different now than it
was back when we started this back in, you know, 2000--or,
excuse me, in 2000----
Dr. Busalacchi. Well, as we saw in the IPCC report, the
future is now. It's not 20, 30, 40, 50 years. We're seeing
these changes today, and actually quite, as a climate
scientist, earlier than many of us expected.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. I'm out of time. I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici.
I now recognize Mr. Collins out of Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Is it Dr. Busalacchi?
Dr. Busalacchi. Busalacchi.
Mr. Collins. That's a north Georgia name. OK. OK. I'm going
to steal your flea comment if that's OK. You commented on
keeping up with the Europeans, and I had a whole list of
questions here, but I threw them to the side because I kind of
want to focus on that a little bit because--and I sit on
several Committees, as we all do, and I've been seeing a
reoccurring theme of--with a lot of our agencies. It seems
like--that we have the--in this case, the data, but I'm just
wondering, has NOAA lost its way or has it changed its mission?
Dr. Busalacchi. I would say neither in all fairness. As I
said before, you know, what we ask of them for what they get--
they fund it, they do a marvelous job. But their remit is so
broad that, you know, we need to be more effective as a nation.
As we said before, we have--we talked about ICAMS. Weather is
separated across NASA, NOAA, NSF, et cetera. We need to be more
organized as a nation with respect to the resources we already
have and be more effective and efficient in that regard.
Mr. Collins. But you made the comment that bits were
falling on the floor and they weren't using them.
Dr. Busalacchi. Sure. So that's where we do need to make
more investment in data assimilation and data science. And that
is--that's where the flea comes in. It's just a small fraction.
So, for example, another solution going forward, when a
satellite system or an observational system is proposed, the
ground data--data processing is built into the cost of the
provision of that sensor in the data. Why not include the cost
of data assimilation right up front in the cost of the sensor
and purchasing that data stream so that when those observations
are available, we don't wait 1 or 2 years to assimilate and
learn how those data. The minute those observations are
available, we're ingesting them into our models that very day,
not years----
Mr. Collins. But it doesn't sound like that costs anything.
It's already there?
Dr. Busalacchi. Well, but we have to invest in the data
science, and we're not investing to the extent that we need to,
to make that advance and get that extraction out of the data.
Mr. Collins. All right. Well, you had two other legs to
that stool, and I noticed in some of the comments it seemed
like that maybe NOAA was--is are they holding up some of the
private sector from making investments on their own?
Dr. Busalacchi. I will defer to my colleagues. I think
there's--as I outlined in my testimony, there's a number of
success stories where NOAA is providing insight, but not
oversight into the obtaining of private sector data, and I
think that's the way it should be.
Mr. Collins. Ms. Bell, would you like to comment on that?
Ms. Bell. I mean, I think there's definitely a
collaboration between NOAA and the private sector. I do think
that there needs to be, you know, more funding for that
collaboration because as much as we do need data assimilation,
there are definitely data-sparse regions out there that we need
to look at. And I have talked to NOAA meteorologists, and they
do have a desire to have more data than they currently have.
And I've even talked to forecasters in the office--in various
offices that has expressed the needs of having more real-time
data. Right now, radiosonde launches are twice a day, 0-Z and
12-Z. That misses prime time for having convective outbreaks in
the afternoon. If we had more aircraft data, those
meteorologists in the offices could be looking at soundings
that would help them forecast. So I believe there is a setup
for partnership there, but more work still needs to be done.
Mr. Collins. Can you explain that again? I may have missed
it when you were talking about early--airlines and planes with
the equipment on them. Is that--I thought I heard you say is
that NOAA's equipment or is that private equipment?
Ms. Bell. So FLYHT is currently the owner of a--the sensor,
the Water Vapor Sensing System, so we will contract with NOAA,
and they will buy----
Mr. Collins. Yeah.
Ms. Bell [continuing]. The equipment, and then we'll put
them on the aircraft.
Mr. Collins. OK. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, that's all I got,
I yield back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Mr. Collins.
I now recognize Mr. Frost out of Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this
hearing, and thank you to our witnesses for being here.
The Weather Act is an example of successful bipartisan
legislation and has the potential to be a real weapon in the
fight against the climate crisis by bringing together and
expanding research, data collection, and private--public-
private partnerships to understand increasingly dangerous
weather.
Mr. Jenkins, your company Saildrone, which has sent
autonomous sailing vessels to map some of the most remote
oceans in the world and even sailed through hurricanes, which
being from Florida is very personal to me, has been working
with NOAA since 2014. In what ways has the 2017 Weather Act
positively impacted that partnership? Like what differences
have you seen?
Mr. Jenkins. To be brutally honest, I don't think it has at
all. We've done some amazing work with scientists and the
creators. These are the frontline scientists who want the data,
want the information. We have about 45 peer-reviewed papers
written by government scientists about our data being climate
quality, how much difference it can make to climate models, to
weather models. We don't have a program where it can transition
into operational models, operational programs. All scientists
want the money, they ask for the money. There is no money
available to progress those programs from demonstrations up to
big programs. So we have a lot of 1-year funds, which is
appropriations trying to achieve things, but we'd love to see
something like the Weather Act actually create a vehicle
whereby these technologies that are proven to be working and
TR-9 readiness level 9, ready for operations, transition into
full-time operations, supplying data to models for
assimilation.
Mr. Frost. OK. Thank you so much. I--you know, and I think
that it's very important that the data and research purchased
with public dollars are available to the public for awareness,
research, data collection, innovation. Mr. Jenkins again, to
what degree is the data collected through your NOAA
partnerships available to the public, and what is the process
like for making it available?
Mr. Jenkins. So we give all our data to NOAA in real time,
so two types of data. There's near real time, which is about
eight second delay to get the data, which is a low resolution.
It's down sampled. And then they get the high resolution data
when the vehicle comes back to shore. So they get the entire
data set from the vehicle both in real time for modeling and
for--in high resolution for physics experiments and other kinds
of deep dives in technology.
At that point, it's up to NOAA when they distribute it. I
believe NOAA's mandate is to release all data they have, which
they're allowed to do with our data of course. That's really a
NOAA decision on when it goes public. A lot of the scientists
who write papers want to hold that data back for a few years so
it's not--doesn't reveal the findings of that paper. So it
varies from National Weather Service buy our data for
atmospheric soundings, pressure, temperature, wind speed, et
cetera. That's almost instantaneous. Other deep projects, ocean
currents bathymetry is much longer times getting it released.
Mr. Frost. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Busalacchi, how do we ensure that the data collected
through NOAA's public-private partnerships stay true to NOAA's
founding mission and continuing the mission of protecting lives
and property?
Dr. Busalacchi. Thank you for that question. I think we
need to settle on a set of best practices for what is in a data
buy, and that's my experience with the SeaWiFS mission, again,
back to the issue of government insight but not oversight. And
so we never want to be totally dependent on any one particular
company because of the data stream, and it's important to
protecting life and property. The importance of setting up
ancillary science teams to extract even more information out of
the data, we need data streams that are stable, continuous, and
calibrated for actually decades. Sensors always degrade, so we
need to have--make sure that the raw data, the level zero data
are archived permanently so that we can reprocess them as
algorithms and prove--we can improve our science. We need
insight to the instrument characterization, access to the
calibration validation, verification data so that we can ensure
the integrity of this data set going forward.
Mr. Frost. Got you. Yeah, you know, it seems like there
still is a real role for public research and academic research
in predicting weather events, which again, being from the State
of Florida is really important for me, both in terms of
resiliency, but also in terms of being able to look at patterns
and ensure that we're prepared for these storms. You know, we
just had Ian last year, which was one of our worst storms that
we've had and longest storms.
This is for anybody on the panel. I'm curious. I'd love to
hear if there are examples of where data collected through the
partnerships with NOAA, the public-private partnerships were
able to provide better predictability and warn us of extreme
weather events.
Mr. Jenkins. Back toward the hurricane directly, we're
working--this is our third year with hurricanes, and that is
transformationally new information. It's the first time we've
got data from the surface of the ocean, inside hurricanes.
Hurricane intensification is very poorly understood. We've got
much better tracking the direction of hurricanes and the path,
but the intensification has gone actually down in skill. So the
storm is getting stronger before reaching land, probably due to
the warmer temperatures, but it's unknown. So putting our
vehicles into those hurricanes is actually tangibly affecting
the model science to help us improve rapid intensification of
hurricanes.
Mr. Frost. All right. Well, thank you so much. I yield
back.
Chairman Miller. Thank you, Mr. Frost.
And in closing, I just want to thank the witnesses for your
valuable testimony and for the Members for their questions here
today. The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and written questions for Members.
The hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:09 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Michael Eilts

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Max Miller

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
