- CHIPS ON THE TABLE: A ONE-YEAR REVIEW OF THE CHIPS AND SCIENCE ACT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CHIPS ON THE TABLE: A ONE-YEAR
REVIEW OF THE CHIPS AND SCIENCE ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-24

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-349PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 19, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Acting Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    12
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15

Witnesses:

The Honorable Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary of Commerce, U.S.
Department of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    17

Discussion.......................................................    26

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary of Commerce, U.S.
Department of Commerce.........................................    72

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Documents submitted by Representative Scott Franklin, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
Letter to the Honorable Gina Raimondo, Secretary, U.S.
Department of Commerce, from Representative C. Scott
Franklin, et al............................................   102
United States Department of Commerce, ``COVID-19 Workplace
Safety Plan,'' DOC COVID-19 Coordination Team..............   106

Document submitted by Representative Suzanne Bonamici, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
``CHIPS Child Care Requirement--Equitable Implementation
Promotes Stable, Well-Compensated Early Childhood Jobs,''
Center for the Study of Child Care Employment, University
of California, Berkeley....................................   124

CHIPS ON THE TABLE: A ONE-YEAR
REVIEW OF THE CHIPS AND SCIENCE ACT

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brian Babin
presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. The Committee will come to order, and without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
And before we begin, Secretary Raimondo has informed us
that she has only two hours available for this hearing, so in
the interest of time, Ranking Member Lofgren and I are limiting
ourselves to very brief opening statements, and we're asking
the Secretary to do the same.
Additionally, to give as many Members as possible a chance
to ask questions, and in concurrence with the Ranking Member, I
ask unanimous consent to limit each Member's Q&A to four
minutes. Without objection, so ordered.
I would also like to request unanimous consent to submit
two statements for the record. The first is from Chairman
Lucas, who could not be with us here today. As you know, he has
had a terrible accident with a bull. He's a rancher, and he is
recuperating. We look forward to his return soon and to his
leadership because his leadership is dearly missed. The second
is a full opening statement from myself. Without objection, we
will enter that.
So I'll recognize myself for one minute for an opening
statement. So I would say welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's first oversight hearing on the CHIPS for
America program. Secretary Raimondo we appreciate your
willingness to testify today. Thank you for being here. I
understand you were in traffic. I'm sorry to hear that. It's
not a rare occurrence, but your last-minute notice that you
were only able to dedicate two hours of your time to discussing
a $50 billion program is frustrating to say the least to the
Members of this Committee, who have a responsibility to oversee
your use of these taxpayer dollars and ensure that the program
is a success. I hope that you will at least commit to meeting
in person with any Members of this Committee, whether
Republican or Democrat, who are not able to ask the questions
that they prepared for this hearing, and I hope that despite
our time constraints that we will be able to have a productive
discussion today.
Congress funded the CHIPS program to bolster national
security and to ensure that semiconductors can be produced here
in the United States in a cost-competitive way, but the
policies advanced by this Administration during implementation
have been criticized for driving up the cost of doing business,
so I expect that to be a strong topic of discussion today,
along with guardrails to protect our investments from
benefiting our adversaries.
I look forward to the dialog that we will have today, and I
look forward to hearing more about the near-term future of the
CHIPS program directly from the Secretary. So thank you,
Secretary Raimondo, for taking the time to join us today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's first oversight hearing on the CHIPS for
America program.
It has been just over a year since the CHIPS and Science
Act was signed into law. This law, while much larger, more
expansive, and more expensive than many could have predicted or
may have wanted, was meant to ensure economic stability and
prosperity for the United States long into the future. Whether
that intent becomes reality, however, depends largely on
efficient implementation.
The U.S. Department of Commerce is responsible for carrying
out much of the CHIPS and Science Act, including the CHIPS for
America program. This program, which will be the focus of
today's hearing, will receive a combined $50 billion in
taxpayer funding to be distributed over five years.
Congress appropriated these funds to bolster national
security and ensure semiconductors can be produced here in the
United States in a cost-competitive way. But the policies
advanced by this administration during implementation have been
repeatedly criticized for doing nothing but driving up the cost
of doing business.
Make no mistake, this is a zero-sum game. The mandatory
spending for CHIPS was not a down payment. More expensive
projects means fewer projects funded.
If we do this right, the global semiconductor supply will
be insulated from market volatility and geopolitical conflict,
and it will prevent many of the disruptions that occurred
during the COVID pandemic. It would also ensure the U.S. reaps
the economic benefit of leading the field.
However, if we burden state and local governments and
industry partners with regulatory requirements, long review
timelines, and unrelated paperwork, we risk wasting billions in
taxpayer funding and weakening our competitive advantage over
our adversaries.
Secretary Raimondo, we appreciate your willingness to
testify today, but your last-minute notice that you are only
able to dedicate two hours of your time to discussing a fifty-
billion dollar program of such importance is frustrating to the
members of this Committee who have a responsibility to oversee
your use of these taxpayer dollars and ensure they are used
effectively.
As Secretary, you carry the weight of ensuring the CHIPS
program is a success, so I hope you will at least commit to
meeting in-person with any members of this Committee, whether
Republican or Democrat, who are not able to ask the questions
they have prepared for this hearing.
Secretary Raimondo, you are a leading advocate for the
program and have championed the administration's semiconductor
and workforce policies - both those included in the statute and
those not - since it was signed into law. I am sure you will
field many questions - though not as many as we thought given
your time constraints - on those policies over the course of
this hearing.
So far, the Commerce Department has launched the CHIPS
office, released several vision and opinion papers, and issued
two funding opportunity notices for ``fabs'' and supply chain
projects. The Department has also launched efforts to begin the
process of standing up the National Semiconductor Technology
Center. These are all notable milestones, but much more remains
to be done.
There are fundamental challenges that must be overcome for
the CHIPS programs to be a success. Despite billions in
government funding, it remains much more expensive to build and
operate a manufacturing facility in the United States than in
other parts of the world.
We don't know what the global semiconductor market will
look like in the long term. And our own analysis has shown that
the current advanced manufacturing workforce supply and demand
structure could leave tens of thousands of high-paying domestic
jobs in the industry unfilled.
We must also ensure the record investments made through the
CHIPS programs benefit the United States and our allies - not
our adversaries abroad.
The CHIPS and Science Act includes ``guardrails'' for
protecting investments in semiconductor manufacturing, new
research security measures, and other provisions that, once
fully implemented, will make it harder for adversarial
governments to strong arm American companies.
America cannot profit from trade and international
collaboration if China and other nations are allowed to steal
intellectual property or cutting-edge research. We cannot
afford to settle for business as usual.
Secretary Raimondo, you said repeatedly that passing CHIPS
and Science and building our semiconductor industry was a
matter of national security. Allowing partisan politics or
political gamesmanship to influence the way these funds are
distributed or who reaps the most benefit will jeopardize the
entire enterprise. Efficiency, effectiveness, and objective
evaluation must be core tenants of this program if it is to
succeed.
I look forward to the dialogue we will have today, and I
look forward to hearing more about the near-term future of the
chips program directly from the Secretary. Thank you, Secretary
Raimondo, for taking the time to join us today.

Mr. Babin. So I would like to now recognize the Ranking
Member, the gentlewoman from California, for an opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, like you, I ask
unanimous consent that my full statement be made part of the
record. In the interest of time, I'll just say that CHIPS for
America represents really a historic investment in reshoring
our semiconductor manufacturing and innovation capacity.
However, there are challenges in carrying out such an ambitious
program. One of the concerns I have, which I've mentioned to
the Secretary, is what steps the CHIPS program is taking to
ensure that companies receiving funding implement the very
highest standards for the handling of toxic chemicals.
I come from Silicon Valley, where we've seen firsthand the
tremendous benefits of this semiconductor industry, but also
problematic environmental legacy of some chip production. So we
have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to revitalize the U.S.
semiconductor industry, but we also have an opportunity to do
it in a way that protects American workers.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing and
welcome Secretary Raimondo. As Secretary of the Department of
Commerce (DOC), your presence here before the Science, Space,
and Technology Committee reflects just how much our nation's
economic competitiveness is tied to our leadership in science,
technology, and innovation.
In a few years time, we will know whether the passage of
the CHIPS and Science Act last year was truly the turning point
that we all hope and believe it to be. The fate of that Act,
and all of its promise, is not about luck or circumstances out
of our control. It's not about regulatory hurdles or lack of
human capital. It is very much about the choices we make in the
next few months and years. We are having a remarkable debate in
this body right now about taking a sledgehammer to our Federal
budget rather than meeting the call of the CHIPS and Science
Act to invest in our nation's future competitiveness, well-
being, and national security.
I know that many of my Republican colleagues truly
understand the critical importance of these investments. I hope
that we can find the will to come together not simply to fund
our government- which is a pretty basic requirement of our job
- but to make the necessary investments in fusion, in AI
(artificial intelligence), in quantum, and across the full
range of scientific and engineering fields that will drive
solutions to our nation's and globe's most pressing problems
and cementU.S. global leadership.
Today, Secretary Raimondo, you were asked to focus your
testimony on the CHIPS part of CHIPS and Science. That is the
one part of the bill that received an actual appropriation, not
just an authorization. And it does truly represent an historic
investment in reshoring our semiconductor manufacturing and
innovation capacity. I appreciate what a monumental task you
and your staff have been asked to take on. Your staff have been
transparent and responsive to the Committee in our oversight
efforts to date. I thank you for that, and for appearing before
the Committee today. This Committee's job is to help you
succeed through our oversight work. To that end, I anticipate
many thoughtful questions today as we continue to receive
feedback from a diverse array of stakeholders and have our own
questions about the details of implementation.
I personally have been particularly concerned about the
health and safety of workers in semiconductor fabrication
facilities, and what steps the CHIPS program office is taking
to ensure that companies receiving CHIPS funding implement the
highest standards for handling of toxic chemicals. I come from
Silicon Valley, where we have seen first-hand both the
tremendous benefits of the semiconductor industry but also the
dark environmental legacy of chips production. This includes
terrible effects to pregnant women who worked in this industry
and experienced miscarriages and birth defects as a result of
exposures to toxic materials. It is essential that we learn
from our past mistakes and prioritize the health of our
semiconductor workforce and their families.
I look forward to today's discussion about this and other
important issues related to implementation of the CHIPS Act.
Thank you again for being here today, Madam Secretary.
I yield back.

Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Secretary Raimondo, for joining the Committee
today. Although I can't be there in person, I'm expecting this
to be an informative hearing with productive discussions about
the Department of Commerce and your work to support American
competitiveness in semiconductors.
The CHIPS and Science Act was passed to achieve two goals -
to bolster the domestic semiconductor industry and to support
the basic research and fundamental science that keeps America
at the cutting edge of scientific development.
The bill doubles down on basic R&D at the Department of
Energy (DOE), National Science Foundation (NSF), and National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
As I like to remind people, the ``chips'' portion of the
bill will build factories today, but the ``and science''
portion will build American technology for generations to come.
This Committee has held multiple hearings touching on the
research provisions in CHIPS and Science, but this is the first
focusing on the chips incentives program.
That program was given $50 billion in mandatory funding to
increase domestic semiconductor manufacturing, research and
development. That's a significant commitment, and it's crucial
that these taxpayer funds are managed effectively and support
the Congressional intent of the legislation.
That intent was to build up our chips production to shore
up our supply chain, stay ahead of our adversaries, and reclaim
our global competitiveness in this critical industry.
Before we passed this legislation, you made it very clear
that you considered this a matter of high urgency and national
security.
I tend to agree.
So I'm concerned that the first call for funding proposals
came with a number of stipulations that are clearly more about
fulfilling a political agenda than they are about building our
chips manufacturing capabilities.
Extraneous provisions like requiring fabs to provide
childcare or encouraging unionized workforces are less about
building up domestic chip production than they are about
pursuing a social agenda.
They add time and expense to fab construction and operation
and we're working with a limited pool of resources on both of
those.
Money that goes to meeting unrelated requirements is money
that doesn't go to bolstering domestic semiconductor
production.
It's important that we get this right not just for this
program, but because this will affect our ability to make
similar commitments in the future.
There will come a time when we need to make another
substantial investment in science and technology and when that
day comes, we will need to show positive results from this one.
So as we move forward, I encourage the Department of
Commerce to keep in mind the Congressional intent of moving
quickly and efficiently to build out our semiconductor industry
and will prioritize that growth.
I hope this hearing will serve as a productive discussion
of the CHIPS program and how we can make it as effective as
possible.
Thank you for your time, Secretary Raimondo.

Mr. Babin. I now recognize--thank you, Ms. Lofgren. I
recognize the Secretary for her testimony for four minutes.
Thank you very much.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE GINA M. RAIMONDO,

SECRETARY OF COMMERCE,

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE

Secretary Raimondo. Thank you, and good morning. I--a few
things. One, I'm delighted to be here. Secondly, I spoke with
the Chairman yesterday and reassured him that I'm happy to
spend any amount of time with any of you on any topic. Also,
after speaking with you yesterday, we shifted the schedule a
bit, so be able to be here for at least 2 1/2 hours.
I just want to thank you for this chance to update you on
the CHIPS and Science Act, as outlined in detail in my written
testimony. We've made significant progress since about a year
ago when the bill was passed. As evidence of that, for CHIPS,
we've received more than 500 statements of interest from
companies who want to participate and about 100 applications
for the incentive program, so we are on track to launch the
National Semiconductor Technology Center (NSTC) this fall,
which I know many of you will want to talk about.
At EDA (Economic Development Administration), we've
launched two initiatives, the Tech Hubs Initiative and the
Recompete Program. We're working as quick as we can to have
announcements on both of those programs this fall. I will tell
you both of these programs are massively oversubscribed. In
addition, NTIA (National Telecommunications and Information
Administration), NIST (National Institute of Standards and
Technology), and NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration) are working to implement additional provisions,
happy to talk about any of that.
I just want to reiterate what you all know and what the
Chair and Ranking Member have said. In addition, if successful
in implementing CHIPS and Science, which is, as the Ranking
Member said, unprecedented and historic, the United States will
become the premier destination in the world for where we design
new chip architectures, do research and development (R&D) in
our research labs, make chips for every end use, manufacture
chips at scale with American workers in the United States, and
package the most sophisticated chips in the world, all here on
our shores. That's the vision that we're trying to achieve with
your support.
And, you know, with that, I'm happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Raimondo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Babin. I want to thank the Secretary for her testimony.
Now, the Chair would recognize himself for four minutes.
Secretary Raimondo, during negotiations of the CHIPS and
Science Act, Science Committee Republicans developed strong
guardrails that prohibit any company that accepts a grant
incentive from expanding or building new advanced semiconductor
manufacturing facilities in a country of concern, including
China, for 10 years. The language also gives the authority to
you, Madam Secretary, to recover any incentives received should
a company be found in violation of this. Can you please provide
a short update on when the Department of Commerce's rule for
implementing the guardrails will be finalized so that we can
review it, considering the public comment period ended in May?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, thank you for your question. So
the answer is very, very soon. In a matter of weeks that will
be completed. You know, I'm trying to move as fast as I
possibly can, but more important than going fast, I need to--we
need to get it right, especially with respect to these
guardrails. The whole purpose of the CHIPS program is national
security, and so we have to be absolutely vigilant that not a
penny of this helps China to get ahead of us and that none of
these companies who receive our money do any research with
China or investment in China that in any way undermines our own
national security. So very soon it'll be out and, you know,
look forward to working with all of you to implement this
program to achieve its goals.
Mr. Babin. OK. The CHIPS and Science Act requires
guardrails to be a part of any agreement or contract the
Department enters as part of the $39 billion taxpayer-backed
CHIPS Incentive Program. How is it then that the Department has
been accepting applications for the Incentives Program since
March without the guardrails being finalized? And how is the
Department making it clear what commitments that applicants
will be required to make when applying for the program if this
rule has not been finalized? It makes no sense.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, so we--so, as you can imagine,
these are incredibly complicated applications. We're requiring
a huge amount of information from these companies. We obviously
aren't going to make any commitments to any companies and
certainly not give any money to any companies until the
guardrails are firmly in place. But if we were to--we're trying
to parallel process so we can move fast, so we thought it was
prudent to start, you know, seeking information so that
companies could get into a good position to apply while
finalizing the guardrails, but obviously no commitments will be
made to any company----
Mr. Babin. OK----
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Until the guardrails are
in place.
Mr. Babin. All right. Can you commit that no application
will be approved or money sent out the door until the
guardrails are finalized? Yes or no?
Secretary Raimondo. Absolutely.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much.
Second, the Department is standing up tracks to provide
space situational awareness data. Isn't this reinventing the
already existing system at the Pentagon, very briefly?
Secretary Raimondo. No, no, we're working on, like you say,
space situational awareness with the Pentagon, with an
interagency to track the commercial satellites and commercial
space traffic. It's more congested in space. We have to prevent
collisions and the like. So no, it's an interagency process,
and I think it's necessary.
Mr. Babin. OK. All right. The CHIPS and Science Act forbids
companies from using CHIPS funds for stock buybacks. The CHIPS
Act Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), however, goes
further. It asks applicants whether they plan to engage in any
stock buybacks over the next five years and states that
Commerce will, quote, ``evaluate applications based on the
extent of the applicant's commitment to refrain from stock
buybacks,'' unquote. Does that mean that Commerce will deny
funding for applicants who plan to engage in any stock
buybacks? And if not, then how should companies who engage in
stock buyback in the normal course, what would they think about
this provision?
Secretary Raimondo. No, is the answer to your question. If
you do buybacks, you're still eligible to receive the money.
But, look, as you know, the whole point of this program is for
companies to invest in research and development, manufacturing
in the United States, and so we're going to be tough on
companies. Like we want to see how--what are their investment
plans, what are their research and development plans. They
should be putting their money into investing in America and
research and development in America. So we protect taxpayer
money. We can't be giving them money so they can go give it to
their shareholders to make more money. This is money to race
ahead for investments in semiconductor industry in our country.
So it's not a prohibition, but it is a signal to industry that
we are serious that this is not about padding their bottom
line. This is about enhancing their ability to innovate in
America.
Mr. Babin. Well, I have one more question but I'm out of
time about Fluoro Technology and PFAS, but I will submit that
for the record.
And so at this time, I would like to recognize the Ranking
Member from California.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary. It's great to see you here, and I appreciated the
time to talk to you earlier about health and safety for workers
in the chip industry.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, Silicon Valley has
been the home of chip manufacturing for many years. It's a
wonderful opportunity. It's helped build the valley. On the
other hand, there has sometimes been a downside. Multiple
studies in the 1980's and 1990's found that women working at
microelectronics manufacturing sites had miscarriages at twice
the expected rate. And although the industry has made
significant strides in terms of the use of hazardous chemicals,
in some cases there is no alternative for a hazardous chemical
in the manufacturing. And in that case, special care must be
made to prevent exposure to the workforce.
I'll just note that this is from an OSHA (Occupational
Safety and Health Administration) missive, and I'll read it.
``OSHA's mandatory PLs (Public Laws) remain in effect. However,
OSHA recommends that employers consider using the alternative
occupational exposure limits because the agency believes that
exposures above some of these alternative exposure--
occupational exposure limits may be hazardous to workers, even
when the exposure levels are in compliance with OSHA standards.
And in fact, it's the EPA (Environmental Protection Agency)
standards in those cases that need to be applied.
I'll just say this. I appreciate your willingness to work
with me on this. I look forward to vigorously engaging with you
to see how we can get the great benefit of the CHIPS Act but
also protect our workforce.
Let me ask another question. There's a company in
California not in my district with an important question that
has broad policy implications. This company never offshored,
and so, as a consequence, their costs were higher because labor
costs are higher in the United States. They are worried that
they might be at a disadvantage in the selection process
because of their higher cost structure. What's the Department's
general view on using the loan program to use U.S.-only
semiconductor manufacturers to refinance existing debt if it
results in additional capital investments in the United States?
What's the view on using the loan program to allow U.S.-only
semiconductor manufacturers to use loans for purposes of
funding operational and workforce development costs? And is
there concern about the higher cost structure disadvantaging
them in the competition accurate?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So a couple reactions, mindful of
time. On your first point, I am totally committed to working
with you like we talked about. These are--these companies use a
lot of chemicals. Necessarily, it's heavily chemical-based, and
as you say, sometimes OSHA isn't enough. So let's figure out
better ways to work with companies to----
Ms. Lofgren. Absolutely.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Secure health and safety.
Secondly, the answer is yes. We look well upon using loan
authority and grant authority to help small companies, U.S.-
based companies to, you know, defray the additional cost
associated with the cost of U.S. labor. I would say, in a way,
that's the point of this whole program. I mean, the truth of it
is, you come from Silicon Valley, that's where all
semiconductors once were, and then it was in search of cheap
labor that these companies all went to Taiwan, China, Malaysia,
et cetera. That's the point of this subsidy, to allow American
companies and American workers, you know, stay in this
business, accounting for the fact that it is more expensive.
So I'd say we're going to look--I have assembled an
amazingly talented team. There was a piece in the Wall Street
Journal about it a few months ago. I'd welcome any of you to
come over to the Department to meet this team. We have some
top-notch investment people, a top-notch loan expert. We're
going to be as creative as possible to stretch the money as
much as we can to help American businesses.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has expired,
and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just slightly off that topic, regarding NOAA's misguided
East Coast vessel speed rule regarding the North Atlantic right
whales, you know, we had heard from NOAA that one or less
whales on average per year have been killed by boats, and I'm
wondering why the Administration would move forward with
releasing the proposed rule later this year, and then next
year, hold a workshop on how technology can help protect the
whales. It seems like they're putting the cart before the
horse.
Secretary Raimondo. So one thing I've learned since being
Commerce Secretary is that the most complicated issues aren't
semiconductor technology. It's the fish issues. And I would be
very happy coming from the Ocean State myself to come back to
you on that, sir, and give you, you know, a proper answer. And
I'll have Dr. Spinrad, who runs NOAA, get in touch with you.
But I will say this. I am personally sympathetic to both sides.
We have to, you know, preserve the environment and protect the
whales, but also I know a lot of people make a living as
fishermen, and so let me come back to you with a better answer.
Mr. Posey. Yes, as the former Governor, I wouldn't expect
that you would like the way they rolled that rule out, and so I
appreciate that answer.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, it's complicated. They're often
subject to lawsuits, so permit me to come back to you.
Mr. Posey. I'll do that. What specific steps is the
Department of Commerce taking to protect American interests at
standard bodies where China has flooded them with high rates of
participants and submissions?
Secretary Raimondo. I worry a lot about this. We have a
whole working group inside of Commerce at NIST just focused on
showing up at standards bodies and exactly what you say. It
sounds, you know, not sexy and boring, except when the Chinese
write the standards to favor them, then we get locked out, and
so I have put a huge priority on reinvigorating our presence at
standard-setting bodies all over the world. One little example
I'll give you is we were successful in getting the American
chairperson of the ITU (International Telecommunications
Union), the telecommunications union, because the Russians were
backing an alternative. And we won, and that's because we
focused on and put a campaign in place because, you know,
standards really matter.
Mr. Posey. Well, you just answered my next three questions,
so, Mr. Chairman, I'll yield back the balance of my time. Thank
you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
I'd now like to recognize Ms. Bonamici from Oregon.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you to the Chair. Thank you to the
Ranking Member. Thank you, Madam Secretary. It's good to see
you.
The CHIPS and Science Act is making historic investments in
U.S. semiconductor manufacturing in supply chain improvements
and in cutting-edge research and development. Now, the Ranking
Member said she represents the Silicon Valley. I represent
Silicon Forest, and as a representative of the Silicon Forest,
I'm excited for the opportunities.
And it was a pleasure to host you in Oregon, Madam
Secretary, where we heard from students at Portland Community
College (PCC) and learned how they are preparing to enter the
workforce. PCC has a program called Quick Start in which they
partner with the semiconductor leaders like Intel, for example,
to provide skills-based training for the next generation of the
semiconductor workforce.
So, Madam Secretary, we need more pathways for people to
enter the growing semiconductor and advanced manufacturing
industries. So what workforce education programs is the
Department investing in to meet the R&D goals of CHIPS? And how
can Congress and the Department make these programs accessible
to more diverse learners, including rural and underserved
communities?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, so great question, and I love
visiting. We had a great visit, and I was blown away by what I
saw at the community college. I should tell you, if you were to
say to me what keeps you up at night, it's a long list, but the
workforce is something that we--that I worry about. Right now,
there's about 100,000--there's a need for industry to have
100,000 semiconductor technicians, and that number is going to
go up to about 300,000 pretty quickly. Technicians don't need a
four-year college degree. The community college is a perfect
training ground, maybe a high school plus credentialing
program. So we're doing a few things. As you know, we're going
to stand up the NSTC that'll have a whole workforce component.
We encourage universities and community colleges to hook into
that. And for every CHIPS applicant, every company that
applies, we're requiring them to give us a workforce plan, so
what are you going to do? We're asking States--I'm calling
Governors myself and convening Governors to say, invest your
State money into workforce programs, including community
colleges. The NSF (National Science Foundation) has a couple
hundred million dollars.
So anyway, long story short, every single thing we're
doing, whether it's the CHIPS money or the R&D money or
outreach, it's to try to get States to put skin in the game so
we can do this.
I'll tell you some good news. We already have over 50
community colleges that we know of that have put out new
training programs related to the semiconductor industry----
Ms. Bonamici. That's exciting.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. So we just got to keep
going.
Ms. Bonamici. I don't want to cut you off, but I want to--
--
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, yes, go ahead. Sorry.
Ms. Bonamici [continuing]. Get another question in.
Secretary Raimondo. That's a topic for----
Ms. Bonamici. For a prepared and diverse workforce ready to
implement the act, there must be access to high-quality,
affordable childcare.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Ms. Bonamici. And I'm hearing this across northeast Oregon
and across the country. Under your leadership, the Department
is pioneering the requirement that CHIPS applicants must or
should, depending on the size of the award, provide childcare
for their workers, and I appreciate this commitment because of
the serious challenges in the care economy. So, Madam
Secretary, what criteria will the Department use to evaluate
the accessibility and quality of these childcare services, and
how will the Department encourage applicants to partner with a
diverse range of providers like Early Head Start or home-based
childcare services?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So we're asking every company to
show us their workforce plan, including a childcare plan.
There's no one size fits all. It'll be different in every
State. But it's exactly what you say. You can't hire the
workers you need unless women can work, and that's not going to
happen unless there's childcare that's affordable. I'm not
doing that because it's a social issue. It's a business issue.
You talk to any CEO (Chief Executive Officer)----
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. And they tell you the same
thing.
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely. Thank you.
And, Mr. Chairman, as I yield back, I request unanimous
consent to enter into the record a brief from the Center for
the Study of Childcare Employment at UC (University of
California) Berkeley on implementing the CHIPS childcare
requirements and supporting good-paying early childhood
education jobs.
And also, Mr. Chairman and colleagues, this is a good
investment in our future to invest in our children. They will
be the next generation of semiconductor workforce.
And I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Without objection, so ordered.
I would now like to introduce--excuse me, Mr. Garcia, the
gentleman from California for four minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Madam Secretary, good to see you again. Thanks for
coming in.
I respect and I agree with your comments. I think the
biggest threat to the CHIPS Act is the workforce right now if
we can't figure out how to get that right. So I applaud the
efforts. We need all hands on deck, all demographics, both
sexes, and everyone to max participate to support this.
I want to thank you again for taking the time before the
CHIPS was brought to the floor for a vote to help me get
comfortable with the requirements, the diligence that you're
putting into making sure--Mr. Chair, we spent several hours in
the skiff with the Secretary's team, as well as some corporate
subject matter experts, to make sure that we're porting over
the requirements list to the DOD (Department of Defense)
applications because it's--it would be a terrible thing to
build semiconductor chips for refrigerators and cars, only to
find out that we have no industrial base to service the
hypersonics, the exotic weapons that we need in a fight against
China. So I'd like for you to touch on that, Madam Secretary.
And I also want to thank you. We are getting actually very
positive feedback from local industry partners in my district
in southern California from your team. The engagements that
you've had that you described have been fruitful, and I think--
I know it's early, but the feedback is very positive, so I
appreciate the execution on that.
And then last, before I hand it to you, just in the
interest of time, we had talked about over the phone a couple
of months ago supporting you with an initiative. This trade
fight that we're in with China, this this macro issue that we
have with China being the biggest threat to the United States
right now as a pure adversary, we have to figure out how to get
to some sort of reciprocal trade agreement. I think you and I
share that opinion. I just want to reiterate that I'm at your
disposal. I am happy to pull together a bipartisan group of
folks. I know, you know, folks like Mike Gallagher on the China
Select Committee, both sides of the aisle to come together to
help enable you in that process. It's a long-term, you know,
problem I know, and the answers aren't easy, but I think it's
important that we do get together and start bending the arc
toward a reciprocal trade agreement. China is doing to us right
now things that we should not tolerate, but if we're going to
allow them to do it, we should at least be able to do it to
them and have access to their markets, their intellectual
property (IP). The agreement should be fair and balanced and
reciprocal, and I think you understand and appreciate that.
The last thing--so if you could talk to the requirements,
and then I also want you to just touch on briefly your level of
satisfaction. I know it's not related to CHIPS, but are you OK
with the way Treasury right now is currently managing and
making sure that we are enforcing the sanctions against Russia,
relative to the Ukraine conflict, if you can touch on those two
things. Thank you.
Secretary Raimondo. OK. Good morning. Nice to see you.
Mr. Garcia. Good to see you.
Secretary Raimondo. On the defense industrial base, one, I
guess, update I think since the last time I saw you is that
we've executed an MOU (memorandum of understanding) with the
Defense Department to share information and work together on
exactly this issue. So we get from DOD what are the defense
industrial base CHIPS needs to make sure that, you know, as you
say, what we are incentivizing fulfills those needs. So I feel
good about that. It's progress, and we're working very closely
with the DOD and the intelligence community----
Mr. Garcia. That's great.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. So that's a good update.
Reciprocity to China. I'm going to come sit with you
because I only have a minute now. I'll just say when I was in
China, I was very clear that you know, Alipay and UnionPay do
business in the United States, Visa and MasterCard cannot.
Their autonomous vehicle companies are piloting on our roads
right now. We cannot. Their media companies every day are
submitting content in the United States. We cannot.
Mr. Garcia. That's right.
Secretary Raimondo. It's a long list. It's not fair. Enough
is enough. Let's level the playing field. And so I think
there's a lot--I'll come visit with you----
Mr. Garcia. OK.
Secretary Raimondo. [continuing]. After my trip, and----
Mr. Garcia. Appreciate it.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Maybe we can talk about
it.
On Russia, you know, that--Secretary Yellen and the whole
team, I think, is doing a fantastic job under great--really
difficult circumstances. The thing I'm focused on is the export
controls. It's--I'll be honest, it is a brutal day-to-day
fight. Every time we find out that they're going around our
export controls, we come down on them, but it's a little like
the whack-a-mole. Russia has been putting these global networks
together for decades. They're good at getting around us, and
I'd like think we're even better about stopping it. So my point
of it is, is vigilance. You've got to take it--take it to it
every day with vigilance, and that's what we're doing with the
export controls.
Mr. Garcia. Make sense. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. OK. Now, I'd like to recognize Ms. Stevens from
Michigan.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you. Good morning. It's so nice to see
you, Madam Secretary. And as I was thinking about today's
hearing, I was reflecting on the incredible workforce at the
Department of Commerce. And I know that you have been busy
setting up a team, the CHIPS team, CHIPS for America team
within the Department itself and at NIST, and it's just a
remarkable set of people who are implementing a very historic
endeavor. And I'm going to take you up on your offer to come by
and sit down with the investment crew and some of the other
folks that are working on the initiative.
But I did just want to ask you a couple of questions. One
is about open source central processing units, the CPUs. As you
know, anyone in the world can contribute instructions to the
design of open source CPUs, which then can be used for
electronic products. And currently, there aren't requirements
or regulations to ensure that open source CPUs have not had any
instructions added by actors like China, Russia. I know Mr.
Garcia was just talking to you about export controls. So if you
have any reflections on open source CPUs, in addition to what
you just shared about export controls, we are all ears.
Also, we saw that the CCP (Chinese Communist Party) came
down with some restrictions on gallium and germanium. Gallium
is used in the microelectronic components of many electronics,
and germanium poses many military applications critical to our
national defense. And so, given these developments, what
industrial policy initiatives has the Department considered,
maybe a CHIPS-like initiative for rare minerals that you could
implement if we want to draft another kind of CHIPS 2.0 type of
legislation surrounding germanium in particular, given how
critical that's going to be to--you know, to the CHIPS
implementation?
And then last, if you have any other comments around the
CHIPS office and the R&D facilities that--the commercial
opportunities for R&D facilities that you're going to put
forward. Thank you.
Secretary Raimondo. OK. OK. So on the gallium germanium,
you know, that seems clear to me to--that's their tit-for-tat
sort of retaliation, and I think, you know, we're not going to
be scared by that. We need to do what we're going to do to
protect our national security, period. And we have allies
around the world who can provide some of those critical
minerals to us, or, as you say, we--you know, we can innovate
here. I would welcome the opportunity to work with you or
everybody to sit down and make a plan around critical minerals.
You know, what are the most important critical minerals for
products we need for our national security like CHIPS? And if
we can't, you know, mine them or process them in our own
country, then where else besides China in the world can we
because we can't be held hostage. And so I would welcome that.
Ms. Stevens. Great.
Secretary Raimondo. The CHIPS team--I would--I've been in
government now as an executive for more than a dozen years.
This CHIPS team is like nothing I've ever----
Ms. Stevens. I know. It's gold.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Created. It's over 100
people, really top talent working seven days a week. I'm very
proud of them. It's a hard job so would welcome your
engagement.
On the research and development, this fall, we're going
to--you're going to--I would say in general, this fall we will
have big announcements on tech hubs, Recompete, NSTC, R&D. You
know, the bill passed a year ago. We've been working like
crazy. The next few months, you're going to see announcements
on all of that, and we want to work with, you know, whoever in
Michigan or any of your States, nonprofit, for-profit that we
think can add to the innovation ecosystem.
Ms. Stevens. Great. Thank you.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I'll yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. Now, I'd like to recognize the
gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Fleischmann.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
thank you so much for appearing before us today.
I have two questions. The first is on the RAN, the Radio
Access Network. The CHIPS and Science Act contained funding for
grants that could help increase supplier diversity in the
wireless industry by supporting Open Radio Access Networks, the
ORAN. Can you give us your thoughts on the program on how these
funds can help scale new, commercial-ready, open RAN vendors?
And what is at stake if these funds aren't quickly deployed to
help spur the development and deployment of open RAN wireless
networks?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, thank you for the question. So, as
you say, there's $1.5 billion in the CHIPS Act for ORAN. I
would say I think it's vitally critically important because we
need secure 5G and 6G networks and--you know, to protect
ourselves. And one way to do that to bring down the cost is to
have them be open. So we put out the first money in August of
this year. We put out $5.5 million for the first awards. We're
going to put more money out later this fall. We're very engaged
with industry. I've actually been meeting myself with the
wireless carriers. That's the key, I think, to get the carriers
to be open to--what do you call it--like embracing this instead
of just working with incumbent hardware providers. So I think
it's a critical innovation for our national security, and I'm
actually grateful that Congress put that money in the bill.
Mr. Fleischmann. And I thank you, and we'll work with you
to continue to expedite that, so I thank you so much for your
answer.
My next question deals with semiconductor manufacturing tax
credits. Without going into too much detail, on section 48(d)--
I just wanted to let you know we were talking about--earlier
this year, Commerce issued proposed guidance for the CHIPS
Act's grant programs that defined semiconductor as
semiconductor devices only and defined semiconductive
substances such as polysilicon as material. The Department of
Treasury unfortunately relied on this narrow definition in
their proposed regulations for implementing the act's tax
credits, excluding investments in U.S. polysilicon
manufacturing and other facilities in the supply chain from
qualifying for the credit. I feel that without domestic
polysilicon ingot wafer manufacturing, we won't be able to
build out our domestic semiconductor manufacturing supply
chain.
So my question, Madam Secretary, is will you commit to
working with the Department of Treasury to issue final
regulations that correctly define semiconductor to include
semiconductor substances such as polysilicon and wafers, which
represent critical parts of the semiconductor manufacturing
supply chain?
Secretary Raimondo. So let me say, as you correctly say,
this is in Treasury's wheelhouse, so--but yes, I will work with
you and Secretary Yellen to look at this issue, recognizing
that, you know, my authority relates more to the grant program.
And Secretary Yellen is in charge of the 25 percent ITC
(Investment Tax Credit). But I hear you. We can follow up and
we, you know, can talk to the Secretary's team.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Because with that narrow
definition, it does exclude a lot of things that are critically
important, in my view, to creating that domestic supply chain.
And I think what Treasury did is they respectfully incorrectly
latched on to a very narrow definition, which we'd like to see
expanded and broadened.
And I thank you, and with that, I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thanks.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And now the gentleman from New York, I'd like to recognize
Mr. Bowman.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Good to see
you, Madam Secretary. Thank you for being here, and thank you
for your tremendous work.
I'm concerned about the Recompete Program. In my district,
there are many historically marginalized, underserved, red-
lined, under-resourced communities that lack the infrastructure
to go after some of the grant money that is available as part
of the Recompete Program. What are your thoughts in terms of
supporting these historically marginalized communities and
building the infrastructure and accessing the resources that
are necessary to create jobs and, you know, like you mentioned
earlier, 100K shortage in semiconductor tech jobs that these
communities could really benefit from? Can you speak to how to
provide more on-the-ground support for historically
marginalized communities?
Secretary Raimondo. So it's a great question, and the whole
point of the Recompete Program is to make investments in
communities that have been historically behind, and our plan is
to run an open, you know, merit-based process, then to pick a
handful of places to make fairly significant investments
because I know from experience if you're starting, you know,
with nothing, you need some critical mass, which requires a big
investment.
We are providing every bit of technical assistance that we
can to help communities to apply. This is an initiative that's
got a couple of steps in the application process, and we're
really trying to provide technical assistance. That being said,
I'm not going to sugarcoat it. This is tough. I know in Rhode
Island the communities that--they are left behind. As a result,
they don't have, you know, much of the infrastructure. They
don't have a planning team. They don't have money to hire a
lawyer to submit the grant. So we're doing what we can to
recognize that, but in your case, or anyone's case, if you have
a community that you think is worthy with some money, you know,
could be successful, then we will reach out to you and we'll
help you to help them to apply.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you. And I'll have my office follow up
with you on that because we definitely want to partner with you
in that conversation.
I had another question about regional tech hubs, regional
tech and innovation hubs. So I was proud to contribute ideas to
the bill about how we can bring minority women-owned businesses
and CDFIs (community development financial institutions) to the
table and how we can use the hubs to promote employee ownership
and cooperative business models. As you implement these
programs, how are you approaching the challenge of building and
actually keeping wealth in local communities, particularly
vulnerable communities, as we just talked about? How do we make
sure the benefits don't just go to large corporations and
distant investors?
Secretary Raimondo. With tech hubs? So----
Mr. Bowman. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Let me say something on
the tech hub initiative. I've never seen anything like this,
this oversubscribed. We were appropriated $500 million, and we
have received over 400 applications. We are massively,
massively, massively oversubscribed, 400 applications from 48
States and three territories. We are going through the
applications. We're required by statute to designate at least
20, but that means, you know, 380 disappointed places. And I
can tell you, you know, these are incredibly high-quality
applications. So I suppose that's my way of saying I think at
some point you should appropriate more money for this----
Mr. Bowman. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Because it was authorized
at $10 billion, we got $500 million. It's amazing what we're
seeing. And this is the thing that allows us to compete with
China, invest in America and all of our technology and all of
our communities.
So the point of this--Recompete is for really distressed
places. Tech hubs, you know, not so much. Honestly, we want to
find places that are really good at some technology, and we can
take them from good to great. So I don't want you to think that
this is for distressed communities.
That being said, it's also not just for big companies.
Actually, tech hubs, we want to be looking for the next
generation. I don't think of it so much as big companies. CHIPS
has become--this is for, you know, like a startup ecosystem, an
R&D ecosystem, a new innovative way of job training, so that's
how we think about it. That's the purpose of it. And I think
we'll get that right and make sure we get into every nook and
cranny of the community.
Mr. Bowman. Yes, there's a company in my district SEEQC
that works on superconductor-based technology, so I want to
give them a shout-out as well. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
And now the gentleman from California, I recognize Mr.
Issa.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, you have what some have considered to be
the key Cabinet position because it's really a conglomerate of
a lot of things that didn't necessarily go together but
Congress saw fit to bring them together. Conveniently and
interestingly, we're here to talk about the CHIPS Act, but I
think what's interesting is two have your key Under
Secretaries, your Under Secretary known as the BIS (Bureau of
Industry and Security) and your Under Secretary known as the
director of the PTO (Patent and Trademark Office). When you
were in China just days ago----
Secretary Raimondo. I believe so.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. You were you were bushwhacked to say
the least by the launch of a 5G phone and the proof that China
has achieved seven nanometer capability. That wasn't an
accident. They chose you as an important symbol of their
accomplishment. The tools that are at your disposal, one of
them clearly to stop the export of technology that allows
exactly what has just occurred to occur. The other one, though,
is the one I want to focus on for a moment. Even though the
Under Secretary for intellectual property, the PTO Director, is
somewhat independent, still falls under yours--and the
coordination is uniquely yours as the Secretary--my question to
you is three of the top 10 patent recipients last year were
Chinese. Only one was American. The reality is that Huawei, a
company not able to do business in the United States, continues
to receive--and often clandestinely through proxies--they
continue to receive royalties because they are in fact
patenting the technology.
And there were a couple people that talked about trees and
valleys. I'm from Telecom Gulch, San Diego. We are extremely
concerned that your Administration has to find a way to block
in a different way. It's not just about a particular device
going to China from Lam or some other entity. The reality is
that if China's allowed to create blocking and revenue
technology in 5G, in telecommunication, in a host of areas as
they are, the patent system, both directly through real
innovation and through what I would call AI blocking, in other
words, coming up with patents that envision things that they
haven't really reduced to practice, will be used against us to
thwart us. What can you do with the combination of those and
other tools?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, so let me say this. I would
welcome to come sit with you if you have ideas for our
consideration. We're trying to do--use every single tool at our
disposal, BIS, enforcement, patents to deny the Chinese an
ability to, you know, get intellectual property to advance
their technology in ways that can hurt us. I was obviously--I
don't know what the right word--upset, you know, when I saw the
Huawei announcement. The only good news if there is any is we
don't have any evidence that they can manufacture seven
nanometer at scale. And although I can't talk about any
investigations specifically, I promise you this. Every time we
find credible evidence that any company has gone around our
export controls, we do investigate.
But as it relates to IP, I'll come sit with you or have
Kathi Vidal come sit with you. If you have ideas for how we can
tighten it up, I want to hear them.
Mr. Issa. Well, I have been able to meet with Kathi. I'd
love to meet with you because during the time I left Congress
for two years, I would--my job was to try to figure out how to
compete with Belt and Road, and we don't do it well because we
don't coordinate the way China does----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. In competing against us. I would
like to see in technology that we do coordinate yours and other
parts of the government, so I'll be happy to meet with you at
your convenience.
Secretary Raimondo. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
And now, the gentlewoman from North Carolina, Ms. Ross.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Chairman Babin and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this very important hearing today. And
thank you, Madam Secretary, for being with us.
North Carolina's semiconductor industry boasts over 100
semiconductor and other electronic component manufacturing
establishments, over 7,600 people employed in the sector, and
$1.2 billion in exported product. The passage of the CHIPS and
Science Act was critical in reenergizing the U.S. semiconductor
production and maintaining America's technological global
competitiveness.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST's
extramural manufacturing programs are critical to supporting
U.S. domestic manufacturing, and Congress authorized
significant plus-ups for both the Manufacturing Extension
Partnership (MEP) and the Manufacturing USA program in the
CHIPS and Science Act, with major support from the Biden-Harris
Administration. But, as you know, Congress failed to
appropriate funding to these programs at the level set in CHIPS
and Science.
So, Madam Secretary, could you talk about the opportunities
that the United States is losing out on by not supporting the
Manufacturing Extension Partnership and Manufacturing USA? And
how would a decrease in funding to these programs affect
domestic manufacturing?
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you for your question. So I think
it's very significant. You know, we talk a lot about securing
our national security, competing with China. The exchange I
just had with Congressman Issa relates to what we can do on
defense. But my strongly held view is that what we do on
offense matters so much more. You know, there's only so much we
can do. As he just said, China is coordinated, they're
investing. We need to be coordinated and invest. And the
reality is that over the past 30 years, this country has taken
its eye off the ball of manufacturing, and when you don't
manufacture, you lose out on innovation and you become
dependent on other countries. So every investment we make in
MEP--MEP is a great program. You all have MEPs in your States.
They are very well-run. They help small companies to do
innovation and manufacturing. They're the ones who are going to
find, you know, the next semiconductor manufacturing
innovation, the next, you know, interesting battery technology.
And so I would say we're working hard on the Manufacturing
USA. We're going to announce the topics this fall. There'll be
a competition of merit-based. We'll stand it up next year. But
yes, any--if it's--shortchanging MEP or Manufacturing USA
shortchanges America's national security and our ability to
invest in our own manufacturing capacity.
Ms. Ross. Great. Final question, back to NIST. I know that
the Department of Commerce, primarily through NIST, is looking
to increase its investments in quantum information science.
Where do you believe the Department of Commerce should focus
its efforts for the next five years with--through the National
Quantum Initiative?
Secretary Raimondo. I'm going to have to get back to you on
that. A quantum expert, I am not, but I will have Dr. Locascio
and her team follow up with you.
Ms. Ross. OK. And just to tell you why I think that's so
important, some of this we're doing catch-up or we ceded our
semiconductor stature to other countries when we----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Ms. Ross [continuing]. Put manufacturing there. On quantum,
we can be the leaders, and we already are----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Ms. Ross [continuing]. Maybe Representative Foushee will
ask about this, but if you've never been to the Duke Quantum
Science Center to see what is going on for the future, it's
amazing, so thank you.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, no, thank you. I think we do--we
lead the world in quantum. We lead the world in AI. And I will
have Locascio follow up with you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good morning,
Madam Secretary. I appreciate you spending time with us here
today. It's a very important topic, and I'd love to talk more
about CHIPS.
Unfortunately, since I do have your present, I would like
to follow up on something that our office has been trying to
get some answers on for a while. And as much as we all are
tired of talking about the topic, it concerns COVID. I hail
from central Florida. The hurricane hunters that fly for NOAA
are in my hometown of Lakeland. And as a former naval aviator,
I made it a career practice to avoid flying into storms, but
was invited at a point to go flying with the Hurricane Hunters,
and I was looking forward to doing that.
Back in July, when I was going to do all the paperwork
necessary to do that, I was surprised to find that I would have
to supply my status of COVID vaccine--vaccine status and be
willing to submit to a test or show proof that I didn't have
COVID at the time. That kind of came as a surprise to me,
considering that the Administration had declared an end to the
pandemic. And I should have done this before, but, Mr.
Chairman, I request unanimous consent to enter into the record
a letter I sent to the Secretary back in July, as well as the
Department of Commerce's ``COVID-19 Workplace Safety Plan''
that was dated in July 2023.
Mr. Babin. Without objection.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I--you know, so our staff started doing some research and
finding out why, why would we still be requiring this. And, as
it turns out, you know, I read in your Department's own plan
that the Department does not require onsite contractor
employees and visitors to provide information about their
vaccine status at this time. Additionally, onsite contractor,
employees, and visitors are not required to show proof of a
negative COVID-19 test when entering in--or a DOC facility, all
Department of Commerce, regardless of their vaccine status.
There's a disconnect there that I'm really puzzled about
because somewhere between your desk and the deck plate level,
someone's decided to create their own policy. And in no way do
I fault the folks who were at the tip of the spear trying to
get this done, but I--you know, 41 of my colleagues and I sent
you a letter back in July asking for information about this. We
still--I'm sure it's languishing in someone's inbox, but I'm
curious, why would NOAA still be requiring this at this time,
particularly----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. An organization that's nothing
but scientists who presumably are following the science every
day?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So thank you for your question.
Let me say a few things. First, I'm sorry we haven't replied
yet. I'm constantly trying to get better and quicker at
replying, and we'll get you a reply this week. Second, I don't
know, and I'll look into it. I do know, you know, they're very
close quarters in these hurricane hunters, they're tiny, and it
could be that, but I'll get you a proper answer.
Thirdly, I do want to take 10 seconds to say thank you to
the--to my team that operates these hurricane hunters. It's
been an unbelievably busy season. We only have two hurricane
hunters that can fly into the thick of the storm. You're braver
than I. I'm--they've asked me to try it----
Mr. Franklin. I don't fly into hurricanes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. And I'm not willing to do
that----
Mr. Franklin. Right.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. But I am going to take
this occasion to ask Congress for additional funding. We have
two planes. They're old. We operate a fleet of nine hurricane
hunters. They are all old. They need maintenance. I had to take
one down during a hurricane because of maintenance. So I'll get
you proper answers to your questions, but I do want to say that
team is working around the clock, and we need Congress' support
to maintain this fleet.
Mr. Franklin. Now I do fully support them, and I would
support more resources for them. I do understand Miss Piggy was
down, wasn't able to fly into the storm when we needed that
data the most.
I'm also concerned about the implications for NOAA staff.
You know, our staff members of NOAA are required to show
vaccine status now because that's also not in accordance with
the----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. Administration. So I really
would like to have those answers.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Franklin. And----
Secretary Raimondo. I'll get you the answers. We have a
policy that is science-based, as you say, and so I'll follow
up.
Secretary Raimondo. Very good. Thank you, Madam Secretary,
and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you.
Now, the gentleman from Illinois, I'd like recognize Mr.
Sorensen.
Mr. Sorensen. I want to thank the Chairman and Ranking
Member for convening the hearing and Secretary Raimondo for
your willingness to appear today.
And just to continue on the subject, in my previous life, I
was a meteorologist, and so I really appreciate your support
for those who put themselves in harm's way, flying into the
hurricane so that we have the data to better forecast where
these killer storms are going to go. So I would invite you to
come to our office so that I could help champion how we can
find the funding for the hurricane hunter aircraft to protect
lives and property.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Sorensen. The CHIPS and Science Act included $50
billion for CHIPS for America Fund, $39 billion for
implementation for manufacturing incentive programs, and $11
billion for R&D and workforce development. Thirty-nine billion
dollars, that's a huge investment in chips manufacturing.
However, the cost of manufacturing is very high, more than will
be covered by this investment. We need industry to capitalize
on the investments made in CHIPS.
In the last year, CHIPS Program Office has staffed up and
released two Notice of Funding Opportunity announcements. One
of those was for the $39 billion for the Semiconductors
Financial Assistance Program, which has received hundreds of
statements of inquiry. In your perspective, have the
investments made through CHIPS and Science Act incentivized and
catalyzed the investment of private capital in the chips
economy on the scale that we need?
Secretary Raimondo. So it's a great question. Yes, so let
me say, although $39 billion is an enormous amount of taxpayer
money and it's an unprecedented program, it really is a drop in
the bucket, you know, relative to the mission we have to meet.
Since the President signed the CHIPS and Science Act, there's
been more than $300 billion of private investment announced
into the semiconductor industry, so that's why I answer yes to
your question. Like if we continue to go on a path that for
every dollar we invest there's $10 or more of private capital,
then, you know, that--I feel good about that. But it is
necessary, which is why, you know, my job is to cut the best
deal possible for the taxpayer----
Mr. Sorensen. Right.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. To draw in as much private
capital as possible.
Mr. Sorensen. How does our investment compare with China's
investment today?
Secretary Raimondo. Much lower, much lower. I mean, I don't
have the numbers in front of me, but, you know, China--I think
China--I'll get to the exact number, but I think they have like
$145 billion fund just for semiconductors, and they've
announced massive investments, state subsidies in legacy chips
and mature node chips, so much lower. But, you know, our
private sector is the envy of the world. You know, we're not a,
you know, state-run economy, nor do we want to be one. So we
will compete and win, and we're not going to go toe to toe with
them for public money. We're going to out-innovate them and
draw in private sector capital, which is why the question
you're asking is so hard. It's the right question, and we have
to make sure it happens.
Mr. Sorensen. How do we make sure that we meet the
workforce requirements when we go forward? I know that was
brought up before. And how can Congress be part of the
solution?
Secretary Raimondo. You know, I think Congress needs to
continue to fund workforce. Workforce, apprenticeships, job
training, these aren't social programs. These are essential
business investments for America to compete. You know, when I
think about--if you say to me, Secretary, what is success in
implementing the CHIPS Act? It isn't just incentivizing a dozen
new fabs. It's getting colleges and universities to put out
three times as many engineers. It's getting, you know, every
community college in America to have a semiconductor technician
certification program. It's getting high school students, you
know, to be taught vocational training and things that relate
to the chip industry. So I'd say continue to fund it and don't
look at it as a soft investment. It's actually every bit as
important to invest in our people as it is in our tanks and
missiles and, you know, hardware.
Mr. Sorensen. Great. Appreciate that perspective, and I
yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, sir.
Now, I'd like to recognize Mr. Baird, the gentleman from
Indiana.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member, for holding this session. And thank you for being here,
Madam Secretary. We appreciate it.
My question is, you know, that among the requirements for
those seeking CHIPS funding, they must comply with the NEPA, or
the National Environmental Policy Act, and other environmental
laws and other Executive orders. So tying NEPA compliance to
CHIPS funding means that any company applying through any of
the funding opportunities, including the upcoming one focused
on R&D, will need to navigate this process, and for some firms,
carrying out the environmental reviews is familiar. It is
resource-intensive, and the process is feasible given to the
bandwidth and capital that they have at their disposal.
However, the smaller businesses in the semiconductor materials
and equipment sector, there's a real risk that the requirement
to comply with NEPA may impact the disbursement of CHIPS
funding and/or slow down the pace of construction.
So here's my question. How's the CHIPS Program Office
working with its industry partners, particularly small business
applicants, to assuage this concern? And how can the CHIPS
Program Office work with State and local authorities to reduce
the potential for duplicative compliance activities that might
further delay the construction of new fabs of other
manufacturing centers?
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you for your very important
question. You're right. NEPA takes a long time. And so I have
built a little team in the CHIPS office to do just NEPA, which
is to say to provide help and assistance, technical assistance
to applicants so they can have a NEPA plan which makes sense.
I will say there is currently a bipartisan amendment to the
Defense Authorization Act which would help a lot. So we're
going to do everything we can with our own team to help
streamline NEPA and move it as quickly as is prudent, but if
Congress could pass the amendment--I think it's the Cruz-Kelly
amendment in the Authorization Act--it would help us a lot to
move faster.
The other thing I wanted to say is in the--the way we're
implementing CHIPS is we're trying to incentivize States, to
your point, trying to incentivize States to help us with the
permitting. And so, for example, States--we've encouraged
States' Governors' offices to put in point of contact on
permitting for CHIPS so there's just like in the Governor's
office, a CHIPS permitting team because that's what--we're
trying to, like you just said, streamline between the feds and
the State requirements, and we're giving like--you know, like a
plus one to States that actually do that.
There's no easy solution on this. I worry about it myself.
And like I said, we have--I have a very good team of NEPA
experts trying to, you know, work the system properly so that
we get it done as quickly as we can.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. That's good to hear. You know, I got
to give a shout-out to my alma mater, Purdue University.
They're working--doing a lot of work in this CHIPS area.
They've gone from a small little wafer up to an 18 inch wafer
now to make the chips, so--and they're training these young
people, too, and students. So I just want to give them a shout-
out for the good work in the CHIPS area.
Secretary Raimondo. So I'm smiling because one of the best
visits I've taken on my--at my tenure was to Purdue. I mean,
I've loved all my visits. But Mitch Daniels is a friend of
mine, former Governor, and what he did there was amazing. But I
spent the day at Purdue, and I even went to a chips job fair at
Purdue, and I got to meet some of the professors there, what
they're doing in chips. It's like right on target. If every
community did that in this country, there'd be no stopping us.
Mr. Baird. Mitch Daniels is my friend, too, but anyway,
Purdue--and we really appreciate you taking the time to be
there.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I've already been once. It was a
great trip and happy to go back.
Mr. Baird. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you.
I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms.
Salinas.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to you
and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing. And thank you,
Secretary Raimondo, for taking the time to speak with us today.
So just before we get started on some of my questions that
relate back to my district, you mentioned a lot of
announcements coming this fall. And I know a lot of the money
has already been--the funding has been appropriated. But how
would a shutdown--a government shutdown actually affect all the
rollouts and timelines that you are facing right now?
Secretary Raimondo. It would be crushing. You know, I--when
I talk to Members of Congress, they say, how come you're not
moving faster on CHIPS? You know, where's this, where's that?
We are literally working seven days a week to go as fast as we
can. If there's a shutdown, it'll come to a grinding halt. I
mean, there is no question in my mind this shutdown will hurt
America's national security, at least as it relates to my work.
Export control enforcement, export control work, investment of
the CHIPS money, investment of the tech hub money, it all
stops, and every dollar and every day that we aren't working,
you know, puts us greater at risk.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And, as we know, as Oregon is not
only home to Intel and companies like Lam Research, which is
actually in my district and they manufacture chips as well, we
host a significant manufacturing hub that contributes to the
semiconductor supply chain, and these are really good-paying
jobs. And I hear from these smaller companies though,
machinists, for example, that it was a huge shock for their
businesses when chip fabrication initially started moving
overseas, and in some cases, these businesses took many years
to recover. And they may hesitate to fully jump back in because
of that experience.
So as we look to jumpstart this essential industry, how
should we be thinking long term about the supports to ensure
that this isn't just a one-off investment, but that we are
really bringing this industry and these jobs back permanently
for the long haul?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. I think a few things. We need to
embrace innovation, including artificial intelligence, which
will bring down the cost of a lot of this production in a way
that it could enable us to keep it in the United States. The
other thing is that's why we--honestly, that is why we have the
CHIPS initiative. It is, you know, much more expensive to build
one of these huge facilities in the United States relative to
Asia, and that's why I think this is a good investment, right?
Like, we want to pay workers a good wage in America. We want
labor standards. We need environmental standards. So we can't
back away from high standards. We need to innovate to bring
down cost, and then, you know, that's why the--I think it's
appropriate in this case for the government to have a program
of this kind.
I also will tell you, as I talk to big customers of
semiconductors--I won't name names, but, you know, companies
that consume huge quantities of chips, they're increasingly
willing, in some cases, to pay more for U.S.-made because they
see how vulnerable they are when they buy all of these chips
from, say, one country in Asia. So if they can pay a premium to
have U.S.-made chips, you know, I think they're increasingly
willing to do that because it adds business value.
Ms. Salinas. That's right. That's right. Thank you.
As you know, the CHIPS and Science Act appropriated $11
billion for R&D activities, including the creation of the
National Semiconductor Technology Center, as you mentioned
earlier. Oregon's existing infrastructure in chips, including
everything from cutting-edge research to the manufacturing
supply chain to high-volume fabrication capacity, uniquely
positions the State to serve as a hub for domestic R&D. How are
you thinking about leveraging existing resources such as
Oregon's leading-edge and high-volume manufacturing
capabilities and our extensive supply chain to maximize NSTC
investments?
Secretary Raimondo. We are thinking of doing that. Like so
what we envision is creating a whole network. The NSTC we want
to be a neutral science-based place or series of places that
existing universities, tech hubs, networks, like you say, can
kind of hook into. So the point of it is to tap into what
exists, invest into it so it grows, and to--like if we succeed,
the NSTC will be this place, as it says, is neutral and is
science-based so that all institutions feel comfortable
interacting with it.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Georgia,
Dr. McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, sir, and thank you, Ms.
Secretary, for being here with us today.
It's limited, so I'll get right to the point. Space Policy
Directive 3 transferred the responsibility for civilian space
situational awareness from the Pentagon to Department of
Commerce. From what I understand is--since it's transferred
away from the Pentagon, most other agencies that are monitoring
have been using commercialized monitoring, but you're kind of
developing your own system itself. How's that going to differ
from the Pentagon? And why not rely on the commercial industry
rather than creating your own kind of what seems duplicitous
and fairly expensive?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, good--great question. So we are
going to work with the Pentagon, and we will absolutely
leverage commercial capacity. And we haven't made any specific
plans. We're still, you know, working in the interagency,
including with the Pentagon, to finalize this. All of that
being said, there's a need for a space situational awareness,
you know, program not that different from, you know, FAA
(Federal Aviation Administration) and air traffic control to
keep track of the commercial congestion in space of the
commercial satellites. Space is becoming, you know, a lot of
traffic, very congested, which increases probability of
collision, danger, et cetera.
Mr. McCormick. So I know we're really short on time.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, sorry.
Mr. McCormick. Specifically, like we have places like
LeoLabs and stuff like that, people who are kind of doing that
already, and they have--actually have broader access to more
locations than we would have, which we'd have to recreate in
the Department. My question is, why not use those civilian
agencies and that coordination between commercial instead of
recreating your own infrastructure, which would seem to be much
more expensive?
Secretary Raimondo. We will work with them, but we think
it's necessary for the Federal Government to have our own, you
know, proprietary system.
Mr. McCormick. OK. I want to talk real quick about China
and the massive satellite launches that they have right now.
They're going to be basically the same kind of orbit, the LEO
(low-Earth orbit) orbit. I think somewhere around 13,000 that
they've asked to launch up to space and how we're going to
track that. Basically, my question is, what is the Department
of Commerce doing to establish data sharing and transparency to
keep all that in a safe space, given our limited ability to
share information right now? China is not playing ball, and
they're not allowing us to track in the same way, and we can't
just rely on radar tracking. I know it's going to get harder as
people come up with new technology and stuff like that. How do
we force their hands to kind of come to the table and share the
information to keep our space, especially LEO, from being on a
collision course?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, let me do this. I--my Deputy
Secretary Don Graves, along with Rich DalBello, who runs Space
Commerce, can give you a much better answer, a more detailed
answer to that on LEO. So let me connect you with them and come
back to you with the proper answer.
Mr. McCormick. Complex questions, I know.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. Final complex question. I'm very interested
in the AI production, the actual hardware that we're producing
in Taiwan. You mentioned at the opening CHIPS Act and that we
rely heavily on the hardware that's produced in Taiwan. China
says we're going to take Taiwan. I take them for the word. If
they do, what then? We were two years away from even--you know,
once you break ground, it takes two years to build that kind of
capacity locally.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. Would we have to then--do we have a way to
keep them from getting that technology and actually reverse
engineering and actually having the capability to produce it
and not give it to us? If they take the--in other words, are
we're going to have to destroy those places in place? How do we
keep us on an even keel or even ahead where we belong given
that our entire capacity for production is in Taiwan right now?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. My answer to that question is I
have to do everything every single day to go as fast as
possible to increase domestic manufacturing. I don't know--I'm
not going to engage in hypotheticals about what China will and
won't do and when they'll do it. I know that we are vulnerable.
We buy all of those chips you're talking about the AI chips,
the leading-edge chips, all of that--none of them are made in
America right now, which is why I've got to work like crazy
every day to bring that manufacturing home as fast as we can. I
don't--there's no shortcut around that because we need them at
scale. You know, like AI consumes massive numbers of chips.
It's not like you can make a small number of chips for AI. So
unfortunately, the only solution, at least that I can think of,
is move faster in America and build fabs in America to produce
those chips at scale.
Mr. McCormick. I'll close with this, to saying that I think
the CHIPS Act kind of didn't address that fully, that we really
don't have that production capability, nor do we even have a
plan to--the plants aren't--haven't started being built here
for the AI chips, and I'm really worried about that. Thanks.
With that, I'll close.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you.
And I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman Ms. Foushee.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this meeting today. And, Secretary
Raimondo, it is good to see you again. Thank you for being
willing to appear before us again today.
I was proud to join you and President Biden earlier this
year in North Carolina's 4th, which is my district, for the
President's first stop on the Investing in America Tour, and I
thank you for talking with us about the success of CHIPS and
Science and where we're heading. I am proud that in my
district, it includes North Carolina Biotechnology Center, who
leads the Accelerate North Carolina Life Sciences Manufacturing
Coalition, a recipient and winner of the Economic Development
Agency's Build Back Better Regional Challenge. This funding has
helped to dramatically increase the capacity of the State's
education system to prepare North Carolina residents for high-
quality, well-paying jobs and expands entry-level biotechnology
training programs at 10 community colleges across the State.
North Carolina Central University in my district is also
leading a network of the State's HBCUs (historically Black
colleges and universities) and one historically American Indian
University to establish six training hubs. How do you believe
these tech hubs programs will complement the efforts of the
CHIPS office to reinvigorate the U.S. domestic semiconductor
manufacturing sector?
Secretary Raimondo. Good morning. Nice to see you. They're
meant to work together. They're meant to work together. If we
do this right, the NSTC, which we just talked about, will work
with Manufacturing USA, the MEPs, the tech hubs. As I said,
I've been blown away by--we have 400 tech hub applications from
48 States, really high-quality applications. So if we do it
right, we'll have a whole web all over America with different--
investing in different parts of the supply chain, in space, in
quantum, in artificial intelligence, in biotechnology, you
know, feeding--you know, planting seeds of innovation all over
the place, which then will help these--our biggest companies,
you know, for example, like a company like Intel that'll be
making these chips to be that much, you know, more successful
and innovative. So what we're trying to build is like a whole
ecosystem of the workforce, the research and development, and
the actual manufacturing.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you for that. And I'm sure you've heard
from many corners now that everyone wishes you'd just hurry up
and get the money out the door----
Secretary Raimondo. That's true.
Mrs. Foushee [continuing]. After reshoring our
semiconductor manufacturing capacity was a sufficiently urgent
national priority to rally bipartisan support to enact the
CHIPS and Science Act and to provide the $50 billion in
funding. At the same time, we want and need you to get this
right. Can you assure us you're doing everything you can to
move as quickly as possible to get the funding out the door?
And can you please talk about the timeline for additional
funding opportunities and where you see the future of the CHIPS
program heading?
Secretary Raimondo. So, look, I feel the pressure. I
promise you that. I know we have to move fast. Fast is a
conversation we just had. We are behind. But it is more
important that we get it right, and if we take another month or
a few more weeks to get it right, I will defend that because
it's necessary.
By the way, a shutdown sets us back in a huge way. You
know, sending people home and slowing down our work, that would
be a huge problem. So yes, I assure you, we're moving as fast
as we can, and we're doing everything we can to achieve the
national security goals that were intended to be achieved by
the statute.
The next phase, you know, I think that what I've said is
the CHIPS program is about manufacturing, but we also have to
think about advanced packaging happening in the United States.
It's an interesting thing, you know, we can make all the chips
in America, but if we then send them to Asia to be tested and
packaged, that's a problem. So we have to package in the United
States. We have to do the research and--increase research and
development in the United States. And a comment--I forget who
asked me. We've got to bring down the cost of manufacturing
chips. That happens through innovation. So when you say what
comes next, I think that's what has to come next, bending the
cost curve so this can be sustainable in the United States.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And now the gentleman from California, I recognize Mr.
Obernolte.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, thanks for the testimony today. This is a
topic that's very important to me and I think to everyone on
this dais.
I'd like to ask about something that you just brought up
since you brought it up, the issue of packaging. That's
something that I also have been very concerned about because,
obviously, if we can't construct the packaging for these chips
and use that to dissipate the heat from them and incorporate
them into integrated circuit boards, it doesn't matter where
they're made. If we're not doing the packaging here
domestically, that represents an equally potent threat to our
supply chain. And yet, as you remarked, nearly all of that
packaging is currently done overseas. I think all of our U.S.
chip manufacturers do their packaging overseas, you know, by
and large. I think 81 percent of the world's packaging is done
in Asia. So I think that this is a really potent threat.
I know that this is something we've all been talking about.
Part of the CHIPS and Science Act establishes and adds National
Advanced Packaging Manufacturing Program (NAPMP) and dedicated
$2.5 billion to get that spun up. Can you give us an update on
that and your confidence level that we can solve the packaging
problem at the same time we solve the chip manufacturing
problem?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, my confidence level is high
because we have to, right, like we have no choice. And relative
to the question before, it's going to require a lot of private
sector capital. In our plan, in our strategy plan, our strategy
paper, which we put out earlier this year, we would like to
have multiple high volume, advanced packaging facilities in the
United States. So several, like you say, advanced packaging. As
you well know, you're expert in this, you know, there's some--I
hate to use the word like commodity packaging. I'm not sure you
know how much of that will be in the United States, but
certainly the leading-edge packaging, the most sophisticated
packaging, that's essential for the future. Chips can only get
so small. You know, I'm not a scientist, but what I understand
is coming to the end of Moore's Law and chips can only get so
small, which means it's all--the special sauce is in the
packaging, and we have to have that in America, period, and I
think we will, and we're focused on it.
Mr. Obernolte. Great. I'm glad to hear that. You know,
talking about what you just brought up again, you know, the
fact that we're reaching some of the theoretical limits of our
ability to create faster chips using silicon, you know, that
highlights the fact that silicon is not the only semiconductor
out there, and there's increasing interest in other
semiconductors, particularly semiconductors such as indium
phosphide that are optical semiconductors with higher electron
velocities than silicon. And those will probably be very useful
in applications like quantum computing, which I know is
something that we're all very interested in making sure that
the United States retains a leadership role on.
So I was a little alarmed to hear the efforts recently of
Huawei in establishing scale production of indium phosphide at
locations such as the Wuhan Optics Valley in China. Do we have
a plan to dedicate some of the CHIPS funding to increase the
production of these optical semiconductors in the United
States?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I don't know--I just made a note
and I'll have my team follow up with you. I don't know
precisely, you know, which areas, but I can promise you, we're
very focused on it. Whether it's indium phosphide or silicon
carbide, we're trying to stimulate the innovation. Like we're
trying to--we just had a meeting on it the other day, and
you're saying, like, we got to go to where the puck is going,
not where it is now, which is what you're talking about. So
yes, I am confident that we are evaluating all those future
technologies and incorporating that into the way we're going to
invest the incentives.
Mr. Obernolte. All right. I'm glad to hear it. Let's
continue that discussion. Thanks for being here today. I yield
back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you.
I'd like to introduce the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Jackson.
Mr. Jackson. Good morning.
Secretary Raimondo. Good morning.
Mr. Jackson. There are three Members from North Carolina on
this Committee. You've heard from two of them. They were there.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I saw.
Mr. Jackson. Yes. Representative Foushee and Representative
Ross both represent part of the Research Triangle, which
already has a wonderful reputation for being a tech hub,
Raleigh Durham Chapel Hill. I represent a new district, which
was just created in the last census that's the Charlotte
region. And part of my job up here is to tell a new story for
that region to update people's understanding because we have
earned a reputation as our own tech center for a lot of
different reasons, one of the Nation's leading financial
centers and on and on.
You said that part of your job is to get the best possible
deal for the taxpayer, want you to do that, but would be remiss
if I didn't use this opportunity to use my voice to update in
your thinking what this region means, what it means to the
State and what it means to the country because it's just grown
a heck of a lot. And it already is a tech hub and would surely
benefit from official recognition as such.
I think we all know what success looks like for the CHIPS
Act 20 years from now. I think we can have a vision of what a
successful semiconductor industry, a mature semiconductor
industry looks like. My question is what does success look like
five years from now? What are the markers that tell you that
this is headed in the right direction? My sense is that the
CHIPS Act should best be understood as an industry subsidy but
as an industry catalyst----
Secretary Raimondo. Exactly.----
Mr. Jackson [continuing]. Because we don't have the money
to continue to subsidize this industry as the Chinese
Government would. So we have to light a very expensive spark,
and that spark has to catch fire.
Now, you've said--you've given me a couple of possible
metrics that you might be tracking here. Workforce is one. Cost
of manufacturing going down is another. Private sector
investment may be the biggest. So 5 years from now, what do you
want to see that's going to give you confidence that this spark
has produced a flame?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. I mean, that was so well said, and
I appreciate it. First, let me say this on tech hubs. We are
committed to supporting every tech hub that's designated, which
is to say with a very limited amount of money, not every tech
hub will get the money. Some of the ones that are designated
will, some of them won't. But we are working on ways that we
can use existing funds in the Commerce Department and across
the government to support the tech hubs that are designated. So
when you said you'd appreciate being designated, I wanted
everyone to know we're going to put our back into supporting
all the designees, even the ones that don't get tech hub money.
Second thing, you know, it's--here's what I think. Five
years from now if we do our job right, we will have in
construction facilities to do--at least two facilities to do
leading-edge chip manufacturing. Same thing for leading-edge
packaging. I mean, actually, in five years from now, they
should be up and running more than in construction. So we
should have knew at-scale fabs producing leading-edge chips in
the United States, same thing for packaging, same thing for
advanced memory at scale. The NSTC will have--will be
established. There'll be, you know, several centers around the
country doing research and development. We'll have a fund
established to make investments in, you know, smaller
companies, and we'll have one or more Manufacturing USAs up and
running.
So I think that the five-year mark is a really important
mark because it's the time that, you know, these fabs should be
coming online, and we should be, you know, making these chips
at scale. I also--the last thing I'll say is if we do our job
right with all of the workforce, you know, we'll start to see
like a totally new way of training people to do these
semiconductor jobs. And it's not just semiconductors, you know,
they're tech, technicians, cyber technicians and such. So it's
a pretty--it's a grand vision, and I think five or six years
we'll--we will have achieved a lot of that.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. All right. Thank you very much.
And now the--I recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Ms.
Tenney.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairman Babin and Ranking Member
Lofgren. And thank you, Secretary Raimondo, for being here. I
am just so privileged to represent New York's 24th District,
which has a strong history of tech. We have IBM Corning in
upstate New York. The Erie Canal is really one of the first
regions to really bring us into the industrial revolution. But
unfortunately, upstate New York has suffered tremendously
because of Chinese-based entities flooding our market with
over-subsidized cheap goods. Many of our strong domestic
manufacturing has moved overseas. We've lost industry jobs,
and, you know, brought on huge mass outmigration in New York,
as everyone knows.
We were the ones that kind of got this started. North
Carolina has kind of taken over. But we do have an opportunity
now to bring manufacturing and especially the high tech
semiconductor manufacturing research here. We're really excited
about the advent of the new Micron announcement, the facility
coming in Clay, New York. We think it's a great first step.
But I wanted to ask you--I wanted to talk about the--first
of all, the Buffalo--you talked about the hubs and some of the
tech hubs that were going to be funded potentially. I--my
district spans across all of upstate New York. It's a huge,
long district. I go from the Buffalo region to Rochester,
Syracuse, all the way to Watertown, circling Lake Ontario. So
Buffalo, Rochester, and Syracuse have come together. We're
doing this as a regional approach, the New York SMART I-
Corridor Tech Hub. It's a proposal that we're hoping could
leverage our regional labor market, existing semiconductor and
microchip industry. Some of these are holdovers from the
original investments many, many years ago when New York was at
its high, and draw new investments from the private sector, as
my colleague from North Carolina talked about. It's really
important to get the buy-in and the investment from the private
sector, which we're seeing.
And I just wanted to also extend some gratitude here
because we have other Members that are very involved in this
bipartisan reach on this proposal, Representative Morelle, who
I kind of surround in Rochester area, Representative Higgins in
the Buffalo area, Representative Langworthy, Molinaro, and also
Representative Williams, who serves on this Committee. But my
question for you is I just--I don't--are you aware of the New
York SMART I-Corridor Tech Hub proposal that has been--are you
specifically aware of it as been----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Indicated.
Secretary Raimondo. I am aware of it. I know you're taking
that regional approach to all come together. As I said before,
we have hundreds of applications. All of them are quite
excellent. So we're going through them now, and we'll make
announcements pretty shortly this fall.
Ms. Tenney. OK. So the phase 2 tech hub Notice of Funding
Opportunities are going out. Is there still a plan or is there
an update on phase 2, tech hub NOFO? Is that going to be
released as well?
Secretary Raimondo. This fall, yes.
Ms. Tenney. OK. Let me ask you something. Are these going
to be contingent on phase 1 designation? Can we expect phase 1
tech hub designees to be notified as well?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Ms. Tenney. OK.
Secretary Raimondo. So what I was saying to Congressman
Jackson, they--we're required by statute to designate at least
20.
Ms. Tenney. OK.
Secretary Raimondo. And they have to be regionally diverse
to make sure that the money doesn't just go to cities, you
know, rural as well. So there'll be designations. And then some
will receive like a planning grant, and then a subset will
receive a larger grant. But what I was saying is, even if you
don't get the larger grant but you're designated, we're
committed to providing as much government support as we can to
all the designees through, say, other Commerce money or, you
know, other money in the interagency like the SBA (Small
Business Administration) and such.
The reality is we just need more money for these tech hubs.
I mean, it was in the CHIPS and Science program authorized at
$10 billion, appropriated at $500 million, and so even the
subset of the designees that receive the bigger grants, you
know, I--there--I can tell you this. We have a merit-based
team. They're going to go through to evaluate. All of the ones
that are designated are probably worthy for big grants. Like
they're high quality, but we just don't have enough money.
Ms. Tenney. Well, we urge you to obviously choose our tech
hub, but we appreciate your----
Secretary Raimondo. I think I've heard----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Testimony and hard work. We think
we put together a great team, a bipartisan effort and really
just grateful to all the Representatives in upstate New York
for coming back because we--again, we were once the champions
of industry and innovation, and we need to come back. And we
have a great opportunity with this huge investment coming from
Micron.
So we appreciate your testimony. My time has run out, but
thank you so much. I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I hear you. I will say I have
heard from more Members of Congress on tech hubs than anything
else that I've done. It's unbelievable.
Mr. Babin. We protect our turf.
Secretary Raimondo. I love it. I love the advocacy.
Mr. Babin. I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Ohio,
Mrs. Sykes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for this
meeting. And, Madam Secretary, I really appreciate you being
here. I'm going to talk about something different, regional
tech hubs. We--that was a joke. I guess it wasn't funny.
Similar to my other colleagues here, would appreciate your full
consideration of the regional tech hub from our community that
is not based in one of the largest cities in the State. Coming
from Ohio's 13th Congressional District, we do have a bit of a
shadow over us from the larger cities, including Cleveland,
Columbus, and Cincinnati. And Columbus, where central Ohio is,
we know that in central Ohio, where the Intel project is, we
hear a lot about the work from your agency and what is going to
happen, but I encourage you to look at us in northeastern Ohio,
as well as some other areas, smaller areas that have a lot to
contribute to the opportunities to onshore chip manufacturing,
as well as other domestic energy--excuse me, domestic
manufacturing in places that are very much used to doing so and
have the spirit to do it as well, and not to mention the
talent.
I want to also thank you for your commitment to northeast
Ohio. We were in Cleveland together to announce some minority
business opportunities, which is important to getting more
folks into these industries and recently held a webinar around
accessing CHIPS funding for our community. We welcomed economic
development companies, large businesses, nonprofits, as well as
our universities, and they had a lot of questions. And I know
that we submitted those to your office and look forward to the
responses that we get from them.
I just really want to hone in on the workforce conversation
because there's not an industry that I've met with that has
said that they aren't struggling with the workforce. And
certainly in manufacturing and technology, we experience that
as well. And I want to highlight your comment that childcare is
not a social issue. It's a business decision. Thank you for
that. But specifically, if you could talk to us about the
private businesses and what incentives or encouragement are you
sharing with them to make sure we're getting locally based,
Ohio-based folks on these Ohio-based projects? Certainly, we
take pride in the work that we're doing, but we want to make
sure that folks in our communities are accessing them. How are
you encouraging, incentivizing, demanding, mandating if you
will those folks to work with our local employees?
Secretary Raimondo. Great, excellent, thank you. And it was
great to visit with you. I thought we had a great visit. By the
way, I just again want to say on tech hubs, I hear what you're
saying, and we take that into account. Just because you're in a
place that might not be Columbus or might not be, you know,
Raleigh, as your colleague said, we're going to look--take a
hard look at the quality of the application, the quality of the
technology that's in your community, and, you know, make those
merit-based decisions.
With respect to your other question, I would say for the
CHIPS money, we're requiring every company that applies as part
of their application to show us their workforce plan, and I've
actually built a team in the CHIPS office who just works with
these companies to develop their workforce plans. And the
reason I'm doing that is because I've got to protect taxpayer
money. I cannot give all this money to a company and then have
them fail because they can't, you know, find the talent they
need to run the fab. And the same thing for childcare, you
know, you won't find the talent if you can't hire and retain
women.
So we are asking every company to do what you just said.
What are your relationships with local universities, with local
high schools, with local training partners, with local
community colleges? How are you going to train the people in
the community to do the jobs in your facilities? These fabs are
massive, 5,000 people to build them, 5,000 people to work
there, and so that's why when I say the workforce is as
important as the technology, it is, and they've got to train
the people in the community if they're, you know, going to be
successful.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you for your answer, and thank you, Mr.
Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from New
Jersey, Mr. Kean.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Secretary
Raimondo, for being here today.
Secretary Raimondo. Good morning.
Mr. Kean. And while I will talk a little bit about the tech
hubs as well----
Secretary Raimondo. Go for it.
Mr. Kean [continuing]. As a strong advocate for New Jersey
because we have a rich history of fostering innovative
entrepreneurs, and institutions like Rutgers University are
leading the way with proposals for initiatives such as the
Regional Technology and Innovation Hub Program, making it
crucial to recognize the importance of tech hubs and fueling
the spirit of innovation.
Can you continue to talk a little bit about the premise of
the tech hubs and why they're so important?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, absolutely. I've been to Rutgers.
I visited Rutgers, I don't know, a year or so ago so I saw with
my own eyes the impressive work that's happening there in
robotics and other areas. And the whole point of the tech hubs,
including if you are successful in New Jersey, is to find the
next leading-edge innovation in artificial intelligence,
quantum, biotech, AI, all the things are going to allow America
to have a lead in the world. And it starts in universities. It
starts in someone's lab somewhere and then gets translated into
maybe a startup and then to a bigger company.
So the point of the tech hubs is to have a whole network of
these little like beehives of innovation where you bring
together universities with companies, with innovators and
entrepreneurs and add some money to catalyze that kind of
cutting edge, which ultimately leads to jobs. You know, every--
like talking to New Jersey--Bell, think about Bell Labs. Think
about all the jobs and innovation that spun----
Mr. Kean. In my district.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Out of there. Yes.
Mr. Kean. In my district. I was there the last couple
weeks.
Secretary Raimondo. It's amazing, right? I mean, amazing,
amazing, amazing. Thousands and thousands of companies and
people came out of that. Let's recreate that with tech hubs all
across the country.
Mr. Kean. Right. This district that I represent is an
innovation and infrastructure district and continue to have
those priorities. We need to continue to find that common
ground. Can you talk a little bit about export controls and the
importance of how we use export controls in our competition
with the PRC (People's Republic of China) ?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, so that's the other side of the
coin. Tech hubs is investing in America. Export controls, we
have to make sure that China doesn't have access to our most
cutting-edge technology. Since I've been Secretary, we've added
over 700 PRC entities to the entity list. More than 1/3 of all
the Chinese entities on the list were put there under the Biden
Administration, and it's because we can't be selling our most
sophisticated artificial intelligence, chips, or other
technology to the PRC so that they can get it to put in their
military and use it in a way to undercut our national security.
I would say to everyone here, BIS needs more funding. We
need more export enforcement agents. We need more tech experts.
Like increasingly, national security is about technology and
keeping our edge over China, staying ahead of them, and so we
have to control this technology so it doesn't wind up into the
Chinese military.
Mr. Kean. Is there anything that--you anticipated my next
question, which was what do we need to do as a Congress to
ensure that we continue to be on the leading edge of this
fight?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, what I just said is that's it, you
know, support the budget submission. BIS once upon a time
wasn't necessarily as important as it might be today. Today,
when you think about Chinese military capacity, you think about
artificial intelligence, satellites, quantum, data. That's all
tech, where America leads. So if you want us to protect that
fully and vigorously and enforce that, we do need more
resources, more people, and more technical people who work with
us.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Frost.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary. NeoCity is a new and growing 500-acre tech campus
just south of my district that has applied to be one of the
CHIPS and Science Act's regional technology and innovation
hubs. It's a really beautiful project. I really encourage
people to check it out. It shows how local government can
really think big. NeoCity includes SkyWater Technologies, a
chip-packaging facility that's had to quadruple its workforce
in the next two years. And workforce development programs
through NeoCity Academy High School and two colleges in my
district, Valencia College and the University of Central
Florida. Madam Secretary, when selecting regional hubs, how is
the Department of Commerce's Economic Development
Administration taking into consideration local education and
workforce development capacity, especially when the U.S.
semiconductor industry has a worker shortage that can be filled
by locally grown talent?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, thank you, Congressman. I'm not
familiar with that particular application. I will go learn
about it. But it sounds like exactly the kind of thing we're
trying to incentivize, which is what you said, bring in the
high schools, bring in the community colleges, bring in the
research universities, bring in the big companies like
SkyWater, and focus on an area of technology where you can go
from excellent to world class. I do want to make that point,
especially since tech hubs is so competitive. We're not trying
to invest in places--this is a national security program. We
want to advance the frontier of technology, so we're not going
to go for places that are distressed or that are, you know,
pretty good----
Mr. Frost. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. On the technology. We want
to go for places that are excellent on the technology, make a
big investment where they can be world leading in the
technology.
But anyway, the workforce piece of it in some ways is the
whole game. You need the----
Mr. Frost. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. People to work. So it'll
be--the merit-based process, the criteria leans heavily on the
workforce component.
Mr. Frost. OK. Got you. Yes, and definitely suggest
checking out NeoCity. I got to visit the campus. It's a huge
project that'll include housing companies. The school is right
next to one of the companies where students get to go over
there and learn about it. It's really, I think, going to
provide a good model for how we can grow local talent.
The massive investments of President Biden's CHIPS and
Science Act will set the tone for what the domestic
semiconductor industry looks like for years to come, and so we
have the opportunity now to create industry that prioritizes
worker safety and well-being. We've had some great
conversations with the AFL-CIO. It seems like companies are
saying new jobs won't necessarily be union jobs, and there's a
want for substantial, ongoing collaboration with unions and the
Commerce Department and these companies to ensure labor
standards are enforced. What steps has Commerce taken to
prevent a race to the bottom in terms of labor and the fact
that, you know, there's competition with overseas semiconductor
manufacturers?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So, as you said, we are--you know,
we're never going to mandate to a company. There's--Davis-Bacon
is in the statute for the building of the facility, but these
companies are going to have to make their own decisions with
respect to the workers in the facility. That being said, this
Administration cares deeply about high labor standards and
workplace conditions, safety, and wages. So we're having--every
company that's applied to give us their workforce plan, and
we're going to work on that with them to make sure that they
have, you know, a high-quality, well-compensated workforce to
do the job. I see that as a taxpayer protection. They need a
workforce who can, you know, get the job done.
Mr. Frost. Yes. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. Now, I'd like to recognize the
gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Babin and Secretary
Raimondo, for your time today.
Secretary, your department works to ensure U.S. leadership
in critical technologies such as artificial intelligence. This
leadership depends on the Nation's ability to bring advanced
packaging on shore. Advanced packaging combines the fastest
logic chips, specifically GPUs (graphics processing units) and
high bandwidth memory chips and certain design configurations,
allowing the optional language training and interference
techniques at the heart of AI. Do you have a good sense of
which applicants or types of applicants best meet the advanced
packaging needs?
Secretary Raimondo. We do. We do. As you said, we've had
400 statements of interest, some including leading-edge
packaging, and it is part of our strategy to incentivize
packaging because we want to have at least a couple of leading-
edge packaging investments in the United States as a result of
this.
Mr. Strong. Since there's virtually no packaging done in
the United States, do you feel confident in the discussions
with these few companies that work on advanced packaging that
you can strike a deal and bring these technologies to the
United States?
Secretary Raimondo. I do.
Mr. Strong. In August, the Commerce Department announced
that in the year since the CHIPS Act was signed into law that
the CHIPS Program Office has received more than 460 statements
of interest for projects in 42 States. Over August recess, I
had the opportunity to visit with large chemical manufacturers
in north Alabama, who are exploring expansion to support new
semiconductor manufacturing because of the CHIPS Act. While
significant attention has been given to large fabrication
projects announced in States such as California, Arizona, New
York, and Ohio, is it important that project--it's important
that projects in States like Alabama, where there is currently
no significant presence of chip manufacturers, are given fair
consideration. Can you specifically describe the CHIPS Program
Office's efforts so far to ensure that the CHIPS Act is
implemented as a national program with opportunities for States
like mine that also want to play a critical role in the
domestic semiconductor supply chain?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I can absolutely assure you of
that. Listen, this is completely merit-based. There are no
States or projects that have any advantages over any other.
It's based upon who can help us hit our--the mission of the
program, which we've identified in a paper which we put out
earlier this year. I'll say of the $39 billion, we've said that
$10 billion will be invested in mature node chips and also
supply chain companies, which would include chemical companies
like the one you're talking about. So we would encourage them
to apply, and I promise you, they'll get a, you know, really
hard look.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Secretary. North Alabama is home to
a variety of space-based technology research and development
companies, as well as NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center. Both
commercial companies and civil space organizations recognize
the potential of utilizing microgravity as an environment to
make smaller chips. Can you speak to the Department of
Commerce's interest in ensuring that the regulations
implementing the CHIPS Act directly acknowledges and supports
the future of this important work in space?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, it's a component. You know,
although it's sounds crazy to say that $39 billion is not
enough money, you know, we can't do everything, and these are
massive projects. So I can assure you, we are looking to do the
most cutting-edge work, including with AI chips and space-
related chips to advance our national security goals and that
we'll look at all applications, you know, very seriously.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms.
Caraveo.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Secretary
Raimondo, for coming in to speak with us. You know, I think I
would really be remiss if I didn't mention Colorado's bid to be
a tech hub and look forward to following that process moving
forward with you.
Now, one of the best things about Colorado is the
concentration of research universities we have that are primed
to take advantage of the benefits of the CHIPS and Science Act.
These include universities like CU Boulder, Colorado State, and
MSU (Metropolitan State University) Denver, which Deputy
Secretary Graves visited earlier this year. And while I'm eager
to make sure that these institutions are able to take advantage
of the various programs in the CHIPS Act, specifically chips
R&D and workforce programs, I also want to make sure that other
institutions that maybe don't have the clout or the name
recognition of a University of Colorado at Boulder are able to
use these programs as well.
My district is home to the University of Northern Colorado
(UNC), which is a smaller public institution that's becoming an
attractive option for many Coloradans. It's our UNC, perhaps
lesser known than the North Carolina one, but it has seen a
growing demand for undergraduate students to add more degrees
in those STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) fields and is offering computer science and
statistics for the first time this semester as a major. Many
more students are interested in mathematical sciences, and the
university, I think, has been forward-thinking in expanding its
expertise there.
But I want to make sure that even though UNC is still
growing, that they can compete with larger universities for new
R&D and workforce programs being stood up by the Department. So
how is the Department ensuring that smaller institutions that
are still building their STEM programs like UNC will be able to
engage in partnerships under the various chips R&D and
workforce programs?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, thank you. Let me be really clear
about this. We won't succeed unless we have community colleges,
all--not just the tier 1 research universities. In some ways,
you know, a lot of them are already doing their thing. We
talked about Purdue earlier. We are completely focused on what
you're talking about, especially when you have a college or
community college like that hooked into a bigger network of a
statewide system. We need to be operating at every level. You
know, I said earlier, there's a massive shortage of
semiconductor technicians. There's a massive shortage of
cybersecurity technicians, of digital backbone workers. You
know, everyone that that college can put out, we can put to
work.
So--and by the way, I lived this as Governor. You know,
when I was the Governor of Rhode Island, we completely redid
our community college and our non-research university four-year
university to be focused on the industry needs, and it works.
These students in my experience are incredibly hungry,
hardworking, and they're the ones you need to support to get
good jobs. So that's what we're doing. I mean, we are reaching
out. We already have, I think, 50 community colleges around the
country that we're kind of working with or who have said they
want to work with us to do what you said, like redesign the
curriculum to match the needs. It's why we're asking companies
to give us their workforce plan, and then we're going to work
with them to say, have you thought about this college? What are
you doing with this university? What--you know, so we're--the
NSTC is going to have a big workforce component, a
semiconductor workforce component which will work with these
universities. The NSF has a couple hundred million dollars for
workforce.
So across all of the R&D programs, there's a lot of
workforce, and I just--I promise you, we're going to go out of
our way to make sure it's inclusive. That being said, you just
put that on my radar, so I'll make sure, you know, we focus in
in Colorado.
Ms. Caraveo. Perfect. I appreciate the concentration on--
excuse me--these smaller institutions, and in particular, that
you're reaching out to make sure that they know about the
resources that you have.
And with that, my time is expired. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. Now, I'd like to recognize
Mr. Williams, the gentleman from New York.
Mr. Williams. Madam Secretary, well, good afternoon. It's
nice to meet you----
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Williams [continuing]. And thank you for being here.
Before we get started, I spent four months in Rhode Island in
1991 at Officer Candidate School, and so if you'll indulge me,
do you know how long the Newport Bridge is? You really don't
have to answer that.
Secretary Raimondo. I don't, although I just kayaked under
it in the Save the Bay Swim.
Mr. Williams. Yes, the Narragansett is beautiful, but I can
tell you that it's 16 long, long weeks long, sir. That's how
long it is, corresponding to my time there.
I am proud to represent the heart of the Silicon Empire,
which is central New York, and, as you know, Micron has
announced $100 billion investment, one of the largest in
American history, to be part of this resurgence of chip
manufacturing in the United States. We have a fantastic
application for the Regional Technology and Innovation Hub,
from western New York into central New York, and this is just--
think of it as the superhighway for the Silicon Empire. And we
are also in my district home to some of our Nation's most
advanced weapons systems, and these are systems that require
secure, reliable, and domestically produced silicon chips. So
thank you for all you're doing and all those efforts.
I come out of the tech industry. The new digital economy is
increasing data creation at an exponential rate, and that's not
hyperbole. Industries like transportation, power generation,
process manufacturing, and even the retail shopping experience
are increasingly data-driven. So solutions like artificial
intelligence and self-driving cars need and create enormous
amounts of data to be useful.
And so I want to highlight the tremendous risk our Nation
faces that the production of memory chips is dangerously
concentrated in Asia. May I invite your comments on how the
CHIPS Program Office is planning to ensure domestic production
of memory chips specifically to protect the United States from
relying solely on overseas production?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So we do have memory as a focus of
our investment program. We need--we've we put out in our paper
we want to have at least two clusters of leading-edge logic, as
well as advanced packaging, as well as memory. Exactly as you
said, you know, it's not made in America now, and we need to
change that.
Mr. Williams. One of the perceptions I think for the
layperson is often focused on the logic portion of--you know,
of silicon chips. We think about these advanced processors. But
in this data-driven world, the ability to write into and out of
quickly to store vast amounts of storage, as we all know, on
our phones, you know, is increasingly sort of taking over the
helm of chips and a central focus of chips. Are there any
positive developments in memory chip manufacturing that you're
aware of that you would draw attention to, you know, beyond the
announcement, for example, of Micron? Is there any other action
or activity going on in memory chips in the United States
running through your office?
Secretary Raimondo. That's the primary one. I mean, as you
well know, there's only really three--there's two Korean
companies, Samsung and Hynix and then Micron, and we are
interested--and right now, as you say, there's no really like
most advanced memory made in America, which is something that
we need to, you know, remedy through investing in this
initiative program.
Mr. Williams. And urgently and at scale I might add.
Secretary Raimondo. And at scale.
Mr. Williams. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Williams. Great. Thank you for your time.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Williams. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. And now I'd like to recognize the
gentlewoman from Pennsylvania, Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Secretary
Raimondo, for honoring this Committee's invitation to be here
today.
Secretary Raimondo. Good morning.
Ms. Lee. I'm proud that the EDA has a robust and positive
working relationship with the Southwestern Pennsylvania
Commission. I commend EDA's commitment to equity as a top
priority and their grants and programs, as the Administration
encourages its grantees throughout the country to develop
initiatives that present new ideas and creative approaches to
advance economic prosperity in distressed communities.
NIST has been vital in advancing U.S. innovation and
competitiveness. As someone who likes cold hard facts, NIST
works directly--NIST's work directly impacts the daily lives of
citizens to improve not only physical tangibles like products,
services, and infrastructures, but also improve our quality of
life and standard of living.
As a proud representative of western Pennsylvania, my
constituents expect us to address their concerns on the
implications AI will have on our labor and our workforce. AI
presents fascinating opportunities in STEM and advanced
manufacturing, but we also need to exercise caution to ensure
that we provide access to opportunity for skills training and
education to every worker, and that we're truly understanding
the ethical implications involved and the concerns regarding
bias and discrimination. Investments in our future through
legislation like the CHIPS and Science Act will only continue
to foster more success stories like those in my district and
across the country through the work that's done through NIST,
but this work does change lives.
Secretary Raimondo, how is the Department of Commerce
collaborating with other agencies to ensure that domestic
content requirements for tax credits--excuse me, tax credit
incentives in industries like steel manufacturing ensure
American competitiveness and robust business opportunities for
small- and mid-sized enterprises?
Secretary Raimondo. Just--sorry, can you--first of all,
it's nice to meet you.
To say the last, I was with you on AI, and then I----
Ms. Lee. Yes, we left there.
Secretary Raimondo. Just--sorry, just the question----
Ms. Lee. Yes--no, no, you've been here for a long time----
Secretary Raimondo. I know----
Ms. Lee [continuing]. And it's freezing in here.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. I apologize. It is very--
--
Ms. Lee. My question is about how the Department of
Commerce is collaborating with other agencies to ensure that
domestic content requirements for tax credit incentives
industries like steel manufacturing ensure American competitive
and--competitiveness and robust business opportunities for
small and midsize companies?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, OK. Sorry. We are really serious
about enforcing all of that. I mean, you know better than most
that Chinese dumping of cheap steel into the market has hurt a
lot of people, including in your district, and so we have Buy
America provisions and U.S. content requirements that wherever
they are, in statute, we enforce them. Also on the other side
of our house in the Commerce Department we also, you know,
maintain tariffs and countervailing duties wherever we need to
so we have a vibrant domestic steel industry. You can't be a
strong country without making steel.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. And I was going to ask you about
western Pennsylvania's ecosystem for robotics and our autonomy
sector, but a lot of folks have been able to actually ask
questions about what I was going to say there so I didn't want
to overwhelm you with repetitive questions.
But for my final question, with the development and
expansion of the domestic production of semiconductors and
other advanced technologies, how is your agency working to
continually update the NIST artificial intelligence risk
management framework to ensure workforce development
initiatives are effective in supporting labor but not
supplanting labor?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, exactly. Exactly what you just
said, working with NIST but also the White House has been, you
know, working across the interagency to put out other
frameworks on the topic you just said, which is how do we deal
with the fact that AI is going to change the way we all work.
And we have to be there for all workers. You know, certain jobs
will change, but we have to use AI to create jobs, not destroy
jobs for--people's jobs will change, but we have to make sure
that they are retrained to do different jobs and not left out.
Ms. Lee. Yes, I thank you for the consideration that the
agency will put into AI and workforce. As people--you know,
people with disabilities, people who have various concerns will
find increasing access to quality of life, but we do want to
make sure that we're prioritizing workers.
My time is up, and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd now like to recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Madam Secretary,
thank you for being here today, and thank you for your
patience. I know it's been a good bit. You spoke earlier, and
you've been ongoing, talk about the importance of increasing
opportunities for career and technical education. I could not
agree more. So I'm going to dive right in and forgo my
monologue. What is the Commerce doing to ensure that CHIPS
funding goes to projects that will actually create jobs for
Americans? And do you believe that the American workforce has
the ability to complete these construction projects and then
has the engineers and technicians needed to operate these new
fabs here in the country?
Secretary Raimondo. I do, but we have a lot of work to do.
So I have a team on the CHIPS team who are helping figure out
the construction workforce plans with each of the applicants.
You know, so Ohio--like these facilities will require 5, 6, 7,
8, 9,000 people to build. The unemployment rate in the building
trades right now, no matter where you live is like zero, two
percent.
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo. So we need new apprenticeship programs.
We need to recruit people in high school. We need girls and
women to do these jobs. And will we do it? Yes, but I can't
sugarcoat it. It's a lot of work. Same thing for in the fabs.
I--we are pushing the companies, Governors, Mayors, educational
institutions, update your curriculum, teach people what's
relevant so they can get these jobs.
Mr. Miller. Yes, I mean, even in the State of Ohio right
now--and as you know, the Intel project is coming to Columbus,
which is just a couple hours south in the 7th District. But
we're around 2,000 carpenters short right now for that project
at Intel. And as you just said, with a two percent dip in the
trades, amongst the whole--now, I love what you said about
encouraging our educational system to promote more of the
trades, K through 12 technical education and STEM workforce,
and I applaud you for that. I just would really like to see it
come from the State and local level----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. And see more of an influx there
throughout our entire country than doing what's easiest here,
which is just more Federal legislation that nobody needs, in my
opinion, but I wholeheartedly agree with you on that.
Secretary Raimondo. Can I say one thing on that?
Mr. Miller. Sure.
Secretary Raimondo. As part of the incentive program, the
CHIPS money we're putting out, we are requiring the applicant
to come to us with money from the State, including workforce.
So we're putting the burden on the company, say Intel in your
case, for example----
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Secretary Raimondo [continuing]. Would go to Ohio or go to
Columbus and find out what incentives, including workforce or
apprenticeship programs, whatever, put it in the application
before they apply to us. We're trying to draw forward all that
at the local level.
I also started an initiative called a Million Women in
Construction. There's about a million women right now in
America that work in construction. We've got to try to double
it. I mean----
Mr. Miller. I just met with a group actually right before
here, about women in construction. You know, I have a few
questions here, but I'm just going to ask, what do you think
when it comes to the technical education, the drawback that
we're seeing amongst the trades? Do you attribute it to work
ethic? Do you attribute it to societal norms within this
country changing? I mean, you've talked about innovation. You
know, we've shipped off, you know, manufacturing to focus on
innovation within this country, and we've lost out on that so
we don't have parity. I mean, where do you think it is? Because
in Cleveland, Ohio, in our steel workers, it's hot in the
summer, and it's very cold in the winter, and it is tough work,
but what I can tell you is----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. They're getting paid $120,000 a
year----
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. Right now with full pensions, and
they will be millionaires and our kids that are going to school
will be half a million in debt. So just curious what your
response----
Secretary Raimondo. I totally agree. You know, I think it's
a lot of things. We can maybe follow up when we have more than
a minute. I do think the cultural norms, I think, like pushing
everybody to college isn't necessarily the right move. And
most--like 40 percent of American kids who go to college drop
out, so they have loans, no degree, and it's not a good path.
So I've--even when I was Governor, I'm a big believer in
vocational training, technical skills, apprenticeships. Girls
should think of themselves as a plumber or as a welder. They
can do these jobs. You know, the average entry level like
certified nurse assistant or home healthcare, which is heavily
women, is like maybe like $15 an hour, and those are tough
jobs, too. The average plumber apprentice maybe 40 bucks an
hour, on your way to 80 bucks an hour. So I think we have to
start to say these are good jobs. They're good jobs for
America. You know, not everybody has to be a Ph.D. engineer or
whatever. Go do these jobs. Build the future of America and
make a good living.
Mr. Miller. I could not agree more. I'd love to follow up
with you later on. Chairman, my time has ended. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
And now, I'll recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lieu.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Secretary
Raimondo, for your leadership. I'd like to ask you some
questions about artificial intelligence. AI has been a driver
of our economy and will continue to be a driver of our economy.
Last year with a public release of large language models,
individuals and companies now have access to very expensive AI
technology at their fingertips. Largely, that's going to
benefit society. It can also cause harm because some of these
individuals would be terrorists or criminals.
Just a few minutes ago, I went on ChatGPT and simply typed
in how can I build a lethal virus? And it said, I'm very sorry,
but I can't assist with that. Then I asked, how do I build a
dirty nuclear bomb? Same answer, I can't assist with that. And
that's because ChatGPT is a closed AI system and their
programmers put in guardrails so it doesn't answer those
questions. Open source large language models, you can have the
guardrails removed pretty easily. I want to know if you or the
Department of Commerce have a--has a view on whether there
should be some regulations on open source AI large language
models above a certain size?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. Let me say this and then answer
your question directly. I agree, AI has incredible potential,
which is incredibly exciting, especially in healthcare, if you
think about, you know, finding cures to diseases more quickly.
But the downside is just as scary, and that's why the White
House has convened companies to take on voluntary commitments.
I think we need to do that as a bridge to this body, Congress,
enacting regulations. But yes, we have to think about the
threats of open models and come up with a regulatory
environment as well because, as I understand it--and you know
more than I do--the open models are only like a generation
behind the largest frontier of large language models, which is
to say they're pretty powerful, and so we do need to find ways
to regulate and protect the downside for the open models.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. NIST has done incredible work, and
they have put out an AI risk management framework that's gotten
good reviews from both the public sector and private sector.
Part of it is simply having organizations think through the
issues raised by AI and have a process for working through
those issues. Earlier this year, Congressmembers Zoe Lofgren,
Haley Stevens, and I wrote a letter to the President asking him
to apply the NIST risk management framework to the entire
Federal executive branch. So I'd like for you to request and
consider applying the NIST risk management framework to the
Department of Commerce, and if you would look into that, that'd
be greatly appreciated.
Secretary Raimondo. OK. I will.
Mr. Lieu. And then lastly, I want to follow up on your
comment, that it was not such a great idea to push everyone
into four-year colleges, and I think that if you look across
our economy, there is a huge shortage of skilled workers in the
trades, and so I support your efforts in that regard. Anything
I can do to help incentivize having more people in the trades,
I'd like to help you with that.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Lieu. With that, I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Miller [presiding]. Mr. Casten from Illinois.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Acting Chairman. Madam
Secretary, nice to see you today.
The--I want to chat a little bit. As you know, when we were
debating the--what became the CHIPS and Science Act, we were--
our office was concerned about--with this huge amount of money,
thankfully, that we're putting in, how do we make sure that
those taxpayer money--that taxpayer money is not going to
shareholders through buyback programs and how do we put those
protections in place? And ultimately, we weren't successful in
getting the strong language we wanted in there. There's some
weaker language in the bill and--such as the legislative
process.
But as a result of that, we had led a letter last February
to Michael Schmidt in your office, asking basically what could
we do administratively to put those stronger protections in.
I'm grateful for a lot of the back-and-forth we had with your
office afterwards, in addition to some of the statements that
your office and you personally have made about giving
preference to companies that are not going to engage in
buybacks.
Having said all that, I'm a little bit concerned about your
exchange at the start of this hearing with Mr. Babin saying
that if a company--that that would not be a prerequisite for
funding if a company didn't make those commitments. And so, to
my mind, if that's not a prerequisite, that raises the
possibility that we may find ourselves in a situation giving
money through CHIPS to a company that doesn't need the money,
essentially displacing private capital, and creating a--what we
were concerned about two years ago, that wealth transfers from
taxpayers to shareholders.
And so I guess my first question for you is when you say
that you will be giving preference, can you explain
mechanically what that means? Is this just a nice-to-have? How
are you actually prioritizing when you make these investments?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So, as you well know, the statute
says our money cannot be used for buybacks, so we're going to
do everything we can to invest the money in accordance with the
statute. What I was saying earlier, I think the question was a
version of can you guarantee you won't give money to a company
that does buybacks? And the answer to that is no, we may, but
we have a very rigorous system where this--this like a lot of
back-and-forth with these companies. They apply and we have,
you know, months or weeks of discussion. They need to show us
their books, show us the financial plan, show us how much
they're investing in research and development, and prove to us
that they actually need our money to do whatever it is, you
know, that they're doing.
So I think of it as like a balance. My number one job is to
hit the national security goals, also, to protect taxpayer
money, not use any--you know, get a good deal, not use any--not
give any company a dollar more than they need to to hit the
mission, and obviously, most important, like to do what the
statute says.
So it is true that we have a preference for companies that
won't do buybacks, mostly because we need them to put every
single penny they have into their workforce, into innovation,
into R&D. but I can't promise you that a company that does in
their--you know, in their business, do buybacks or has in the
past done buybacks won't receive an incentive grant if we think
the business they're in is necessary for our national security
and they can't be successful in doing that without an
incentive.
Mr. Casten. What enforcement do you have if you do all
that, they make the voluntary pledge, and then two years from
now, they violate the pledge?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes.
Mr. Casten. Do you have clawback provisions you're putting
in? Like legally, can you have recourse back to that taxpayer
money?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes, thank you for asking that because
I should have said it before. All of these grants will be sent
out in tranches. So let's say XYZ company receives a $2 billion
grant. We're not going to wire them $2 billion. They are
subject to an investment plan. So you can, you know, get X
amount, hit these milestones, get Y amount. If at any point
along the way they break any of the conditions, either,
depending on what they do, we can claw back money or they don't
get the next installation.
Mr. Casten. OK. I'm out of time, but I would welcome to
continue the conversation and yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. The gentleman from California is now
recognized.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Secretary for your testimony and your
leadership.
My district in the San Francisco Bay Area is a hub of the
innovation economy, so lots of folks are interested in how
CHIPS and Science is rolling out. In July, the Semiconductor
Industry Association released a study that projected a
shortfall of 67,000 workers in the semiconductor industry by
2030. As you know, to address this challenge, CHIPS and Science
Act authorized a number of workforce development programs
scattered throughout the CHIPS office, R&D programs, and
incentive programs. I am a veteran of our California Workforce
Development Board, as well as our local Workforce Investment
Board in San Mateo County, so my question is how is the
Department's overall strategy enabling the semiconductor
workforce through these programs, how that coordination is
happening with the existing Federal workforce funding streams?
But also, is there coordination going on with the State
workforce development boards and--State and local workforce
boards? How is all that being integrated if it is?
Secretary Raimondo. It is. The way we're endeavoring to do
that coordination is every company who applies for money and
receives money has to give us a workforce plan that we approve
after extensive back-and-forth. And in that plan is what is the
State doing, what is the city doing, what's Commerce doing? But
then also, you know, like--as I said before, the NSF. So we're
trying to have a plan in place for every, you know, company's
proposal.
Mr. Mullin. And just----
Secretary Raimondo. I also have a workforce team, I should
say. I've built a workforce team at the CHIPS office in
Commerce, so to just give you a sense, like we are really
serious about the workforce component and providing technical
assistance where we can so that everyone has a really fulsome
workforce plan.
Mr. Mullin. Great. And my district has over 600 life
science companies, so I just wanted to ask you about how NIST
collaborates with other agencies such as the FDA (Food and Drug
Administration), for example, to create frameworks and
standards that ensure biotech products go through the
regulatory process in an efficient way. What kind of
coordination is happening through your department and other
entities like the FDA, for example?
Secretary Raimondo. Exactly what you say. I think NIST is--
I give so much credit to them because they are like neutral,
science-based place that works with industry, but also other
agencies. And I know biotech is one of the top priorities.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for your leadership, and with that, I
yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. The gentleman from New York is now recognized.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the Chair and
Ranking Member for holding this important hearing, and
Secretary Raimondo for your leadership at the Department of
Commerce.
New York State and especially the capital region, the
district that I represent, have been a pioneer in computing
design, development, and manufacturing for nearly 80 years.
Today, New York State is home to the world's most advanced
microelectronic breakthroughs, including the foundational chip
innovations that enable today's AI systems and the world's most
powerful AI supercomputer. Our existing infrastructure, paired
with a deep bench of knowhow, means that New York is ready to
become the linchpin for national efforts to coordinate NSTC
activities aimed at alleviating the chip shortage and
propelling sustainable R&D. I understand the selection
committee will soon announce the Board of Trustees for the new
nonprofit entity that will construct the NSTC.
So, Madam Secretary, can you outline a timeline for the
announcement of the board and next steps they will take once
impaneled?
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So in the next, you know, couple
of months, I think we'll have announcements about the board.
Their first thing that they would do would be to announce the
CEO of the NSTC, which also should all happen this fall. And
then there will be a process to actually establish the NSTC,
you know, early next year. And the decisions around how many,
locations, et cetera, will all be made, you know, at that time.
Mr. Tonko. And can you provide insight on the governance
structure that the NSTC will use to operate?
Secretary Raimondo. So they will have a--we have a
selection committee now that's going to put an initial board in
place. That initial board will choose a CEO and then other
board members. And then our Department of Commerce will have a
agreement with NIST, a research agreement, which--similar to
what NIST has done for a long time with other entities, which
will lay out, you know, how they intend to use the Federal
money to execute their vision.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And once the board is selected, how
does the Department intend to ensure that public-private
partnerships drive solutions to the NSTC's grand challenges?
Secretary Raimondo. So the whole thing is a public-private
partnership as per statute. It's a consortia. We are--we're
committed to making this be a purpose-built, you know, science-
based, neutral effort. And, as I said, there'll be a research
agreement as between NIST and the NSTC which will lay all that
out, and we will hold them accountable to what is in that
agreement.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And there was a white paper on the
NAPMP that was supposed to be issued and has been delayed. Can
you share any new or additional information on the timing and
scope of the entity?
Secretary Raimondo. I just looked at one of my associates
because it's coming very soon, this fall. I was hoping he was
going to say maybe next week, but I guess we'll stay on it.
Mr. Tonko. OK. So we'll go with this fall.
Secretary Raimondo. Fall, yes.
Mr. Tonko. OK. I have several academic institutions in my
district that will be critical to educating and training the
workforce needed to support industry demands, as well as
conducting the advanced research for the next generation of
chip technology. Can you provide insight into the Department's
work across Federal agencies to ensure that collaboration with
universities will incubate that research and science?
Secretary Raimondo. That is--that's exactly the plan. You
know, we're working with the NSF. We're actually working very
well with the DOD, across agencies to work with universities.
The vision would be that the universities--look, someone asked
me earlier what success looked like in five years. In five
years it's this seamless back-and-forth between industry,
startups, and universities so we get the inventions coming out
of universities, out of the lab, and into products we make in
America.
Mr. Tonko. OK. Well, again, I thank you for your responses.
I thank you for your leadership.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
Mr. Collins [presiding]. The Chair now recognizes himself
for four minutes.
Madam Secretary, thank you for your time. I may go over
some stuff you've already talked about. I'm not sure, but----
Secretary Raimondo. Of course.
Mr. Collins [continuing]. They keep us bouncing around
here. I'm also Chair of the Subcommittee for Research and
Technology. So we talk about anything from semiconductors, AI,
hypersonics, even did a roundtable on quantum technology. And I
kind of want to ask about your trip to China because China has
stated that, by 2045, they want to be not only just the
economic leader, but militarily, socially, even in space. And
from what we're gathering, a lot of it, they're ahead of us.
You take quantum technology. I think they spend more than the
entire world on developing that.
So I'd like to know what you may have found out--if any of
that--if there's any evidence of that, they're ahead of us,
behind us, beside us and what you learned there in China.
Secretary Raimondo. Yes. So look, I'm as concerned as you
are that we can't let them get ahead, and we certainly can't
let them get any of our technology to do things that could hurt
us. You know, I think that with respect to AI, the United
States leads the world, and we need to stay there. I also know
that, as you say, the Chinese Government is putting hundreds
and hundreds of billions of dollars into these technologies
with the express goal of dominating. So when I was there, I was
clear that we don't negotiate when it comes to national
security, we don't compromise, and I was clear that we're not
going to make any changes to, for example, our export controls,
which is what I work on. And we're going to continue to
vigorously control U.S. technology so they cannot get this
technology for their military. And I also was clear that as
long as they have this military-civil fusion strategy where
really everything is the military and they can go into any
company and take technology and use it for the military, that
means we are going to have to be tougher than ever to control
that technology from getting into the hands of their military.
It's not that we want to, you know, hold back their economy per
se it, but we do want to hold back their military, and I was
very clear in saying that.
Mr. Collins. Yes, well, I think we should hold back their
economy, too. I'm very much America first, which I guess kind
of leads me into my next question. I also sit on Natural
Resources. So we've been all over the country talking about
critical minerals, and the fact that we're down to three
smelters, China processes 80 percent of our critical minerals
here, and from what we provide. And as far as Taiwan and
semiconductors, we know that China even threatened to withhold
critical minerals from them. And I heard you the few minutes I
was in here earlier, you were talking about making sure that we
bring semiconductors home, and I wholeheartedly agree with you
on that. But we have, and this Administration has really made a
concerted effort, and it's been several Administrations, to not
allow people to mine here in the States. And I don't understand
how you can advocate semiconductors here in this country when
China has already shown that they're willing to withhold
critical minerals, and we're not willing to mine critical
minerals here in our own country.
Secretary Raimondo. So I can't speak to what's been done in
the past, but I do think you're right. You're right. We are
dependent on them, and we have to do everything we can to
either, you know, mine here or on allied shores. And from my
part of it, you know, I'm going to do what I need to do with
export controls to hold them back. But when I think about
chips, the chips is just one piece of it. It's the raw
materials, it's the rare earths, the critical minerals, and we
do need a holistic strategy on that.
Mr. Collins. Right, right. All right. I am out of time. I
thank you. I want to thank the Secretary for joining us today
and the Members for their questions. The record will remain
open for 10 days for additional comments and written questions
from Members.
This hearing is adjourned.
Secretary Raimondo. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:33 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
