[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS
AND TECHNOLOGY FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 10, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-185 PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

May 10, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

Dr. Laurie E. Locascio, Director, National Institute of Standards
and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Discussion.......................................................    32

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Laurie E. Locascio, Director, National Institute of Standards
and Technology.................................................    74

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL

FOR THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE

OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

FOR FISCAL YEAR 2024

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 10, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``An Overview of the
Budget Proposal for the National Institutes of Standards and
Technology (NIST) for the Fiscal Year (FY) 2024.'' I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good morning again. Today's hearing will focus on the
National Institute of Standards and Technology's budget
proposal for the Fiscal Year 2024. And I would like to welcome
the Hon. Dr. Locascio to the Committee for her first hearing
and also thank her for taking the time to participate. I look
forward to hearing your testimony.
This Committee often emphasizes the science in the CHIPS
and Science, but today, we have the opportunity to examine
both. The CHIPS and Science Act provided $50 billion in Federal
funding for the Department of Commerce to strengthen the U.S.
position in semiconductor research, development, and
manufacturing. NIST is home to the CHIPS Program Office and is
responsible for overseeing how this funding is allocated and
sent out the door. The $50 billion is quite the bump for an
agency whose budget usually hasn't been even $1 billion 5 years
ago. Today's hearing will give us insights into NIST's work
implementing CHIPS and Science, as well as the overview of
NIST's broader contributions to America's competitiveness.
The CHIPS and Science Act also authorized critical research
and investments at NIST to address key threats to U.S.
competitiveness and innovation. The NIST for the Future Act,
which was included in CHIPS and Science, codified this role in
several areas, including bioengineering, advanced
communication, cybersecurity, international standard setting,
just to name a few examples.
NIST is one of our Nation's oldest physical science
laboratories. In 1901, Congress established the agency to
support U.S. industrial competitiveness by improving
measurements of infrastructure, which, at the time, were
lagging behind the capacities of other nations. Fast-forward
122 years, and NIST is doing just that, working as industry's
laboratory to advance U.S. leadership in measurement science,
standards, and technology to ensure the U.S. remain a global
leader and does not lose its competitive edge.
NIST measurements support the smallest of technologies to
the largest and most complex, from computer chips to global
communications networks, from nanoscale devices to earthquake-
resistant buildings. An endless number of products and services
rely upon NIST's technologies, measurements, and standards in
some way, shape, or form.
As technologies rapidly develop and evolve, NIST research
and development (R&D) continues to play a critical role in the
U.S. national security, trade, and innovation. Prioritizing key
research areas such as quantum information sciences and
microelectronics, advanced manufacturing, cybersecurity, and
artificial intelligence (AI) is growing more important every
day as these technologies become increasingly necessary for
technological development. Last year, NIST released the AI Risk
Management Framework (AI RMF), a set of guidelines required by
the National AI Initiative, a bill by this Committee, and I
would like to commend NIST for the transparent, bottom-up
approach it used to develop this framework, which ensures these
voluntary guidance is useful to the broad community of AI
stakeholders.
This framework, the subsequent establishment of the
Trustworthy and Responsible AI Resource Center, and the
research and development NIST conducts on AI-enabled systems
are going to provide--prove critical to our work to stay on the
cutting edge of reliable and trustworthy AI technologies. This
work is essentially important now as this technology is growing
by leaps and bounds. I'm looking forward to seeing how
organizations begin to adopt this voluntary guidance and
hearing more about NIST's plans to support the safe development
and adoption of this emerging technology.
NIST also works with small- and medium-sized manufacturers
to compete in the global marketplace through the Hollings
Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP) Program and
Manufacturing USA Network. Through these programs, NIST helps
U.S. manufacturers adopt new technologies and methods to
overcome obstacles facing advanced manufacturers.
NIST also works to ensure domestic supply chains are
secure, resilient, and trustworthy. Promoting supply chain
innovations will enable U.S. manufacturers to improve their
efficiency, identify supply chain disruptions and quality
issues, and bolster national and economic security. I look
forward to hearing more about how public-private partnerships
at NIST are promoting innovation in advanced manufacturing
capacities and supply chain management. I also hope to hear
about what progress MEP has made in establishing the national
supply chain data base authorized in CHIPS and Science.
It's quite a lot of ground to cover, but we in Congress
have the responsibility to ensure that every taxpayer dollar is
spent as effectively and as efficiently as possible. I hope we
can use today's hearing to do just that.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning. Today's hearing will focus on the National
Institute of Standards and Technology's (NIST) budget proposal
for fiscal year 2024. I would like to welcome the Honorable Dr.
Locascio to the Committee for her first hearing and also thank
her for taking the time to participate. I look forward to
hearing your testimony.
This Committee often emphasizes the ``science'' in ``CHIPS
& Science,'' but today we'll have the opportunity to examine
both.
The CHIPS and Science Act provided $50 billion in federal
funding for the Department of Commerce to strengthen the U.S.
position in semiconductor research, development, and
manufacturing. NIST is home to the CHIPS Program Office and is
responsible for overseeing how this funding is allocated and
sent out the door. $50 billion is quite the bump for an agency
whose budget wasn't even one billion dollars five years ago.
Today's hearing will give us insights into NIST's work
implementing CHIPS and Science, as well as an overview of
NIST's broader contributions to America's competitiveness.
The CHIPS and Science Act also authorized critical research
and investments at NIST to address key threats to U.S.
competitiveness and innovation.
The NIST for the Future Act, which was included in CHIPS
and Science, codified NIST's role in several areas including
bioengineering, advanced communication, cybersecurity, and
international standards-setting, just to name a few examples.
NIST is one of our nation's oldest physical science
laboratories. In 1901, Congress established the agency to
support U.S. industrial competitiveness by improving
measurement infrastructure, which at the time was lagging
behind the capabilities of other nations.
Fast forward 122 years and NIST is doing just that-working
as ``industry's laboratory'' to advance U.S. leadership in
measurement science, standards, and technology to ensure the
U.S. remains a global leader and does not lose its competitive
edge.
NIST measurements support the smallest of technologies to
the largest and most complex. From computer chips to global
communications networks, nanoscale devices to earthquake-
resistant buildings, an endless number of products and services
rely upon NIST technologies, measurements, and standards in
some way, shape, or form.
As technologies rapidly develop and evolve, NIST's research
and development continues to play a critical role in U.S.
national security, trade, and innovation.
Prioritizing key research areas such as quantum information
sciences, microelectronics, advanced manufacturing,
cybersecurity, and artificial intelligence (AI) is growing more
important every day, as these technologies become increasingly
necessary for technological development.
Last year NIST released the AI Risk Management Framework-a
set of guidelines required by the National AI Initiative, a
bill by this Committee. I would like to commend NIST for the
transparent, bottom-up approach it used to develop this
framework, which ensures this voluntary guidance is useful to
the broad community of AI stakeholders.
This Framework, the subsequent establishment of the
``Trustworthy and Responsible A.I. Resource Center'', and the
research and development NIST conducts on A.I.-enable systems
are going to prove critical to our work to stay at the cutting
edge of reliable and trustworthy A.I. technologies. That work
is especially important now as this technology is growing by
leaps and bounds.
I'm looking forward to seeing how organizations begin to
adopt this voluntary guidance and hearing more about NIST's
plans to support the safe development and adoption of this
emerging technology.
NIST also works with small and medium-sized manufacturers
to compete in the global marketplace through the Hollings
Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program (MEP) and
Manufacturing U.S.A. Network.
Through these programs, NIST helps U.S. manufacturers adopt
new technologies and methods to overcome obstacles facing
advanced manufacturers.
NIST also works to ensure domestic supply chains are
secure, resilient, and trustworthy. Promoting supply chain
innovations will enable U.S. manufacturers to improve their
efficiency, identify supply-chain disruptions and quality
issues, and bolster national and economic security.
I look forward to hearing more about how public-private
partnerships at NIST are promoting innovation in advanced
manufacturing capabilities and supply chain management.
I also hope to hear about what progress the MEP program has
made in establishing the national supply chain database
authorized in CHIPS and Science.
That's quite a lot of ground to cover, but we in Congress
have the responsibility to ensure every taxpayer dollar spent
is used as effectively and efficiently as possible. I hope we
can use today's hearing to do just that.
Again, I thank our witness for being here today, and I look
forward to your testimony.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.

Chairman Lucas. Again, I thank our witness for being here,
and I look forward to your testimony.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Chairman Lucas, and
for today's hearing. And thank you, Dr. Locascio, for being
here. It's really wonderful to see you again.
NIST is, as we know, a small agency in the Department of
Commerce, but you play a large role in promoting U.S.
innovation and competitiveness by advancing our measurement
science standards in technology. NIST actually does critical
work in every sector of the economy--the American public may
not know that, but we all do--from supporting small
manufacturers, looking at domestic supply chains, creation of
engineering standards and building codes to make our building
safe. NIST develops cybersecurity guidelines for the Federal
agencies and businesses alike to protect Americans'
information.
Congress and industry alike are asking NIST to take on more
responsibility, even as the agency faces a crisis of failing
infrastructure and unmet maintenance needs. And really, it's
never exciting to focus on maintenance, but if you don't, you
end up with a big bill to rebuild at the end. So the report
from the National Academies in February of this year found that
the deficiencies in facilities constitute a major threat to the
mission and performance, and therefore, our Nation's economy
and national security. So with leaking roofs and exploding
pipes, ruining millions of dollars' worth of equipment, poor
ventilation systems making it impossible for NIST to conduct
certain experiments, routine requests for maintenance have had
to be deferred for years. This has been a problem decades in
the making, and I think this Committee, although we don't do
the appropriations, needs to focus and advocate for addressing
this need to be met if you are going to continue to provide the
essential services that you do.
I also want to just touch very quickly on the framework
that you have provided at the request of Congress on AI
systems. I have a worry that, as the voluntary guidelines that
you produced in a very fine process may be actually not fast
enough to keep up with industry is just roaring ahead in ways
that--faster than any of us expected. And so while NIST is not
a regulatory agency and there are limits to our discussion
about that, we need to look to NIST for your deep technical
expertise in informing debates about policy.
As the Chairman has mentioned, NIST plays a key role in
CHIPS for America program. This is very important for our
country. And as we invest in chips manufacturing to solve a
vulnerability for our country, I want to make sure that we're
also addressing the safety of workers in those plants. I come
from Silicon Valley, and in years past, there were issues of
individual workers and even neighbors of fabs being exposed to
toxic chemicals that created huge cancer, miscarriages, fetal
abnormalities. Industry has moved way past that, much improved
from that, but I do think we need to pay attention to toxicity
and look at EPA (Environmental Protection Agency), who really
are the gold standard on exposure to these chemicals, to make
sure that we don't end up with a new set of problems and really
challenge industry to make sure that if there is a toxic
chemical that cannot be replaced with another, that the
protections for workers and neighbors are gold standard EPA.
I'm happy that President Biden has continued his commitment
to science and manufacturing, as reflected in his Fiscal Year
budget request for NIST. I look forward to hearing your
testimony today to learn about how we can tackle some of the
major challenges that we face and also to ensure U.S.
competitiveness in advanced industries.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding today's hearing. I
would also like to welcome our distinguished witness, the
Honorable Dr. Laurie Locascio.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology is a
small agency in the Department of Commerce that plays a large
role promoting U.S. innovation and competitiveness by advancing
measurement science, standards, and technology. NIST does
critical work across every sector of our economy. The agency
supports small manufacturers and our domestic supply chains.
NIST is critical to the creation of engineering standards and
building codes that make our buildings safe. And NIST develops
the cybersecurity guidance that Federal agencies and businesses
alike use to protect Americans' information.
Congress and industry alike are asking NIST to take on more
such responsibilities even as the agency faces a crisis of
failing infrastructure and unmet maintenance needs. A report by
the National Academies from February of this year found that
deficiencies in NIST's facilities ``constitute a major threat
to its mission performance and thereby, to our nation's
economy, national security, and quality of life.'' Leaking
roofs and exploding pipes have ruined millions of dollars worth
of equipment. Poor ventilation systems have made it impossible
for NIST to conduct certain critical experiments. Routine
requests for maintenance are often deferred for months or
years.
This is a problem decades in the making and it will require
sustained support from Congress to overcome. I am encouraged
that the President's budget request would double NIST's
construction funding. It is essential that Congress follows
through with funding, and that NIST continues to provide timely
updates to us on the state of its facilities.
NIST does so much important work across all sectors. Let me
just say a few words about two particular technology areas.
NIST is leading the way on standards and frameworks for safe
and trustworthy AI systems. Earlier this year, in response to a
requirement developed by this Committee as part of the National
AI Initiative Act, the agency published a voluntary AI risk
management framework to help organizations think through and
mitigate the risks in their AI systems. This framework has been
lauded by the greater technology community, even though NIST
led it with limited resources and only a handful of staff.
Voluntary standards are critical to ensuring that both
public and private sector organizations can test, evaluate, and
take steps to mitigate the risks associated with AI. I look
forward to a discussion about progress in developing standards
and testing capabilities for AI. At the same time, AI
technology is moving so fast that I worry voluntary guardrails
will be too little too late. I recognize that NIST is not a
regulatory agency so there are limits to the discussion we can
have in this context, but we can still look to NIST for their
deep technical expertise in informing our debates about policy.
Finally, NIST is the also the agency responsible for much
of the CHIPS for America program that Congress passed last year
to revitalize American-made semiconductor manufacturing. I know
Members will have many questions about CHIPS implementation and
where things stand. I look forward to learning more today.
Dr. Locascio, I am very happy with President Biden's
continued commitment to science and American manufacturing as
reflected in the fiscal year 2024 budget request for NIST. I
look forward to your testimony today to learn about how we can
tackle some of these major challenges and ensure U.S.
competitiveness in advanced industries.
Thank you and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. The Chair thanks the gentlelady for her
thoughtful observations as always.
Let me introduce our witness today. Our witness today is
the--Dr.--Hon. Dr. Laurie Locascio, Under Secretary of Commerce
for Standards and Technology, Director of the National
Institute of Standards and Technology. She oversees NIST's
collaborative efforts with industry, academia, and other
government agencies to develop and apply the technology,
measurements, and standards needed for innovative products and
services.
Dr. Locascio most recently served as Vice President for
Research at the University of Maryland, College Park, and the
University of Maryland, Baltimore. Prior to joining the
University of Maryland, the doctor worked at NIST for 31 years,
rising from a research biomedical engineer to eventually
leading the agency's material measurements laboratory. She also
served as an Acting Associate Director for Laboratory Programs,
providing direction and operational guidance for NIST's lab
research programs. Dr. Locascio has a B.S. in chemistry from
James Madison University, an M.S. in bioengineering from the
University of Utah, and a Ph.D. in toxicology from the
University of Maryland, Baltimore.
I recognize Dr. Locascio for 5 minutes to present her
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. LAURIE E. LOCASCIO, DIRECTOR,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Locascio. Chair Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Committee, I'm Laurie Locascio, Under Secretary
of Commerce for Standards and Technology, and the Director of
the National Institute of Standards and Technology or NIST.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to
discuss the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request for
NIST.
The President's budget request positions NIST to revitalize
U.S. manufacturing across multiple sectors and in all States,
fuel the innovation economy through investments in critical and
emerging technologies, and assert NIST's premier position as
the national metrology institute in the world, helping our
industries to compete and thrive in the global economy.
The President's budget request, approximately $1.6 billion
for NIST in FY '24, this will allow NIST to advance U.S.
innovation and industrial competitiveness, as is our mission.
Importantly, the budget requests critical new resources that
are essential to address the serious deterioration of NIST's
70-year-old facilities and to ensure that we will be able to
continue to carry out our mission and conduct our world-class
research.
The FY '24 budget requests $995 million for scientific and
technical research services account, and that includes $68.7
million in new research program investments. This budget will
ensure that NIST remains in a strong leadership position for
delivering the measurements and the standards necessary for the
development and use of critical and emerging technologies like
AI and quantum and biotechnology. It is essential that we
remain in a strong leadership position as these technologies
are major drivers of economic growth.
The budget will expand NIST's efforts to further the
development of trustworthy AI systems. Building off NIST's
successful AI Risk Management Framework, the budget will
provide new resources to expand the capabilities for
benchmarking and evaluation of AI systems to ensure that the
U.S. can lead in AI innovation, while ensuring that we
responsibly address the risks of this rapidly developing
technology.
The budget will also expand NIST's ability to address
emergent cybersecurity issues and efforts in cybersecurity
education and workforce development.
The budget request will also allow NIST to make critical
investments to strengthen NIST's core mission delivery, and
that includes new investments to accelerate the rapid
deployment of critical reference materials to support the
bioeconomy and food safety, as well as dedicated funding to
more efficiently execute NIST's responsibilities for building
failure investigations.
The FY '24 request includes $262.1 million for
construction. On both campuses, NIST's facilities are degrading
rapidly. NIST contracted with the National Academies of
Science, Engineering, and Medicine to assess our facilities,
and their report, published early this year, describes a dire
situation, quote, ``that facilities issues are preventing NIST
from achieving its mission, and that in many cases NIST
facilities are no longer world class,'' end quote. Now, for
NIST to continue leading the world in measurements and
standards and to continue having the most talented staff to
carry out its many activities that ensure U.S. economic growth
and national security, we must address the condition of our
facilities through sustained investment.
The FY '24 budget request includes $374.9 million for
Industrial Technology Services. This is an increase of $161.2
million to ensure that the Manufacturing Extension Partnership
Program and Manufacturing USA can address the most pressing
challenges facing our Nation's manufacturing ecosystem. This
increase would allow MEP to narrow the workforce gap, mitigate
supply chain vulnerabilities, and leverage advanced
technologies for manufacturers. The Manufacturing USA funds
will allow for the creation and operation of testbeds at
existing institute and support engagement of underserved
communities in the network's technology workforce development
programs.
So I'm proud of the work that NIST does and truly, truly
honored to lead professionals that work at NIST. Their efforts,
aligned with the President's budget, will allow NIST to have
continued impact on advancing the frontiers of critical
technologies that will accelerate and drive future innovation
and increase the competitiveness of U.S. industry. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Locascio follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Dr. Locascio, for your
testimony. I want to recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Dr. Locascio, in January, the Chairman of the Government
Oversight Committee, James Comer, and I sent a letter to the
White House raising concerns about the discrepancies between
the White House's blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights and NIST's
AI Risk Management Framework. In response to the letter, the
White House stated that NIST staff also provided input into
OSTP's (Office of Science and Technology Policy's) development
of the blueprint. To what extent did OSTP consult NIST about
the blueprint? And did you express concerns about the
inconsistencies between the two documents?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question, Chairman. So we
were involved in the AI blueprint out of the OSTP. We had many
discussions all along the way about the compatibility of the
two documents. And we have made a crosswalk that you can see on
our website that shows the compatibility of the two documents.
I will say that they are both geared toward responsible AI.
The NIST document very clearly is looking toward measurements
and standards and solutions for AI risk management, allowing
people to really evaluate their risk associated with the use of
AI. And so that document is, I think, a very different document
than the AI blueprint, but there is compatibility, and I'm
happy to send you our crosswalk on that.
Chairman Lucas. On Friday, the Administration announced new
actions to promote responsible AI innovation that protects
Americans' rights and safety. Specifically, it stated that the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) will be releasing draft
policy guidance on the use of AI systems by the U.S.
Government. Given the technical expertise at NIST, will NIST be
involved in the process of developing this guidance?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, we will. They've already reached out to
us, and we will be involved in that.
Chairman Lucas. Is OMB looking to utilize the AI Risk
Management Framework?
Dr. Locascio. I am not sure the answer to that question,
but we have worked across the Administration, and the
Administration is very supportive of the AI RMF, and so it
definitely will come into the conversation.
Chairman Lucas. Doctor, moving to the CHIPS program, the
first Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) for the incentive
program to build semiconductor fabrication facilities was
released in March. There were several non-statutory policies
included in the notice, including a requirement that any entity
that receives an award will have to provide childcare for
everyone involved in the construction and operation of a new
facility. One of the goals of the CHIPS program is to offset
the fact that building and running fabs in the U.S. is more
expensive than in Asia. This requirement seems likely that it
will only increase the cost of the project. Will the
construction and operation of new childcare facilities be
considered an eligible use of the CHIPS and Science funds?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. The CHIPS funds
are to be used to create new manufacturing fabrication
facilities in this country. And our goal, according to the law,
is really to make sure that happens and that we have the
appropriate workforce to support that. So the money will be
used to bring back manufacturing to the United States
holistically. And yes, the money will focus on fabrication
facilities for leading-edge, mature node, and current
generation semiconductor fabrication.
Chairman Lucas. To take this question one step farther, has
the Department solicited an independent cost-benefit or needs
analysis of making CHIPS award funding available for childcare
facilities?
Dr. Locascio. No, we have not.
Chairman Lucas. So then it's hard to say what we would
expect the return on that investment to be.
Dr. Locascio. But the money--excuse me. May I respond?
Chairman Lucas. Please.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you. And I appreciate the question. We
are focused on the success of CHIPS for this country and
bringing back manufacturing. That is our sole focus, to make
sure that we accomplish everything that you wanted us to
accomplish in that bill, which is to ensure that manufacturing
comes back to the United States, and we are wholly competitive
that way.
Chairman Lucas. I appreciate that very much, Director. And
I would just simply note, if all of these incidental issues
were going to be added in then, that funding should have been
discussed when the bill was put together. But we'll talk about
that later, I'm sure.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time and turn to
the Ranking Member for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Part of this challenge we face in implementing CHIPS and
Science is workforce. And my reaction when I saw the childcare
incentive--not requirement--was that that was to address
workforce. I mean, you--if fab workers don't have the capacity
for their--for childcare, they can't come to work. And we're
already seeing that throughout Silicon Valley. But that doesn't
address some other issues relative to the higher-end Ph.D.'s. I
mean, Intel said they needed 1,000 Ph.D.'s for their company
alone. I don't know if you've done an assessment of how we are
going to meet the workforce needs that would be essential to
make CHIPS and Science actually work.
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. We have
done quite a lot of work in assessing the workforce needs,
working with many associations who have put together their
discussions about what the workforce needs are going to be.
Some of the estimates based on the success of the
implementation of the CHIPS Act are that there will be 180,000
new jobs created in this country. That's quite a bit of demand,
and we have to fill that gap. And so there are a number of ways
we're thinking about approaching that.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me ask you about another potential
incentive. I mentioned in my opening statement the issue of
toxics in the production of chips. At one time in Silicon
Valley, there was a huge problem. There were cancer spirals
around some fabs, miscarriages that were clearly related to
exposures, as well as children who had deformities related to
the exposure. There's been improvement, tremendous improvement
since that time, but there are still a very dangerous toxics.
In some cases, they can't be replaced in the production. And I
want to know and hear from you publicly whether you're in a
position to incent industry to address that issue successfully,
if there's a toxic that cannot be replaced, that we work with,
hopefully, the EPA to make sure that exposure is precluded, not
just for the workforce, but also for the surrounding community.
Would you intend to work with EPA on that?
Dr. Locascio. So I just wanted to say--first of all, thank
you for that question--and that is there are in the original
NOFO, in the first NOFO that came out on February 28, there are
requirements for complying with OSHA (Occupational Safety and
Health Administration). We also--as NIST, work very closely
with our regulators in producing the standards that are
required for any new measurement that they need in the field
regarding toxic exposures and so, for instance, we are working
right now on the development of standards to measure PFAS----
Ms. Lofgren. If I could interrupt, the OSHA Director
himself said that their standards were insufficient, so I'm
hoping that we can reach out to EPA for the gold standard on
some of these chemicals.
Dr. Locascio. We'd be happy to talk more about that, follow
up with you.
Ms. Lofgren. Finally, I want to talk about Standards-
Essential Patents (SEP). You know, this is a very important
provision. Patent holders participate in standardization. They
declare their patents essential, but they have to voluntarily
commit to licensing their patents on fair, reasonable, and
nondiscriminatory terms. This is really essential for the
development of industry in the United States. I'm happy that
NIST has moved to retract what I thought was a misguided 2019
SEP licensing policy statement, but I think there might be more
work to do to push back on SEP licensing abuse. Are you
planning a further action to make sure that the United States'
policy is to ensure a balanced approach to SEPs and licensing
to reward innovative ideas?
Dr. Locascio. So thank you for that question. Yes, we
believe in a balanced approach. And with the withdrawal--I've
worked very closely with Kathi Vidal over at USPTO on the
withdrawal, and of course with DOJ (Department of Justice). And
we are continuing to have constant communications around SEP
licensing and how important that is for our innovation
ecosystem. So yes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my time
has expired, so I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Posey, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Locascino, do you concur with the National Security
Agency that the Chinese Communist Party is co-opting
international standards?
Dr. Locascio. Well, I appreciate that question. I've paid a
lot of attention to this issue. And China is present much more
prominently in the international standards organizations at
this particular time, and they have really laid down the
gauntlet when they set forth their China Standards 2035
strategy a few years ago that really says their intent is to be
the global gold standard, right, usurping other nations.
So with that intent in mind, they have increased
participation. We still have more leadership positions than
China, but they now have more participants in many different
fora. I will say that, internationally, with our likeminded
partners and allies, we have many more leadership positions
than China does on the international standards stage. That's
not to say it's not something that we can't worry about. It's
time to do something, and that's why the national standards
strategy that was released for critical and emerging
technologies that was released last week, I think, is so
vitally important. We have to be strategic in how we are
dealing with international standards. It's absolutely
essential.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Does the National Institute of
Standards and Technology track and respond to the Chinese
Communist Party generated standards that become globally
adopted?
Dr. Locascio. We do not track that, but I'm happy to
discuss that as a follow-on if you'd like.
Mr. Posey. OK.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Posey. Would you explain the use--or explain to us the
dangers of allowing the Chinese Communist Party to outpace the
United States' development of standards for artificial
intelligence?
Dr. Locascio. I think that is an excellent question, and it
is truly existential when you think about who is going to be
the leader in creating the next standards on the world stage
for AI. I mean, do we want autocratic societies to be
instilling their values in what is the global gold standard in
AI? I don't think so. I think we want the United States and
likeminded partners to take a leadership role in making sure
that our values are instilled in AI global standards so that
they represent responsible use of AI and consideration of all
the risks.
Mr. Posey. Yeah, and you wonder who you can trust. And, you
know, is their AI smarter than our AI domestically,
politically, militarily?
How is China's State-led approach to technology development
challenging the rules, norms, and approaches that the United
States and international standards bodies take with regard to
standards development?
Dr. Locascio. Well, so one of the things that this new
national strategy that was released is really going to have an
impact in is coming together with likeminded partners and
allies to make sure that the rules remain the same, that we
continue to have fair and open and transparent processes, that
the governance is retained, which has allowed us to have an
incredible and productive international standards arena for
decades and decades that have really benefited American
markets. So our goal moving forward is to make sure that does
not change, that we still are able to operate the way we've
continued for decades, fairly, responsibly, and openly.
Mr. Posey. Yeah. What is your agency's perspective on
China's use of standards as a tool for protection, technology
transfer, and a mechanism for restricting market access?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. And I think as
long as they are still present in the international standards,
arenas and bodies, coming together to negotiate on
international standards, they will not be building barriers to
international trade. It is really important, though, that in
standard-setting bodies we have an open and fair playing field
so that we can come together and negotiate in the best possible
technical standards for the world win. And if that's true and
they're there as part of the negotiation, then that does not
become a technical barrier to trade. However, if they become
more isolated and mostly adopt internal standards and do not
any longer participate in international standard-setting
processes, then we have the threat of really bifurcating the
world and having more technical barriers to trade.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. I see my time has expired. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The Chair now recognizes gentlelady from
Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. Welcome to the Committee, Dr.
Locascio.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. Good to see you. The National Institute of
Standards and Technology, NIST, launched the Manufacturing
Extension Partnership program back in the late 1980's to
support small and midsized manufacturers in declining
industries. The Oregon Manufacturing Extension Partnership, or
OMEP, serves Oregon manufacturers statewide and helps them
compete globally by creating and implementing business
strategies, increasing operational efficiencies, and solving
workforce challenges. We appreciate OMEP.
So NIST's FY '24 budget includes an increase of a little
more than $100 million for the Hollings Manufacturing Extension
Partnership to make progress on three specific goals, narrowing
the workforce gap, mitigating supply chain vulnerabilities, and
leveraging technology. So how will their impro--the proposed
increase in addressing these interconnected challenges benefit
Oregon and OMEP? And how will this investment strengthen U.S.
manufacturing across the country?
Dr. Locascio. Well, thank you for that question, and I
appreciate your support of MEP. We think it's a very
influential and exciting program, and we're excited about the
future of it as well. I think during the COVID pandemic, one of
the things that we really emphasize is the ability to pivot and
develop new technologies when there is a national emergency.
That was, I think, a really exciting thing that happened during
COVID with the MEP, but also this idea of this supply chain
connectedness, right, starting to really understand what supply
chains are, what the vulnerabilities are. To us, moving forward
with this new budget, we will work more closely with the MEP
centers on sussing out and understanding the supply chain and
the supply chain vulnerabilities regionally, but connect that
through the network so we know what we have----
Ms. Bonamici. OK.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. At stake nationwide and how
somebody in Oregon can help out somebody in Virginia to
essentially meet their needs.
Ms. Bonamici. OK. Thank you. Moving on to CHIPS and
Science, which I'm very excited about, the legislation
appropriates $11 billion for semiconductor research and
development to carry out several activities, including the
National Semiconductor Technology Center, the NSTC, to conduct
research, prototyping, and scaling of advanced semiconductor
technology. My home State of Oregon is home to a thriving
semiconductor industry. We have many of the world's leading
semiconductor manufacturers, suppliers, and researchers
operating in the State, as well as a robust semiconductor
workforce, making it an ideal location for the NSTC
headquarters or an institute, such as one, for example, focused
on advanced lithography. So what process--what will the process
look like to select the headquarters and site the network of
institutes? Will the NSTC issue RFPs (request for proposals)
for each, and what role will NIST have in that process? And if
you could also address with Oregon skilled workforce, advanced
and innovative technology, and sincere commitment to the
semiconductor industry, do you agree that Oregon should be a
frontrunner in the designation of the headquarters or a core
technical center?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. We are very
excited about the NSTC, and we are anticipating that it will be
a nationwide resource and really promoting innovation in
microelectronics for years and decades to come, and that's
really what we need to accomplish here. So the NSTC, we put out
a vision and white paper last week, and essentially, we are
right now calling for nominations for people who will
participate in a selection committee that will establish the
board. The board will then set up the operation for the NSTC.
Now, we are not going to be involved in site selection
necessarily, but our goal is to have a successful, independent,
purpose-built NSTC, and it will take advantage of assets, the
most important assets that we have around the country and be
able to link them together.
Ms. Bonamici. Tremendous potential.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. So your budget includes an additional $20
million for cybersecurity, no doubt important, but only an
additional $5 million for AI, which is within another
technology group. So in light of the recent revelations and
conversations and alarm bells in the industry, what message
does that send?
Dr. Locascio. Well, I appreciate that question as well. Our
AI resources are going to be very, very tightly focused on
several things, one, advancing the AI RMF, which has been
already adopted by industry. As we discussed, we had an open
and transparent process, collective feedback from so many
people as we were developing it, and that really transitioned
it nicely into being adopted, which is fantastic.
There is a lot of conversation about generative AI right
now, obviously, that's what everybody's discussing. Our goal in
the coming year with this funding is to focus the AI RMF and
look specifically at the risks associated with generative AI,
working with the community. We'd also like to develop a public
working group who can provide input and also provide feedback
on the risks associated with generative AI, but we will be
working very, very closely with the community specifically
focusing this fund----
Ms. Bonamici. I see my time has expired.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Ms. Bonamici. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The gentleman now--or the Chairman now recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Dr. Babin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Babin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for being here.
NIST carries out research and development to enhance the
resilience of buildings and infrastructure to natural hazards,
including earthquakes. We don't have many of those in Texas,
but a lot of wind, a lot of hurricanes, fires, and others. NIST
also deployed teams to study the aftermath of a disaster to
improve these standards, codes, and practices for buildings and
infrastructure. Does the President's budget request include
funding for these activities?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. The
President's budget request does include additional support to
support our investigations of disasters, and it's critically
important for us to get the funding because, as we do these
investigations, they really do translate, as you mentioned,
into building codes and standards that will safeguard people
for years to come, right, really change the way we approach our
building in disaster-prone areas and really all over the
country and the world.
Mr. Babin. Right.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. In Fiscal Year '23 omnibus, NIST
receive $40 million in no-year supplemental disaster relief
funds to investigate the impacts of hurricanes, typhoons, and
wildfires in calendar year 2022 to support the development of
resilient standards--along with the first question--in regard
to weather and climate disasters, in addition to the underlying
research to support these standards and for necessary expenses
to carry out investigations of building failures pursuant to
the National Construction Safety Team Act of 2002. Has NIST
awarded any of these funds, and if so, can you tell me what
they were awarded for?
Dr. Locascio. I could give you a very detailed breakdown of
what we have done so far with those funds, and I'd be happy to
follow up with you on that. But we are using those to continue
the investigation in Surfside and--related to Hurricane Ian,
Hurricane Maria, and others, and yes, we are using those funds
and they are being expended, but I'd be happy to get a detailed
report on that back to you.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Earlier this year, NIST released the Artificial
Intelligence Risk Management Framework, RMF, a voluntary
framework to guide organizations and incorporating
trustworthiness into the design, development, and deployment of
AI systems. The Committee is aware that NIST is expanding upon
the AI RMF by creating industry profiles that contain
actionable guidance for implementing this safe AI for specific
use cases. How will NIST ensure these efforts to advance
trustworthy AI are deployed into real-world use by
stakeholders?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. The AI RMF is
really an important document put out by NIST developed to
promote trustworthy AI exactly for that purpose. It is pro-
innovation, and it is also promoting responsible use of AI. And
it has been developed in concert with stakeholders very closely
so that the end result is a product that is usable by them as
they're developing AI, and as they are thinking about promoting
or incorporating AI solutions into their current business
practices. So we're developing a resource center for them to
understand how to use it. We're working with the community and
developing use cases. So there's a lot going on right now in
terms of how we are supporting AI and promoting the use of the
AI RMF. Thank you for that question.
Mr. Babin. OK. I want to jump over to quantum research now.
NIST's budget request includes $220 million for laboratory
programs on fundamental measurement, quantum science, and
measurement dissemination research. NIST is a leader in quantum
research. Can you talk a little bit about NIST's role in
carrying out the National Quantum Initiative? And can you point
toward specific outcomes over the last 5 years that have
advanced U.S. leadership in quantum science? And then, finally,
how much does NIST plan to spend on fundamental measurement
quantum science and measurement dissemination this year? If you
would answer the first question first.
Dr. Locascio. Sure. So, NIST has been involved in quantum
science for decades, and we have four Nobel prizes that are
awarded to our scientists who have been working in this field.
We do research to standards development, to tech transfer, to
technology development, and now with the National Quantum
Initiative, we have developed the Quantum Economic Development
Consortium, which brings together these nascent industries,
thinking about how to translate this into our economy for the
benefit of the new quantum economy in the United States. So our
work is really complete along that entire trajectory. You have
an exciting new technology, and how you're going to cement it
in the United States for the benefit of the U.S.
Mr. Babin. I'm out of time, Mr. Chairman, so I will yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North
Carolina, Ms. Ross, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
you and Ranking Member Lofgren for holding this hearing to
discuss the importance of NIST funding and the agency's ongoing
work.
Just this week, NIST awarded a grant to NC State University
in my district to support the North Carolina Manufacturing
Extension Partnership's National Supply Chain Optimization and
Intelligence Network Program, which will improve the resiliency
and optimization for domestic supply chains in my home State
and across the country, so thank you for that. And I'm excited
to follow the work on this project at NC State and everything
NIST does, and I look forward to hearing even more from you,
Dr. Locascio. You've done such a wonderful job responding to so
many questions.
I'm going to shift the conversation to cybersecurity. The
work NIST does regarding cybersecurity standards and best
practices is incredibly valuable to organizations across the
globe. The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) is widely
adopted, so much so that some companies use it as their
domestic cybersecurity standard and baseline. NIST is in the
process of updating the Cybersecurity Framework. Can you
discuss the process and what is being updated?
Dr. Locascio. Oh, yes, I really do appreciate that
question. We began the update process last year with our first
kickoff meeting, and we had 7,000 people sign up for that, a
huge reception, 100 different countries. So I think that really
indicates that people are very interested in how we can develop
this update to the framework, how well it's adopted not only
nationally, but also how it's received internationally, and how
it can really underpin global standards as they develop. So are
likeminded partners and allies are very excited about it as
well.
The biggest change is really a piece around governance and
how people manage and govern processes around cybersecurity
within their organizations, and we think it's a really
important update. We've gotten a lot of feedback from many
different sectors, including universities, like we just
mentioned at the beginning, and so we're really anticipating a
lot of input also from small businesses on this particular
draft, so we're looking forward to that. Thank you for the
question.
Ms. Ross. Well, just as a follow up, how does NIST help
with the implementation? And you raised the question about
small businesses. Small businesses don't have a cybersecurity
person on their payroll who has expertise. How do you help
people who might not have that internal expertise?
Dr. Locascio. Yeah, I really appreciate that question. It's
one of the questions that we got very early on, how are small
businesses really going to be able to use this, and so we spent
a lot of time developing resources for small business. We have
a small business community of interest. We have a small
business corner that people can go and just sort of see how
other small businesses have used it, but our goal is to really
bring them together to help them understand how it can be
implemented, and we do that virtually, but we also have a
place, the National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence, where
they can come and work with us and figure out the best-use
cases and solutions that are appropriate for small businesses.
Ms. Ross. Great. And I know that the President's budget
requests asked for an additional $20 million to support privacy
and cybersecurity work. Can you tell us how you might use that
money?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, so part of it will be used for improving
cybersecurity--improving the Cybersecurity Framework, the next
edition. We're also working on updating and working on
dissemination of the privacy framework, which is another very
key portion of NIST work, which promotes privacy and in concert
with the Cybersecurity Framework. So our work moving forward
will be to disseminate these two products and also to do more
deep technical research and understanding where there are
issues that are difficult to solve with relation to privacy and
cybersecurity.
Ms. Ross. Thanks. With the few seconds I have left, I've
done a lot of work to promote a pipeline of our next
cybersecurity workers, and can you tell us more about the
nature of NIST's K through 12 outreach and describe how you're
helping design experiences that will help our students engage
in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) and
be lifelong learners?
Dr. Locascio. I appreciate that. And I missed talking about
the workforce development that's going to be happening with the
new cybersecurity funding in FY '24, it's a really important
part of the component. The whole research that we do in
development at NIST is to engage the next generation of cyber
workforce, so we are also working to develop many different
ways to outreach to K through 12, and, in general, working on
trying to figure out how to bring new and diverse populations
into the cyber workforce.
Ms. Ross. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Baird [presiding]. Thank you. And the lady yields back.
And the Chairman had other responsibilities, so he's going to
let me--you got me now.
I really appreciate your testimony, and I really appreciate
your experience and background. The fact that you have--I was
looking at your bio. You have 115 scientific papers, and you've
got 12 patents in the fields of bioengineering, as well as
analytical chemistry, so I give you great credit for that.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. So that leads to my question. My first question
is that, you know, lately with platforms such as ChatGPT,
there's a majority--or a major concern with intellectual
property rights regarding where the information is gathered
from and also concerns about how accurate the information is.
So I guess I'd like to--or we would like to have your thoughts
about how accurate that information is, and then intellectual
property rights.
Dr. Locascio. So you're talking specifically around how
accurate the information that you get out of ChatGPT or----
Mr. Baird. Yes, or anything else you think is important.
You're the one with all the degrees, so----
Dr. Locascio. I can't really speak to that, but I
appreciate the question as far as the accuracy of the platform.
One of the things that we think about at NIST is how to make
sure that the data that we provide is accurate and can be cited
accurately. I know there are a lot of discussions around how to
input accurate data into those types of models, and NIST spends
a lot of time thinking about data sets that can be used to
train AI models, but we're not specifically involved in
ChatGPT, and I really can't speak to the accuracy of the
information that you get out of ChatGPT. I can speak to the
accuracy of the data that would be available to be pulled into
any platform.
Mr. Baird. Well, the way I understand it, the ChatGT--or
GPT actually uses AI to interact with----
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Baird [continuing]. You with questions and give you
good answers supposedly. But anyway, I appreciate your
perspective on that.
You know, the other area, I'm really interested in this
chips program and the CHIPS and Science Act that authorized
NIST to develop three new manufacturing institutes that were
focused on semiconductors and manufacturing. The bill provided
$100 million in Fiscal Year '22, 47 in '23, and 118 in '24, and
mandatory funds to establish these one or more institutes.
Could you give us some kind of an idea and provide us any
updates on the plans and development of these institutes, as
well as do you have any timeline for when we can be putting out
a request for proposals?
Dr. Locascio. Yeah, I really appreciate that question. So
the research and development piece of the CHIPS R&D has four
different components, and we are working very hard to make sure
that these are all aligned and can work seamlessly with each
other. So what we have been doing for the past 6 months is
really planning the phased approach of how we are going to
initiate the NSTC, the packaging program, the Manufacturing USA
Institute and the NIST metrology program. So we want to make
sure they're linked and that industries can enter each one of
those seamlessly and know how to access all the resources that
we have within the CHIPS R&D program.
With regard to your specific question on when you will see
requests for proposals, that will be coming later this year.
Mr. Baird. Well, I appreciate that, and I'm really glad
that we're--you know, I want to make sure that our chips
program is ahead of China or any other adversary we might have,
and so I appreciate having the talent you have and having NIST
working on that. I think it's extremely important.
And so the other question I had relates to my colleagues
across the aisle keep a provision in the CHIPS and Science Act
that would further Congress' effort to strengthen our research
security at our Nation's academic research institutions. I
think that's a pretty important idea. This provision gives
universities the tools they need to protect sensitive research
from cyber theft by requiring NIST to assist research-intensive
universities in adopting the Cybersecurity Framework to help
mitigate cybersecurity risks related to conducting research.
And so we've got about 17 seconds for you to tell me an update
on that idea.
Dr. Locascio. Yes, so we are working with universities.
Right now, we have a section on our website that talks
specifically under the CSF how they can implement, and we have
a request for information out to universities to find out how
best to support them. But I came from a university, and I was
involved in the research security--actually, I was leading the
research security efforts, so I understand the importance of
reaching out to our universities.
Mr. Baird. Absolutely, and thank you for that answer. And
so----
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Baird [continuing]. I yield back to myself, I guess.
And so who's up next? Mr. Sorensen from Illinois.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you to the Chairman and Ranking Member
for convening this hearing and Dr. Locascio for your
willingness to appear today, and thank you for the hard work
that is not always recognized.
Last month, this Committee passed the TRANQ Research Act,
which requires the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, NIST, to support research to identify xylazine,
synthetic opioids, and other dangerous subjects of concern; on
the other hand, NIST, through the Science and Technical
Research and Services Program, tasked with studying the impacts
of hurricanes, typhoons, wildfires to support the development
of climate-resilient standards.
Before coming to Congress, I served my district for nearly
20 years as a meteorologist, and my job was to present
meteorology in an accurate and digestible manner so that my
community could make good decisions to protect their property
and the lives of families. NIST promotes resilient standards so
these communities can better prepare themselves and their
infrastructure for disasters such as flooding, that we along
the Mississippi River in western Illinois are just getting
through here today.
We've seen some of the costs of disasters in our Nation
happened just in the past few years. For example, in 2020, the
Iowa and Illinois derecho left $11.5 billion worth of damage in
its wake. How can Congress assist NIST in ensuring that the
codes and the standards that the agency helps to develop are
implemented in such a way that they'll result in future
disasters being less costly?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, I appreciate that question, and it is
really devastating what we're seeing all over the country, and
we've been asked to participate in many more investigations
than we ever have. Clearly, it's important, and that's why it's
part of this budget. The way that we do our work is to make
sure that whatever we do is an answer that's appropriate for
any changes that could be necessary in order to make a rebuilt
community more disaster resilient or to shore up codes so that
people can become disaster resilient in an existing building.
And so really, the quality of the data and the information that
we provide not only feeds into codes and international
standards but also gets adopted. And the way it gets adopted is
that we work very closely regionally and nationally and
internationally to assure that these are built into the next
generation of infrastructure.
Mr. Sorensen. Because we also have to understand that the
weather that we're seeing today, the extreme weather today is a
product of the warming up to yesterday. So understanding as
this continues to worsen, we're going to have bigger disasters
in the future.
How does NIST coordinate with the Department of Ag to
prepare our agriculture, our farmers with the next disaster?
Dr. Locascio. I think that's a very good question, and I
would say we don't coordinate necessarily to prepare them for
disasters. Our response is to find out what could happen and
how we can shore up infrastructure, and that in general
supports the farmers. But we do work with the Department of
Agriculture, but I'm not being able to come up with the best
way that we coordinate with them, and I would love to get back
to you on that if that's OK.
Mr. Sorensen. We can follow up on that, surely.
Dr. Locascio. That would be great.
Mr. Sorensen. On a related note, NIST has an online
economic decision tool to help communities plan for disasters.
The tool helps communities plan infrastructure investments----
Dr. Locascio. Right, right.
Mr. Sorensen [continuing]. Based on accurate----
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Sorensen [continuing]. Data. How can we work and live
with these disasters in the future? And does NIST have any
plans to expand on this resilience tool in the 2024 budget, for
instance?
Dr. Locascio. So we don't have specific funds for that
particular tool in the 2024 budget. Most of the funding that we
are using in the 2024 budget is to really shore up our ability
to do disaster investigations and the supporting research to
surround investigations and the conclusions from
investigations, but we do have an ongoing commitment to making
sure that community resilience tool is up to date, and we work
with the communities to make sure that it meets their needs in
how it's implemented.
Mr. Sorensen. And I see my time is up, so I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back. And next, we go to
Alabama.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Baird, and thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for sharing your expertise with us today.
Dr. Locascio, China is leveraging its position to gain
influence in the organizations that develop international
telecommunication standards such as the Third Generation
Partnership Project and the standards for 2035. How can the
U.S. be more effective in countering increased Chinese
engagement in the development of these international standards?
Dr. Locascio. Sure. So thank you for that question, and I
think one very clear win on the U.S. side and with likeminded
partners was the election of Doreen Bogdan-Martin in ITU
(International Telecommunications Union), and that, I think,
has a tremendous impact globally. We all understand that IT
runs very differently than other standards development
organizations. It is country by country, and so, therefore,
it's important that we have leadership there that can represent
what America stands for.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. How will NIST protect U.S. quantum
leadership before international standards-setting bodies?
Dr. Locascio. So that's a really interesting question
because there are a number of activities right now happening
within international standards bodies that are directed at
quantum even before the quantum market really exists, and
that's unusual for us, right? Typically, the market exists, and
then the standards come. But we aren't at that place anymore.
We're really at a place where we need to be proactive in
critical and emerging technologies, make sure that we are at
the table promoting U.S. innovation and our competitive
technologies and bring them to the table in the international
standards forum and represent leadership positions there as
well.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Dr. Locascio. So NIST is really at the forefront of that.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Chairman Baird, I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back.
And next, we go to Representative Foushee from North
Carolina.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for this convening, and Director Locascio for your
testimony at today's hearing.
As you know, NIST plays a critical role for my district,
North Carolina's 4th, and last month, I was proud to join
President Biden and Secretary Raimondo during their visit to
Wolfspeed in Durham for the first stop of the Administration's
Investing in America Tour. And thanks to President Biden's bold
economic plan and Congress' historic investments in American
advanced manufacturing, research, and innovation, I am proud
that North Carolina and my district are serving at the
forefront of strengthening our Nation's innovative edge and
playing our role in the Made-in-America initiative.
So, Dr. Locascio, there were several provisions in the
CHIPS and Science Act designed to ensure that Americans of all
backgrounds have the opportunity and access to participate and
benefit from this landmark law in terms of both the business
owners and the workforce. It is critical that we support
minority-owned businesses, veteran-owned businesses, and women-
owned businesses in CHIPS-funded projects, and increase the
participation of economically disadvantaged individuals in the
semiconductor workforce.
The CHIPS Program Office, according to the law, must assign
personnel specifically to focus on opportunity and inclusion.
Can you discuss how NIST is currently satisfying these
requirements with its CHIPS for America programs?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. Yes, we have
already hired--as a matter of fact, several months ago hired--
it was one of our early hires, somebody who can focus directly
on that issue, and she's our diversity and inclusion lead. And
we are thinking about that really in every aspect of our
program, not only as you mentioned, workforce development is
critical. We want to make sure we don't miss anybody, and we
bring them all into this semiconductor ecosystem that we're
building for the United States, which is so exciting, but also
build them into the R&D ecosystem, bring everyone into the R&D
ecosystem and allow everyone to be successful as they launch
their new companies, right, and venture. So I was an innovator
who launched my own company, a woman-owned business, and so I
really do want to see opportunities open for everyone to
succeed. Thank you.
Mrs. Foushee. And I was very happy to see the workforce
development requirements in the program's first Notice of
Funding Opportunity. The NOFO supports good job practices,
expands childcare for companies seeking over $150 million in
grant funding, and includes the use of union labor. Given that
less than 1/4 of the semiconductor workforce are women, child
support--childcare support, rather, should go a long way to
attract more women in good-paying semiconductor jobs. Can you
discuss the importance of supporting the human capital needed
for our chips investments to succeed? And how is NIST thinking
about supporting the microelectronics workforce in the United
States?
Dr. Locascio. Yes. So if you think about it--thank you for
that question. If you think about it, it's pretty daunting, the
amount of jobs that we're about to create with this funding,
with this $50 billion plus the $2 billion from the
microelectronics comments out of DOD (Department of Defense).
We have a big gap to fill, 180,000 new jobs, so we cannot leave
anyone behind, and it is a critical part of our thinking, how
are we going to fill those jobs? How are we going to engage
everyone from across the United States to be actively engaged
in training, upskilling, and really meeting the needs of this
new workforce demand that we're about to create?
Since manufacturing left the United States holistically,
we've lost the ability to train those types of people for these
kinds of jobs, and we are wholly focused on that through the
CHIPS Act and through the Manufacturing USA program as well and
MEP. Thank you.
Mrs. Foushee. And last, how are you coordinating with other
agencies on this?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, so we are coordinating with many other
agencies, NSF primarily in the workforce development, but also
DOE, DOD, and all the other agencies who are involved in the
semiconductor area and who are a part of CHIPS. So we have many
conversations, ongoing conversations about how to most
effectively meet the demand across many different levels of
skills, right, from the people who are going to be the
technicians in the fabs all the way to the Ph.D. innovators who
are going to be creating the new companies.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. That's my time, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentlelady yields back, and next, we go to
Florida with Representative Franklin.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for being here with us this morning. My first
question, in the last Congress, I introduced H.R. 4956. It was
the Leadership in Global Tech Standards Act of 2021. It was
going to direct the Small Business Administration to award
grants to small businesses to participate in the standards and
development process. A similar provision was incorporated into
the CHIPS and Science Act, which requires a pilot program
that's going to award grants to private companies, nonprofits,
and academia to incentivize and support their participation in
international standards setting. Just wondering if you could
talk to us about that, you know, what are the plans for it? How
do you see it being implemented? And does the President's
budget support this?
Dr. Locascio. Well, thank you for that question. Yes, it's
very, very important that, as you said, the title of the bill,
Leadership in Global Tech, it's very important at the standards
table that we are able to engage all the right technical
experts because that's really how you do the best work at the
international standards table, right? You're sitting there, you
have the best technological solutions, and you have the people
who can promote and defend them in an international arena. And
so we need the experts there, and so NIST is planning to have
numerous activities that will be related to trying to engage
and provide the ability for small companies and universities to
participate in the international standards arena.
There are many mechanisms we're considering. We are going
to be forming a center of excellence around standards
development, and that will be one mechanism likely through
which we'll pull and draw in for training and education around
standards development and how to participate most effectively
at the international level.
Mr. Franklin. Well, I appreciate that. I often hear from
small businesses. They have great ideas, and all the innovators
want to participate at a deeper level, but it's just hard for
them to get engaged in the process.
Dr. Locascio. Absolutely. And one of the things that we do
is we do precompetitive research with a lot of small companies,
and that allows us to bring their information also to the
standards table if they don't want to be there directly.
Mr. Franklin. Great. Thank you. Shifting over to
cybersecurity, NIST plays a critical role in the Nation's
cybersecurity, and your organization helps reduce cyber risks
to Federal agencies, multiple industries, and critical
infrastructure through the creation of voluntary frameworks and
standards. How is NIST using its cybersecurity expertise to
assist Federal agencies in improving critical infrastructure,
cybersecurity such as assisting in the adoption and the
application of the Cybersecurity Framework?
Dr. Locascio. So our Cybersecurity Framework does have very
broad reach and global adoption and very, very strong adoption
within the United States, but we understand our gaps and that
we need to be communicating with the right people at the
right--all the time in order to make sure that it can get
adopted into specific areas. And so critical infrastructure, of
course, is a very important part of the work that we do,
communicating with people who are involved in critical
infrastructure and making sure the Cybersecurity Framework is
adopted in and included in the way that they think about
shoring up their security of their information systems.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you. The President's budget requests an
increase of $20 million for further investment in this
cybersecurity and privacy portfolios to meet increased demand
in the areas of critical national importance. To the extent
that you're able to here, can you talk to us about where
further investment is needed and how the President's budget is
going to support that?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. So in
cybersecurity, we have many different areas that we're working
in, but we are focused in the budget on workforce development,
cybersecurity supply chain, the security of our supply chains,
and the development--I'll just give a few examples--and the
development of postquantum cryptography standards that can make
sure that we are prepared for the next generation of computing
and protected against it in terms of our encryption algorithms.
So we have a number of different activities that we're doing,
but related to workforce, development of the new Cybersecurity
Framework, and security for postquantum encryption algorithms.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Dr. Locascio.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Franklin. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. The gentleman yields back.
And we're going to stay in Florida with Representative
Frost.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning. Like it
was mentioned, I am from Florida, a State uniquely threatened
by the effects of global warming caused by greenhouse gas
emissions, and so I'm glad that NIST is taking the threat
seriously by asking for the $5.5 million increase in funding to
assess the impact of carbon on the environment. And we know
that forests can be effective at absorbing carbon pollution,
but currently, deforestation in places like the Amazon and in
the American West make it more and more difficult to slow
global warming, and plus, it's already difficult to measure how
these offset emissions at a rate that will be helpful in
mitigating climate change.
You have mentioned that NIST is working on metrics around
CO
2
removal, both with natural-based solutions and
others. Can you describe how that work on CO
2

removal and how the additional funding you're requesting will
help further that work?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. So we have
a number of activities that have been going on for a long time
in terms of being able to accurately measure and monitor carbon
dioxide and its removal, and we work with a number of other
agencies, NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration), NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration), and others, to ensure the quality of
measurements that are made around carbon dioxide in our world
and how it's removed. Some of this new money will be
specifically focused on a continued understanding of the
development of new technologies for carbon removal and
sequestration and also an understanding of how natural sources
contribute to carbon dioxide removal.
Mr. Frost. How will this work benefit everyday people in
Florida and people across the globe long term?
Dr. Locascio. Yeah, that's a really great question. Our
work is really to ensure that we have accurate measurements and
an understanding of what is going on with all of the different
sources of carbon dioxide that are in our world, right, around
our spaces in the United States around the globe. And so it is
really the underpinning work that we do that assures that
people can understand what is going on in the environment. But
at the same time, we're developing new technologies that can
help people capture carbon and to understand carbon accounting
as well. So there are many ways that NIST's work will help you
in your State, but also really help the world.
Mr. Frost. Yes, and along with the climate crisis, central
Florida in my district, we're currently experiencing one of the
worst affordable housing crises in the entire country, so we
need a lot of housing. We need it quickly, but we also have to
ensure that it's safe, especially with the horrible storms that
we're getting. With those climate threats in mind, can you
please explain how NIST supports investigations under the
National Construction Safety Team Act to help build safe for
the environment?
Dr. Locascio. Sure, thank you so much for that question.
NIST supports investigations under that authority, so we
conduct investigations under that authority, and as matter of
fact, we've been in your State not in your district for a while
now. And we are asked frequently, can we come and study this
new disaster. And more and more often people come to us to ask
us that. We have a matrix under which we look to see if the
work that we do, should NIST be brought in, first of all, and
the reason why NIST should be brought in under any
circumstances is, first of all, there's a loss of human life
that has been devastating, and--of course, as it would be--and
can NIST really do some research that would help understand how
to make it better next time, right? So that's how we
participate. We do long-term research, we go into these places
like Surfside, try to understand what did cause the collapse,
and then parlay that into building codes and standards that can
ensure the quality of construction moving forward.
Mr. Frost. Yeah, and can you quickly--so FloridaMakes,
which is a business in my district, received $2 million in MEP
funding from NIST to help rebuild small- and medium-sized
businesses after the storm. Can you talk briefly about how that
funding impacts the work that you do to help rebuild businesses
after climate disasters?
Dr. Locascio. So--I'm sorry, could you repeat that? Sorry.
Mr. Frost. In 2017, FloridaMakes, a business in our
district, received $2 million in MEP funding from NIST to help
support the rebuilding of businesses.
Dr. Locascio. Yeah. So the MEP funding is really there to
support business resilience in the location where this
occurred. So the money that we got in the disaster bill was
really focused on that. How can you help communities come back?
How can their businesses come back? And how can they thrive
after a disaster? And so that funding was specifically for
that.
Mr. Frost. Yeah, well, thank you so much for your work, the
work that NIST does. It's incredibly integral to what goes on
in my State, especially with the horrible climate disasters
that we experience every single year. So thank you for that
work, and I yield.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. The gentleman yields back. Thank you.
And, next, we go to Representative McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
During the--thank you for being here, by the way. This is
very enlightening. During the Obama Administration, a legacy
sign-on service called login.gov was provided by the General
Services Administration (GSA) Technology Transformation
Services to help people access accounts with government
agencies ranging from the IRS (Internal Revenue Service) to
Social Security Administration. The login.gov website states it
is, quote, ``the public's one account and password for the
government,'' end quote.
Following a March 2023 GSA OIG (Office of Inspector
General) report, bipartisan scrutiny of the website program has
been renewed. The GSA OIG report found, again, quote, ``GSA
misled their customer agencies when GSA failed to communicate
login.gov's known noncompliance with the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-63-3, digital
identity guidelines, specifically, Identity Assurance Level 2
(IAL2).'' It further states that, once again, quote, ``GSA
continued to mislead customer agencies, even after GSA
suspended efforts to meet SP 800-63-3.'' These agencies charged
over $10 million for cybersecurity services that weren't even
provided in the first place. This is incredibly concerning for
me, as somebody who basically is responsible for these taxpayer
dollars and its lack of security they're applied. Were you
aware of this report?
Dr. Locascio. I am aware of this report, yes.
Mr. McCormick. OK. Just to kind of add--and I'm going to
set up the question for you just so you can knock it out of the
park if you will. When it comes to digital identity proofing,
what does NIST Identity Assurance Level 2 compliance mean in
combating identity theft? And why would Biden Administration
want a government-driven product like login.gov to achieve that
particular standard to the extent that it would even mislead
other Federal agencies about having those capabilities? In
other words, we're spending a lot of money. We don't have the
cybersecurity it's promised, and it's a one-site-serves-all
that's worrisome to me when it comes to security--securing
people's identity, which we're all concerned about, and we
don't even have something--a failsafe that's working right now.
Dr. Locascio. So NIST does produce digital identity
guidelines, and you're right, we have IAL2 compliance is what
you're referring to the IAL2, the identity assurance guideline.
We have recently also updated that. We don't audit other
agencies, and I really can't speak to the GSA issue, but I will
say that we have recently updated our guidelines, and that's
available for--and has broad uptake by the community as well.
Mr. McCormick. OK. Guidelines, got it. The IAL2 standard
has been referred to as once again, quote, ``not just a
compliance requirement. In the world of remote identity
proofing, it is aligned between a system that can fend off bulk
identity theft attacks coming from organized criminals, and one
that cannot,'' end quote. Despite the troubling findings of the
OIG report, the White House reportedly still wants to move
forward on mandating--mandating--the use of login.gov through
Executive order at all Federal agencies. It's already mandated
at the VA (Veterans Affairs) through va.gov, which, once again,
alarms me if we don't have the proper--you can have guidelines,
but if you don't have the actual security and it's mandated,
you can understand how this would be very concerning to any
veteran or anybody else who wants to use these websites. How
does NIST play into that, besides guidelines? Is there any
true--are you hammering this home with people, that this is a
real concern for people's identity that's being required by a
government to use?
Dr. Locascio. So our role is to produce these guidelines,
and we don't do the compliance piece, but we produce the
important information that people need to know in order to
secure their systems, and they are publicly available and used.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you. I'm just going to give you one
more chance to comment on this because I think it's important
to hammer home because this affects a lot of Americans, anybody
who wants to use the .gov site. What is GSA's misrepresentation
of the login.gov's IAL2 capabilities mean for veterans and
their dependents trying to access sign-in services to verify
their identity? Since you're the expert, I'll let you have the
final word.
Dr. Locascio. I'm sorry, I appreciate the question, but I
cannot comment on that, but thank you.
Mr. McCormick. With that, I yield.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. And now we go to Representative
McClellan.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Dr.
Locascio.
It is exciting to see NIST programs and how they're
supporting domestic manufacturing capacity. Just last year, the
manufacturing extension partnership in Martinsville, Virginia,
helped maintain over 1,300 jobs, and in my district, it has
supported smaller businesses that provide machining and
industrial services, as well as manufacturers of specialized
materials and electric motors, and we're pretty excited about
that.
And I will say, as a mother of two young children who has
seen firsthand how difficult it is to find affordable, quality
childcare, I'm very excited that the Administration recognizes
how critically important childcare is to maintaining a good
workforce, so thank you for that as well.
At the launch of NIST's AI Risk Management Framework, Dr.
Alondra Nelson, the former acting Director of OSTP, noted that
AI tools are too often developed without the input or the
consent of the people whose lives they will touch. Can you
discuss how NIST's budget supports broad public engagement to
ensure that diverse perspectives are incorporated in these
frameworks?
Dr. Locascio. Yeah, so thank you for that question. As we
develop our work in AI risk management, we engage the community
very, very broadly. Moving forward, we intend to have a public
working group--with the new FY '24 funds--have a public working
group through which we can obtain the perspectives of everyone
and we want to hear from everyone to understand their concerns,
the impact on the communities, and the impact on the
individuals around the country and the organization. And so I
think that's a really important part of how we plan to move
forward with the AI RMF.
Mrs. McClellan. And given the increased use of AI in
applications that include healthcare, criminal justice,
decisionmaking, there is a huge potential for algorithmic bias
to exacerbate social inequities. Can you talk about NIST's work
to develop guidance to help organizations that make algorithms
avoid this garbage in, garbage out problem?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that. So that is clearly a
risk associated with AI. The AI Risk Management Framework looks
at technical characteristics like accuracy. Is your algorithm
accurate? But it also really looks at the human at the end,
right? Is it biased? Is it fair? Is it safe? Is it secure? And
I think that's what makes it very different from anything else
that NIST has ever produced because we really do think
holistically about responsible and trustworthy AI and the human
impact on it. So we've had a lot of impact from community
groups in that regard, and moving forward, we will continue to
make sure that's a priority and that we can help people
understand how to measure their systems for bias.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you for that. A recent GAO report
found gender-related imbalances in career advancement and
leadership roles at NIST, as well as an ``unwelcoming
environment''--that was their quote--for women that may cause
some to leave. Will NIST's budget request for diversity,
equity, inclusion, and accessibility initiatives help address
these issues?
Dr. Locascio. Absolutely. That is a No. 1 priority for me.
Mrs. McClellan. And can you elaborate on how?
Dr. Locascio. So recently--yes, of course. Recently, we're
in the process of hiring our second Chief Diversity Officer.
Our first Chief Diversity Officer now works for the House, so
we lost her, but we're in the process of a hiring our second
one. And we have a new diversity, equity, and inclusion and
accessibility strategic plan that we launched last year with a
tremendous amount of engagement across the organization. There
are multiple layers of things that we are looking at doing
first, making sure that everything that we do represents NIST
the way that we want it to be represented externally and
internally, make everyone know that they're welcome and
included in the way that we think about NIST. But also, we
cannot ignore the fact that we have to continue to measure and
monitor how we're doing as we implement new programs toward
promotions, recruitment, retention of diverse candidates.
Mrs. McClellan. So thank you for that. Mr. Chair, I yield
back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Williams, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Locascio, I come out of the tech industry, so I have
spent a lot of time in industry technology standard meetings
around the IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers), you know, ITU, ISO (International Organization for
Standardization), ISA (International Society of Automation),
and IEEE, all the fun people are there. It's really exciting,
and it's--it is just--you know, for context, you know, for my
colleagues that, you know, our phone that we rely on
encompasses--I'm going to make up a number--but easily hundreds
of different standards, many of which, you know, come and
originate out of the NIST. So I certainly appreciate your work,
and I'm so glad to be freed from those industry standards
meetings.
But the--there's two issues, I think, pretty
straightforward questions today, and just to tee it up for you,
one is just status on the Manufacturing USA program, and the
second is related to other components around chip fab,
specifically about printed circuit boards (PCBs). So if I may
just provide a little context, and then those are two areas of
questions. We're very fortunate to have Micron investing in my
district, historically important and historically large
investment, and, of course, the CHIPS Act and your work at
NIST, you know, is critical to that success. And can you
provide me an update and all of us an update on the status of
the Manufacturing USA program and specifically as it relates to
semiconductors? And I understand that there will be three sites
selected for institutes. I'm not sure if that's still current,
but if you could just give me and my colleagues some context
there, that would be helpful. Thank you.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you so much. We had an RFP that we
released last year.
Mr. Williams. Great.
Dr. Locascio. We got a lot of information from people on
what they think we should be doing with the Manufacturing USA
funds specifically around semiconductors. We have the funding,
of course, as you know, and the authorization to do one or up
to three----
Mr. Williams. OK.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. And so there are a number of
ways that we've been looking at whether it should be one really
large one or three smaller ones, and specifically, that
conversation is really around technology focus areas. Where are
the gaps in our other R&D--chips R&D programs that might not be
filled and need to be filled by Manufacturing USA, for
instance, more precise manufacturing techniques that would be
needed by the semiconductor industry or virtual--3-D
virtualization of components as you're putting them together
either in packaging or in fabrication. So we are still
considering one or up to three, but we will have the request
for proposals, then Notice of Funding Opportunity will be
released at the end of this----
Mr. Williams. OK.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. Before the end of this year.
Mr. Williams. OK. Thank you for that context. That's more
up to date than what I have.
There's a company my district Graphic Technology, Inc.,
that does these printed circuit boards, and chips really
focuses on the semiconductor and not necessarily on the
platform that they write on, which are these PCBs. There's a
lot of supply chain issues, and a lot of the supplies come out
of China. Can you just briefly tell me how you view that or how
NIST views that and are we addressing that supply chain issue
in part through some of the funding and programs that you're
sponsoring?
Dr. Locascio. Well, thank you for that question. There are
a couple of ways we're looking at that, issues around
substrates for instance----
Mr. Williams. Yeah.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. And supply chain in general. The
second Notice of Funding Opportunity will deal with supply
chain so that the suppliers--basically the material suppliers
and the instrument suppliers who serve the semiconductor
industry because obviously, that's very critical to the success
of any fabs that we build in the United States. So there will
be funding opportunities for suppliers, critical suppliers, for
the semiconductor industry.
And then we also are going to be looking at funding
opportunities for people to develop new types of substrates or
advances in substrates as we look at the development of the
packaging program--as we are developing the packaging program
and establishing the NSTC.
Mr. Williams. Great, thank you. And just for my last few
seconds here, just comment that before deciding to run for
office, I was involved with the Open Process Automation Forum
that is modernizing the industrial control systems for the
process industries, which you may know is, you know, oil and
gas, chemical, food and beverage, et cetera, and we're using
the NIST framework as the framework that--to develop that
industrial cybersecurity for these open architecture systems
that's known as the open process automation standard. And so
firsthand, I've actually had to use some of your documents,
although I'm not on the technology side, but anyway, thank you
for your work.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from--gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for your attendance today.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology plays a
critical role in advancing U.S. innovation and competitiveness.
Away from the abstract, NIST's work has a direct impact on the
daily lives of citizens to improve not only the quality of
products, services, and infrastructure, but also improve our
quality of life and standard of living. For example, SMS Group,
Incorporated, headquartered in my district, PA 12, received
NIST support to implement improvements to employee engagement,
satisfaction, and morale. Innovation does not stop at
technological development. American innovation includes the
day-to-day human elements of our economy. It excites me to know
more success stories like these are bound to occur in my
district and across the country through the work that is done
with funding for NIST. This work changes lives,
Dr. Locascio, methane emissions from orphaned and abandoned
oil and gas wells in my district threaten public safety, public
health, and it contributes significantly to climate change. How
is research in developing greenhouse gas measurement tools and
standards being utilized to protect my constituents from
polluted air? And how do we hold polluting corporations
accountable?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. So we're
developing a number of new technologies, but I think the most
important thing is that we're developing the measurements and
standards so that people can apply those technologies to more
accurately understand the sources and the concentrations in the
environment. So we are there working across the community to
ensure that these standards are met and our standards are used
and can meet the demands of the local economies so that they
can understand their issues.
Some of the funding that we're going to be asking for in
the '24 budget is specifically around measuring greenhouse
gases, and we have programs called the Urban Dome, and the
Urban Dome is really to kind of do a holistic assessment of the
presence of greenhouse gases in the environment in specific
regions in the country.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I highlighted earlier that the American
innovation we strive for in the Committee is not limited to
technology. How critical to achieving the NIST mission is it to
support workers through prioritizing grant funding to companies
that utilize union labor and expanded access to childcare, for
instance?
Dr. Locascio. So you've seen--we've talked about this a few
times already. Thank you for that question--of what is
available in the CHIPS incentives portion of the manufacturing
incentives that we've just released, which do include
childcare, and we've had a lot of discussions around that.
Workforce development is really a critical piece of anything
that we do. It's really important to make sure that everybody
can be engaged and come to the table and have the
opportunities, and we need so many people in the tech sector.
We're trying to compete with China right now for global
technology leadership, and so we cannot miss the opportunity to
have everyone engaged in our technology economy.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. So my district is home to some of the
worst air quality in the Nation on any given day. SKC
Incorporated, a local business in western Pennsylvania,
manufactures quality air sampling equipment and is one of the
thousands of success stories under the Hollings Manufacturing
Extension Program. How does NIST strategically target partners
for technical assistance to support underrepresented
populations in manufacturing?
Dr. Locascio. First of all, I would like to thank you for
that question, and I would love to hear more specifics about
that case because if we aren't working with them, we may want
to work with them in our new programs that we're building
around air capture and air quality. But the way that we
typically do things in the open competition model where we look
for opportunities to have people compete and then we select the
best possible innovative solution that can meet the demands of
what we're trying to accomplish, but we have a very important
focus on making sure that we get solutions from a diverse
audience because that's where the creativity comes from, right?
If we have more people engaged in creative solutions, then we
come up with better outcomes, and so we have methods to make
sure that we can promote diversity, equity, and inclusion in
all of our processes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. And thank you so much for your time and
for your answers. I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Collins, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Doctor, the President's budget request asked for $98
million for the Manufacturing USA program. There's a 165
percent increase over appropriated levels. Now, according to
the budget justification, this investment would lead to 10 new
centers by FY 2028. Can you explain what 10 areas of advanced
manufacturing these centers would cover? And I don't want you
to include the centers focused on semiconductors now on the
manufacturing because they're already receiving a total of $265
million in mandatory funds that are in FY '24 for its three
centers.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you very much for that question. So
NIST, unlike other agencies who form Manufacturing USA
Institutes, do an open competition really looking for the needs
of the community at any given time. And so when we ran our
first open competition, we had a variety of different sectors
that came to the table, and we selected a biomanufacturing USA
Institute, Nimble, and formed that. So we are going to be
launching an open competition very soon, before the end of the
year, and we'll be calling for concept proposals where people
can tell us what they think we should be funding and then a
full competition. We'll select and do a full competition that
we will award in mid-'24.
Mr. Collins. All right. Thank you. My commonsense
legislation, the TRANQ Research Act, is about to be considered
on the House floor. This legislation directs NIST to play a
more active role in addressing the rapid spread of fentanyl
containing xylazine, a drug cocktail commonly known as TRANQ.
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Collins. Can you speak on the unique capabilities of
NIST to analyze illicit drugs like TRANQ, the work NIST has
done already in this area, and the ways NIST can help local
first responders who are on the frontline of this drug crisis?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you so much for that question. We have
been working in the area doing research in the areas of drugs
of abuse detection for decades and always trying to stay ahead
and understand how we can prepare people to detect what's
coming, right? And so we have research in collaboration with
the State that allows us to measure and monitor what we find
from the street drugs that are submitted to our program and
then disseminate that information so that people understand not
only what to anticipate, but how to measure it, right, how to
measure it themselves in what they're finding locally.
Mr. Collins. OK. From what part of the President's budget
request will these activities be funded?
Dr. Locascio. The work particularly related to TRANQ?
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Dr. Locascio. I'd have to get back to you because I don't
believe that we asked specifically for funding for that
program.
Mr. Collins. Right. OK. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That's all I have.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Collins. Yes.
Chairman Lucas. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady
from Oregon, Ms. Salinas, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
Chairman and the Ranking Member for today's hearing, and thank
you, Dr. Locascio, for your participation.
As many of my colleagues, I'm very interested in the issue
of workforce development. In my district, Oregon 6,
manufacturing accounts for nearly 40,000 jobs, and I hear
consistently that businesses need more skilled technical
workers. And, as you've mentioned, as we roll out these new
programs from CHIPS and Science Act, the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Bill, Inflation Reduction Act, the need for
those workers is really going to grow.
And we recently had the Directors of NSF and NASA before
this Committee, and I was excited to hear about some of their
efforts in this area, particularly the NSF Regional Innovation
Engine (RIE) Program. Our Oregon universities are partnering
with manufacturers in my district on an RIE proposal in the
semiconductor space, which would include a substantial
workforce training component. And so with all these new
opportunities, I want to be sure that we're getting the most
bang for our buck. These are good jobs that often don't require
a 4-year degree, as you well know, and we have a chance really
to bring students from diverse backgrounds into critical
industries for our future economy.
And thank you for your exchange with my colleague from
North Carolina, Mrs. Foushee, and others.
So my first question is how will proposed budget cuts to
our NIST civilian workforce affect the deployment of this new
manufacturing and technology workforce?
Dr. Locascio. So, first of all, I haven't been very
specific about our workforce programs. Thank you for that
question. Because we are in the process of really putting
together and announcing our workforce programs within CHIPS, so
that's coming, so----
Ms. Salinas. Thank you.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. You can anticipate that coming.
And we are bringing together universities and industries to
really target and find out how best to link them to answer the
needs of the community, so that, I think, is very important. So
related to the CHIPS workforce, obviously, that funding is
existing, and it's not impacted by any potential budget cuts,
right? So within other workforce development programs, we have
very important programs related to cybersecurity workforce
development. We have a lot of workforce development in quantum
through our joint institutes. We have a lot of workforce
development activities in really all areas of critical and
emerging technologies.
With budget cuts or decreases, it would sharply decrease
our ability to promote the STEM workforce in areas of critical
and emerging technologies and at a time that these technologies
are blooming and developing. And if we want to be the leading
tech economy in the world, it is a really bad time to cut down
on generating that next generation of STEM workforce.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And then just a quick follow up, I
feel like this is a softball for you, but is there more that
Congress could do to help you and your counterparts at other
agencies build that sustainable and inclusive STEM workforce
pipeline?
Dr. Locascio. Absolutely. So, I really appreciate that. We
are already trying to work together in certain areas that are
important for our economy, so I'll just give an example. We
work with NSF in programs that we've recently released around
the development of ICT (information and communications
technology) technologies, and that has been, I think, a
fantastic and exciting program. We also developed a new program
around AI, responsible AI, with NSF. So I think there are a
number of ways that not only can Congress support us in our
workforce development programs, but also support the agencies
working together there.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Miller, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, and thank you to Director Locascio for joining us
today.
Dr. Locascio, one of the driving imperatives behind passing
the CHIPS Act last year was urgency. To be specific, the
urgency was building leading-edge capacity within our borders
like Intel's fabs in Ohio, and because it takes 3 years to
build one of these fabs in time was--remains of the essence.
What is your timeline to begin issuing funds for large-scale
and leading-edge fabs in particular?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. I can't give you
the definitive timeline, but we are anticipating making
announcements very soon. Hopefully, that will give you an
indication of when you should see the full funding
announcements coming.
I'll say that the first NOFO we've received over 200
statements of interest related to the first Notice of Funding
Opportunity. We're hiring a lot of people to help us work
through all of the different statements of interest. We're
accepting full applications for fab facilities at this time.
Each one will be negotiated independently. Each deal will be
negotiated independently, so it's very complex dealmaking that
will be conducted in order to get this right to make sure that
we make the best deals for the country and support--and protect
the taxpayer dollars. But you'll be seeing a lot out of the
CHIPS R&D Office and the CHIPS Manufacturing Incentives Office
in the next few months.
Mr. Miller. OK, thanks. So the next few months, we should
see some movement on that?
Dr. Locascio. You will see a lot of information coming out
of both offices on what to anticipate coming next.
Mr. Miller. Is there any type of--and I don't mean to pry
and push----
Dr. Locascio. No, that's OK.
Mr. Miller. Is there any type of speculation or
guesstimation that you could make as to where these--you know,
the funding that's going to be allocated?
Dr. Locascio. Where or when?
Mr. Miller. When.
Dr. Locascio. I cannot speak to when it will be allocated,
I'm sorry. There's so many different factors that come into it
because of the complexity of each one of the deals that we're
going to be making to support leading-edge, current generation,
and mature node. But I'd be happy to talk to you more offline
about the things that are going to be rolling out. And we are
trying to be as transparent as possible in the whole process
and to let you know what our timelines are.
Mr. Miller. OK. Yeah, that would just be great because of
the urgency of the nature and what we push for----
Dr. Locascio. Of course.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. We want to get it as fast as we
can.
Dr. Locascio. Of course, and that's our goal is to make
sure not only that we get it out as fast as we can, but we do
it right, and we protect taxpayer dollars, and that's our goal,
and so we just need to make sure that we're doing it right.
Mr. Miller. Understood.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. The National Environment Policy Act, NEPA, will
apply to projects awarded grants. My understanding is that NEPA
review could slow down fund dispersal to grantees and even
construction by perhaps a minimum of 1 1/2 years or possibly
longer. What are your plans to address that significant delay
in the face of urgent need to bring these fabs online? Are
there specific reforms that should be implemented within the
NEPA process?
Dr. Locascio. You know, I really appreciate that question.
We have encouraged everybody who is applying for these funds to
think about this early, early on because, of course--and the
big fabs already understand that obviously. That can cause
project delays, and we want to be able to understand and
anticipate any project delays.
I talked to the CHIPS Program Office Director a few days
ago, and he said that he's going to be putting probably 20
percent of his time toward looking at NEPA issues, and we are
forming a NEPA team on the government side who can facilitate
working around these issues specifically.
Mr. Miller. And just--there's an actual strategy and a
framework of a game plan that you have in place that's going to
be able to implement this in the timeframe that you would like?
I--because I hear your response and your fantastic answers, but
I want to know how we're going to do it----
Dr. Locascio. Yeah.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. In terms of timelines, in terms
of, you know, you saying that we have this. But I want to know
how we're going to do it and what are your direct answers to
these questions----
Dr. Locascio. Yeah.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. Is really what I would like to
know.
Dr. Locascio. And I hear your question very clearly, and I
thank you for that question. And I would love to follow up with
you at the office----
Mr. Miller. OK.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. And talk more about engagement
on how we can make sure that we can meet our timelines.
Mr. Miller. Understood. Thank you.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. One last one. Is the Department currently
reviewing existing categorical exclusions, CEs, to assess
whether they could be used for proposed projects?
Dr. Locascio. I'm sorry, I have to get back to you on that
as well.
Mr. Miller. OK.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Miller. All right. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now turns to the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms.
Stevens, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you for the 5 minutes of questioning,
and thank you to Director Locascio for your incredible
testimony. And in fact, it is such a delight to hear about NIST
today in this Committee and in the halls of Congress, for NIST
is the secret engine-that-could in the Congress. And some of us
had the privilege of coming over to Gaithersburg alongside you
at the very end of the last term in Congress right before we
were about to have a new Congress come in. And one of the
things I deeply appreciated was seeing the things that we don't
oftentimes get to hear about. And by the way, it is such a
delight to hear that, you know, so many of our colleagues on
both sides of the aisle are celebrating the bipartisan passage
of the CHIPS and Science Act, and so interested to hear about
its inner workings. And, you know, as a polite reminder, we hit
187 Democrats vote for CHIPS and 24 Republicans, and so just
ask yourself, right, when it's time to take that vote, if
you're going to be voting for that, particularly to our new
Members because we know we did the work last term, and we want
to continue to build off of that.
But if you don't mind, Director, do you mind just sharing a
little bit about NIST that maybe we haven't heard today? You
know, again, some of these surprise things, industries that you
touch that don't necessarily come to the forefront of that--of
a hearing like this?
Dr. Locascio. Thank you for that question. NIST, 1901 was
when we were born. That was brought up earlier. Since we were
born, we have really adapted to what is coming on the horizon.
So now that we are a digital economy, we are growing and
growing in areas related to communication technology and
information technology so we can always meet the demands of the
needs of the industry as they develop.
Somebody asked me about quantum, and that is at the
forefront of a lot of people's minds, but I want to bring it up
that we've been involved in quantum for decades and decades,
and it's been our priority for decades before it was on
anybody's mind. We were doing this very basic research that led
to the development of quantum clocks that are more accurate
than anywhere in the world and that will lead to the
redefinition of time on the global scale. That's the kind of
work that we do.
Ms. Stevens. Redefining time----
Dr. Locascio. Redefining time----
Ms. Stevens [continuing]. In the humble place called
Gaithersburg, Maryland----
Dr. Locascio. Yes, exactly.
Ms. Stevens [continuing]. You know, in the NIST
headquarters. And it's just--it's worth shining a light on and
also bringing energy to and in part--look, I was working in one
of the Manufacturing USA Institutes before I ever thought I
would run for Congress and working alongside NIST and so
appreciate your ability to sign MOUs (memorandums of
understanding) and work very cross-functionally across
government in a way that leads to profound outcomes and
oftentimes puts you on a cutting edge. And I'll tell you, it
was those budget cuts of 2017 that awakened me to the fact that
we need to have more NIST champions in the Congress. We've got
to have more people not just singing your praises, but doing
this work alongside you to invest in your modernization, to
make sure that we've got proper, you know, buildings that
aren't falling apart, and I've seen those pictures, and I know
that's been asked today.
But there's a proposal that has come about--I think it was
voted on from the other side of the aisle, a budget of a 22
percent decrease to NIST, and here we are talking about
competing with China, talking about, you know, competing on the
global stage, doing the quantum, doing the chips, doing
industrial policy. What does it mean to our competitiveness
with China if we do that 22 percent cut?
Dr. Locascio. It is a dire outlook, and if you have seen--
I'm sure you've seen the Australian Policy Institute--Strategic
Policy Institute report that said 37 out of 44 leading
technologies are being led by China. The U.S.----
Ms. Stevens. Say that again.
Dr. Locascio. Thirty-seven out of 44 leading technologies
are led by China.
Ms. Stevens. So we cut at our peril. We cut our budget
and--right? We--that's the deal. So you want to default, you
want to have, you know, cuts across the board, and maybe we
might as well be going and voting for our adversaries.
Dr. Locascio. It's a really difficult time in the context
of today's global economy not only in terms of our competition
in technological solutions, but also who is going to be the
shaper of the foundational rules of the next global economy?
That's where we are today.
Ms. Stevens. Who is going to be the shaper? That is the
question, and I think we leave that with the Committee, Madam
Director.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back. Thank you. Great to
see you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time is absolutely
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Issa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, I--a couple of questions. One of them is earlier
with the Ranking Member you touched on standard--SEP,
Standards-Essential Patents. You made a decision to eliminate
the 2019 standard and not replace it, even until today, with a
replacement. Is that correct?
Dr. Locascio. We----
Mr. Issa. I know you have a proposed, but you have not
replaced it.
Dr. Locascio. We have not replaced it.
Mr. Issa. So, basically, during that intervening period,
Europe is going forward with a standard that we now have to
come in second to. Doesn't the absence of guidance at the time
that if you didn't like the previous one, the offer changes, if
you knew what was, quote, wrong with the Trump era one, why
couldn't you replace it with something more quickly, at least
so that we would put down a stake in the ground and not find
ourselves essentially behind the European Union, which
ultimately means that you're going to propose more things that
are their standard, isn't that correct?
Dr. Locascio. Well, I appreciate that question. I deeply--
--
Mr. Issa. I wouldn't appreciate it. It's not intended to be
that appreciated.
Dr. Locascio. I do because this is something that we have
discussed often frequently. I meet with Kathi Vidal, who's the
Director of the----
Mr. Issa. As do I, but the question is, why didn't you--
first of all, let me make it two-part. The absence of a
standard does put us at a disadvantage to Europe that's moving
forward, correct? In fairness, in those discussions?
Dr. Locascio. I can't say that it does.
Mr. Issa. OK. So you won't answer or can't answer that. The
second one is why wasn't there at least some comment at the
point that one was eliminated about what--where we should go?
If you knew what was wrong with Trump, did Biden know what was
right?
Dr. Locascio. So we did not--the two-thousand-eight----
Mr. Issa. Nineteen.
Dr. Locascio. Nineteen, thank you, replaced the 2014. We
did not reinstate either. So right now, there is no policy
statement coming out of the USPTO and NIST.
Mr. Issa. Well, I look forward to--you have a draft now
that we're looking at, but I look forward to some real
guidance. I'm deeply concerned that it's already a difficult
area that Ms. Lofgren and all of us who serve on the Courts
Committee over in Judiciary are very concerned with.
Let me move on to the other one that was brought up.
Somewhere I saw $150 million as an estimate for what mandatory
daycare is going to cost. Is that a reasonable figure or would
you have an alternate?
Dr. Locascio. I don't have a figure----
Mr. Issa. OK. But it costs something.
Dr. Locascio. I don't have any figures for you. I'm sorry.
Mr. Issa. Well, what I want to know is where in the four
squares did Congress say that you should drive up the cost by
having your standards of what you think is fair for
construction? We're not talking even about factories. We're
talking about during construction.
Dr. Locascio. So we are following all legal authorities
that we have received, and based on the statements of interest
that we've received from companies, we don't see any hesitation
based on the requirements.
Mr. Issa. Sure. If you're giving me money and telling me I
have to do it, you're going to say, yes, sir, yes, sir, three
bags full. So again, this drives up the cost. Now we could
drive up the cost, you know, every time somebody takes in a
foster child. We can give them 6 months off with pay during
construction. Every time somebody thinks they have COVID
without a test, we should have them stay home for 14 days. We
could have a whole list of them. What I want to know is you
said that under the CHIPS Act, your job was to protect--
protect--the taxpayers' money, the massive amount that was
given. Do you believe you're protecting it by adding these
additional mandates?
Dr. Locascio. I do because, holistically, what this is
doing is helping us holistically to create the workforce that
we need in order to respond----
Mr. Issa. So----
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. To the demand----
Mr. Issa [continuing]. A construction workforce mandates
certain things which drive up the cost of production of that
infrastructure, and you're saying that that maintains the
workforce, but that's not the workforce for CHIPS. That's the
workforce for construction. But even if it was the CHIPS
portion, where in the square--four squares of this legislation,
if anywhere, do you find that mandate, not do you have other
authorities? Do--where do you find the mandate or intent by
Congress?
Dr. Locascio. Our No. 1 goal, No. 1, is to make sure that
we bring manufacturing back to the United States----
Mr. Issa. I appreciate that. My time is expired, but that
wasn't responsive. Responsive would have been I don't find it
in the four squares, but we had authority, so we did it.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Lucas, and thank you, Director,
for being here today.
So I want to lead in by saying that my questions go well
beyond the jurisdiction of this Committee and maybe beyond your
expertise, so just stay with me here.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Mr. Casten. So as we think about any world where we are
going to price greenhouse gas emissions and whether that's, you
know, at the extreme an economy-wide cap-and-trade. Some of our
colleagues on the other side of the aisle and the center
talking about border tax adjustments. The White House is
talking about social cost of carbon. We need to quantify
greenhouse gas emissions at a very quantifiable level that's,
you know, a specific number of tons at a specific location that
can be tied to a specific activity.
There's two pieces of your budget that I'd like to
understand to what degree they contribute to that. The first is
you've got this, I think it's a $2 million increase to measure
essentially negative CO
2
actions. We've--the work
we've done in the agriculture spaces, we've done some stuff on
the COVER Act to incentivize the use of cover crops, and we've
gotten intellectually comfortable with practice-based
legislation that says we're confident that X is going to reduce
CO
2
, we're not confident how much, we don't know how
durable it is, how long it's going to stay in the ground.
As you look at the--at what you're hoping to do with that
expansion, is that going to enable us to actually specifically
say we know there was this much CO
2
reduced at this
point by this action and it is durable? And I don't say this as
a judgment. Or is this really more about monitoring so we can,
you know, understand global balances, which is also valuable?
I'm not saying that one is better than the other, but how
should we understand what we can do if you succeed with that
part of your budget?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, I appreciate that. So, right now, a lot
of the work that we've done is really to look at various ways
to capture carbon and--through manmade sort, through technology
development, and we do intend to expand that. Now, to natural
sources, right, so exactly what you're talking about. That's
the point of the new funding that we'll be expending in the
future if we get the budget.
There will really be two ways that we'll focus. One is in
the development of calibration methods, and one is in the
development of standards to support better point measurements
at site.
Mr. Casten. OK. Would it get to the durability question,
though?
Dr. Locascio. I am going to have to get back to you on that
if you don't mind.
Mr. Casten. OK.
Dr. Locascio. I would like to answer that question. I
honestly can't.
Mr. Casten. I mean, just as a personal matter, like I'm
intrigued by how much carbon we could store in our soils, but
it's hard----
Dr. Locascio. Yes.
Mr. Casten [continuing]. For me to say if we put it into
the soil, is there going to be a flood next year? Is there
going to be a fire----
Dr. Locascio. So----
Mr. Casten [continuing]. Is there going to be erosion?
Dr. Locascio. So, in theory, we should be able to get to
the durability question with the proposed work, but I want to
be sure that I'm answering that correctly----
Mr. Casten. OK.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. And make sure that we can get to
the proposed solution for you.
Mr. Casten. OK. Let me shift, and it's the same category of
question but on the methane side. You're talking about these--
also these processes of frequency cones if I understand----
Dr. Locascio. Yes.
Mr. Casten [continuing]. The term right of using some
electromagnetic spectrum data to figure out where the methane
emissions are. We've got talks about methane fees and pricing,
and, obviously, the gas industry is keen to reduce leaks
because fewer leaks means I can sell more gas.
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Casten. The challenge has always been, you know, what
do you do on assets that are either upstream of where a
commercial entity has a meter or abandoned wells that are
leaking and nobody has title to it anymore and it just--it's
just left on the taxpayer or society to bear the cost of that?
Will the improvements that you can do in methane metering give
us the ability to not only ascribe the--you know, the location
in space, but also in time sufficient for us to say this entity
is responsible for this ton of methane, and in some methane
fee, we can now connect the accounting or, again, is that more
broadly geospatial data?
Dr. Locascio. No, I believe so with distributed sensing, so
the optical frequency comes as a technology that has been
developed by NIST for many decades as well and a subject of a
Nobel Prize, and so----
Mr. Casten. Congratulations.
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you. Just continuous stream of
pulses of different frequencies that allow you to then use that
to detect the absorption of various molecules and of the
different frequencies of light, so it's kind of like a
fingerprint of the different molecules that are present. But
depending on how you distribute that and do the measurements, I
don't know the accuracy with which we would be able to
pinpoint, but I can also find that out for you.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, and I know we're out of time, but,
you know, I'm thinking, you know, if we can get to a collection
here and say I don't--there's been a bunch of commercial
entities happening here----
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Casten [continuing]. And now we have a cloud of
methane----
Dr. Locascio. So where is the source----
Mr. Casten [continuing]. Can we tie that back----
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. Exactly. Yes.
Mr. Casten [continuing]. Right, because----
Dr. Locascio. Right.
Mr. Casten [continuing]. That's a lot of the methane in the
system.
Dr. Locascio. Yes.
Mr. Casten. I'm out of time. Thank you. I yield back.
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Colorado, Ms.
Caraveo.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to Ranking
Member Lofgren as well for the hearing today. Thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for taking the time to speak with us today.
I'm particularly excited, as Mr. Collins mentioned earlier,
about a hearing that we are going to--sorry, about today's
hearing because later this week, we will be voting on the bill
that we have both worked on with--regarding the work that NIST
can do around new methods and partnerships to make it easier
and faster to detect drugs containing xylazine and other novel
synthetic opioids. So as kind of a follow up to the questions
that he asked earlier, you discussed the research that you can
do in the detection and testing of these new substances. How do
you go about disseminating that information, for example, to
law enforcement agencies in order to keep our law enforcement
officers and others involved in the testing of these and
handling of these substances safe?
Dr. Locascio. Yes, so I appreciate that question. We work
directly with States, but we also disseminate our information
through publications so people understand everything that we
know when we find it out. We can disseminate that throughout
the network.
Ms. Caraveo. Wonderful. And I very much appreciate that
work. Is there anything else that Congress can do to further
help your actions around these efforts?
Dr. Locascio. Well, thank you for that question. This is
work that we have been doing sort of quietly, I think, behind
the scenes for a very long time, but really contributing to
public health. And, as we know, we're in a horrible time of
crisis with regard to not only opioids but now fentanyl and
TRANQ and multiple other things that are coming on the scene. I
think we will always be chasing the next thing, so we always
have to be ahead of the game in our understanding of what's
appearing in our street drugs. Support for that program at
NIST, I think, is really important moving forward. Thank you.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you. And I am fully committed to
anything that you all need in order for us to kind of stop
chasing our tails and provide you with funds and other
resources to make sure that we're keeping ahead of what is
going on to the streets and affecting our families. I would be
interested in helping you more with that.
In a much different vein, I am a pediatrician, and so I'm
very interested both in children and their education and making
sure that we are attracting as many people as possible in the
future to science-based, STEM-based careers. And so I know that
you have a significant presence in Colorado in particular where
I'm from, and I'm very interested in you telling us more ways
about how you support K through 12 students, especially in
terms of diversity, both in terms of backgrounds, myself being
a Latina, but also I represent a very rural district, and so
geographic diversity is also very important to me.
Dr. Locascio. This has been a passion of mine, I think,
since I began researching at NIST. To really promote diversity
in all the research that we do is so important because that's
how we get to the best creative solutions, and so that's just
full stop on that, right? So a lot of our programs are geared
toward--especially our newer programs are geared toward making
sure we're recruiting from diverse populations, and not only
that, reaching back further and further to make sure that
people--that everyone is interested in science who has that
predisposition and who want--and open their eyes to science and
welcome them into science and technology as a discipline moving
forward.
So a few of the things that we do for the K through 12 is
we educate teachers and middle school science teachers to try
to make it more interesting to engage diverse populations in
the sciences, and so we teach them new types of experiments
that might be appealing to younger students to make them
attractive--to help them--to help bring them into the science
fields, but we have a number of other programs. We have a lot
of outreach to our local communities to engage public--I mean
to engage students in science and technology.
Ms. Caraveo. Great, well, I'm very appreciative of those
programs, also looking forward to supporting your efforts on
that. Thank you for the work that you do.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back my time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Kean, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Locascio.
In New Jersey, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership
program has provided essential support to manufacturers,
helping them enhance efficiency, cut costs, and adopt new
technologies. With the program's importance in mind, many are
curious about how the President's budget--back that. How does
the President's budget request support the goals and the
strategies outlined in the Manufacturing Extension Partnership
2023 to 2027 strategic plan?
Dr. Locascio. So it will be very, very--thank you for that
question. It will be very clearly focused on supply chain
vulnerabilities, also workforce development, which we've talked
about a number of times here today, and also on really helping
manufacturers innovate, so bringing new types of technological
solutions into their current thinking. And the programs will be
focused clearly on those three areas.
Mr. Kean. Could you discuss some specific ideas that you
have for the U.S. to broaden participation and the development
of a strong and geographically diverse STEM workforce?
Dr. Locascio. So thank you for that question. This is
something that I'm really passionate about. There are a number
of things that we are working on at NIST, including trying to
recruit and retain diverse representation into the NIST
workforce. I think we have a way to go, but I think we need to
do that internally first, and that's one of the things that
we're working on.
Now, nationally, I think we can be and become a place that
is much more active in reaching out to different organizations
to help diversify the STEM workforce, and we are engaging in
those programs now.
Mr. Kean. OK. And then the European Union AI Act is
advancing quickly and contains many provisions regulating risk
assessment----
Dr. Locascio. Yes.
Mr. Kean [continuing]. Setting technical standards, and
other activities within the NIST's purview. How has NIST
engaged with their--with your European counterparts during
their process? And how should the U.S. respond to the E.U.'s
efforts?
Dr. Locascio. So we are engaged internationally with the AI
RMF framework. First of all, we have engaged early and often in
the development of the AI RMF framework with our international
partners. Our goal is to make sure that this becomes the way
that people want to look at AI, responsible AI globally. So a
number of different ways that we're actively engaged on the
international level, especially in Europe, the TTC (Trade and
Technology Council), the U.S.-E.U. Tech and Trade Council. We
have activities in responsible AI specifically where
discussions are ongoing about responsible AI. I think that's
probably the primary focal point of our discussions with the AI
RMF with the E.U.
The second way is one of the NIST people who was actually
behind the AI RMF, she actually testified recently, Elham
Tabassi. She is a Co-Chair on the OECD (Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development) working group that is
engaged in AI more broadly, responsible AI, and so we are out
there really seeking to make sure we can harmonize with what's
going on globally, actively engaged in that.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Dr. Locascio.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my time.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Mullin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Doctor, for your testimony. My district is the
birthplace and epicenter of biotechnology, the life sciences.
We've got a major hub, over 300 companies there. And I am new
to the Congress, new to this Committee, and candidly, I wasn't
aware of NIST until preparing for this hearing. So if you might
be able to educate me on how the agency interacts with the life
sciences industry. Specifically, how does the work of your
agency support and further the innovation economy, and maybe a
little bit on just the challenges of that public-private
relationship and interaction? I would be curious to get your
thoughts on that.
Dr. Locascio. Yes, thank you for that question. And we have
a number of ways that we interact with the life sciences
community. One, we develop standards, and let me just sort of--
I'll put this in the way that makes it more interesting
perhaps--and consortia around the development of standards. So
several years ago, we developed the gene editing consortium,
and there is engagement of all the major companies who are
involved in gene editing. Our goal is to make sure that when
you're editing the genome, you know what you did, right? You
know what you did and you know how to anticipate the outcome. I
think that's a really critical role for NIST. We are not in the
discovery area, right? That's what the life sciences--the
biotech community is doing. They're in the discovery area.
We're here to ensure that what they're doing, they've got a
handle on understanding the changes that they make or how the
product works or the quality of the product. So we also have
standards around antibody-based therapeutics, which were
important during COVID, but they're important for many, many,
many different diseases. And those are to make sure that they
understand the quality with their antibody-based therapeutic.
So it's around standards and consortium that can help bring
quality to the products.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for that. And switching gears to a
different topic, we're hearing a lot about extreme weather
events and climate resilience. We in California, that is
certainly top of mind. And I understand that the agency is
working on building more resilient communities. There are
community-resilience standards that the agency has put out,
which are targeted toward governments and community-level
planning projects, flood control systems, that kind of thing.
Meanwhile, I'm concerned about individual homeowners who
are on their own having to take action to make their properties
more resilient. Many communities are putting the onus on
households to adapt their own property to withstand climate
change and extreme weather. They're having to sort of go it
alone right now. So I'm just curious if beyond that community-
level guidance, is NIST planning any work around developing
standards directly applicable to individual homeowners and sort
of hardening their property, making their own buildings more
resilient? Or is that really the realm of other entities or
individuals on their own to deal with? Curious if you're
looking at that.
Dr. Locascio. Well, thank you for that. When we do incident
response--or when we do response and investigation of disasters
is really geared toward an understanding of how to really make
buildings more secure and resilient, and so that includes
housing in these areas. And so the way that we disseminate
that, that gets disseminated into building codes and standards
to help build more resilient housing for people, help build
more resilient businesses. So it doesn't leave out the people.
It's really focused on how can we make sure that anything that
we're learning from our investigations gets translated into
buildings and codes and standards that make people's lives more
secure?
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for that, Doctor. And with that, I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Lieu, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this hearing. Thank you, Dr. Locascio, for
your public service.
I'd like to ask you about the Risk Management Framework for
Artificial Intelligence. I first I want to commend NIST for
coming out with this framework in January of this year. Their
framework has at its core sort of four steps, right, govern,
map, measure, and manage, and then there are standards and
guidance within each of those steps. I think it's a good
framework. I'm wondering, what has the feedback been to NIST
from the stakeholders?
Dr. Locascio. Oh, you know, I appreciate that question.
We've had incredible response from the stakeholders, really
good response from both large and small business community in
the United States. And I'll also say that the NAIAC, the
National AI Advisory Committee has recently also recommended
the adoption of the AI Risk Management Framework more broadly.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. Have the Federal agencies adopted this
framework?
Dr. Locascio. The Federal agencies--I don't know the extent
to which Federal agencies or industry has adopted the framework
yet. I know that a lot of people are considering the adoption
and working on the adoption of the framework.
Mr. Lieu. OK.
Dr. Locascio. I haven't seen----
Mr. Lieu. Now----
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. Sort of the official----
Mr. Lieu. Right.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. You know, adoption.
Mr. Lieu. NIST spent a lot of time on this, met with a lot
of people, had a lot of iterations, had lots of stakeholder
meetings. Why is OMB now going to reinvent the wheel and do
guidance of Federal agencies? Why not just have Federal
agencies just adopt the framework that you had all these
meetings and stakeholder input on?
Dr. Locascio. I can't speak for OMB, but I will say that
they have asked for our input, so that's----
Mr. Lieu. I'm just--what is the thinking there? I don't--
you spent all these resources developing this framework. OMB
doesn't have the time to do their own thing. Why are they
reinventing the wheel? I don't get it. I'm just trying to
understand what the thinking is there. What's the reason we
don't just have every Federal agency adopt the framework you
all put out?
Dr. Locascio. I really can't speak to that. I don't----
Mr. Lieu. All right. So I think NIST----
Dr. Locascio. But I can say that----
Mr. Lieu [continuing]. Should ask that question, and I
would like a response to that question because I don't think
reinventing the wheel makes a lot of sense, and--unless it's
somehow that the Administration doesn't believe in your
framework, but from what you're telling me, I think it got good
feedback. It seems like it is a good framework, so I'm just
curious. I don't really understand that process.
All right. So after you release your framework in March,
Open AI released the second version of ChatGPT, ChatGPT-4. It's
generative AI. It's sort of another advancement in artificial
intelligence. By the way, I'm a recovering computer science
major, so all of this is enthralling to me. I find it amazing.
I think AI is going to provide us a lot of benefits. It can
also harm us. Does NIST have the resources and budget to deal
with what we're seeing is increasing usage and increasing
development of AI as you come up with, for example, framework
version 2.0?
Dr. Locascio. So I will say that the money that we are
asking for for AI--first of all, I'll just go back and mention
that we do have support from the Administration for the AI RMF.
But I'll mention that the money that we're asking for for AI in
the coming year in FY '24 is really going to be focused on
generative AI. Part of it is going to be focused on taking the
AI RMF framework and looking at that as a use case, working
with the community, working with public engagement, and
understanding and uncovering the risks associated specifically
with generative AI. I think there are a number of things that
we want to do in that area, and that will be part of the focus
of the future of the next year's funds.
Mr. Lieu. Do you have a timeline for when that framework
might come out?
Dr. Locascio. Well, it will be based on the AI RMF
framework, so it won't be an independent framework. It will be
an application of the framework to generative AI----
Mr. Lieu. OK, got it.
Dr. Locascio [continuing]. Working with the community, very
closely with the community, as we always do, so----
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs.
Sykes, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Dr.
Locascio, for being here with us. I hope I'm your last question
today, as you've been here for quite some time.
But I do want to talk to you or get your feedback and
expertise on CHIPS and Science Act. I'm from Ohio. Obviously,
the CHIPS and Science Act is really integral to our economy and
our future, and over the last couple of weeks, I've asked many
of our witnesses who have testified, including the National
Science Foundation, about what would happen to their budget,
their continued expertise, and opportunities for expansion and
growth around technology if the majority's budget bill were to
pass. And one of the things he shared was there'd be about
280,000 semiconductor jobs that would be lost across the
country. Obviously, that would be a significant impact for not
only Ohio, but the entire country, our supply chains, and our
national defense, our security, and competitiveness with the
world, but wanted to just hear your take on that as well,
whether or not you agree with--you may not exactly have that
number, but whether or not you agree with those devastating
impacts and what that could do to the semiconductor industry in
this country.
Dr. Locascio. I do think there will be devastating impacts,
and I think that's agreed upon that it is not a time to take
our foot off the gas in terms of competing in the technological
landscape globally because if we do, other countries will
gladly take over. So this is the time to invest in science and
technology and not lose ground in science and technology. By a
lot of estimates, we're already falling behind because they are
investing in research and are investing in standards and
investing in multiple areas that are in manufacturing. As a
matter of fact, China has moved our Manufacturing USA
Institutes as well. So it's really not time to take our foot
off the gas, and I do think we'll lose a lot of ground in terms
of our global economic competitiveness if we do.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you so much for sharing that, and I can
say with some confidence our colleagues from both sides of the
aisle have been strong supporters of the CHIPS Act, and I would
certainly hate for us to lose our competitive advantage, as
well as our economic opportunities in Ohio and across the
country. And I know that your agency is doing quite a bit of
work. We've--there's--your chips office in northeast Ohio,
would love to come visit and see what you're doing, but if you
could focus a bit more about--or share with me a bit more about
if I were to go visit, what would I see there? What are some of
the things that you're doing, particularly with the
Manufacturing USA Institute, and ensuring that you have the
workforce, you have the infrastructure necessary to produce the
semiconductors and live up to the full potential of the CHIPS
and Science Act?
Dr. Locascio. There's so many moving parts right now within
the CHIPS and Science Act and its implementation, including
notice funding and opportunities that I think everyone is aware
of and how that's going to lead to the increased capacity for
building and manufacturing in this country, and we are so
excited about that and working very, very hard on implementing
that.
At the same time, we are very excited about the
implementation of the CHIPS R&D funding, so the manufacturing
incentives are to bring manufacturing back to the United
States. The R&D incentives are to keep it here because we are
the innovators in the world, and we can't be beat. Both of
those are really underpinned by a tremendous workforce
development piece because of the demand, 180,000 new jobs
created. We have to be able to support that. Otherwise, we lose
both. We will lose manufacturing, and we will lose R&D, and we
can't.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Doctor. I yield back and hopefully
give you a minute back of your time.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
Seeing no one else seeking recognition, I want to thank the
doctor for her valuable testimony and the Members for the
questions. The record will remain open for 10 additional days
for comments and written questions from Members.
This hearing is adjourned.
Dr. Locascio. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:28 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Laurie E. Locascio
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
