- FROM RISK TO RESILIENCE: REAUTHORIZING THE EARTHQUAKE AND WINDSTORM HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

______

FROM RISK TO RESILIENCE: REAUTHORIZING
THE EARTHQUAKE AND WINDSTORM
HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 30, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-31

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-636PDF          WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              GABE AMO, Rhode Island
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Research and Technology

HON. MIKE COLLINS, Georgia, Chairman
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan,
DARRELL ISSA, California                 Ranking Member
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              KEVIN MULLIN, California
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

January 30, 2024

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Mike Collins, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Research and Technology, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Haley Stevens, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    12
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

Mr. Jason Averill, Deputy Director of the Engineering Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    17
Written Statement............................................    19

Mr. Edward Laatsch, P.E., Director, Safety, Planning, and
Building Science Division, Risk Analysis, Planning and
Information Directorate, Federal Emergency Management Agency
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

Dr. Gavin Hayes, Earthquake Hazards Program Coordinator, United
States Geological Survey
Oral Statement...............................................    36
Written Statement............................................    38

Dr. Susan Margulies, Assistant Director for Engineering, National
Science Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    43
Written Statement............................................    45

Discussion.......................................................    59

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Jason Averill, Deputy Director of the Engineering Laboratory,
National Institute of Standards and Technology.................    72

Mr. Edward Laatsch, P.E., Director, Safety, Planning, and
Building Science Division, Risk Analysis, Planning and
Information Directorate, Federal Emergency Management Agency...    75

Dr. Gavin Hayes, Earthquake Hazards Program Coordinator, United
States Geological Survey.......................................    80

Dr. Susan Margulies, Assistant Director for Engineering, National
Science Foundation.............................................    83

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Suzanne Bonamici, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves--2019 Report,'' Summary of
Findings, National Institute of Building Sciences..........    88

FROM RISK TO RESILIENCE: REAUTHORIZING

THE EARTHQUAKE AND WINDSTORM

HAZARDS REDUCTION PROGRAMS

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 30, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Research and Technology,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:24 p.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mike
Collins [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Chairman Collins. The Subcommittee on Research and
Technology will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the Subcommittee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``From Risk to
Resilience: Reauthorizing the Earthquake and Windstorm Hazards
Reductions Programs.'' I'm going to recognize myself for five
minutes for an opening statement.
Good afternoon, and thank you to our expert panel of
witnesses for coming to take the time to be with us here today.
I look forward to hearing about how the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP) and the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP) have helped us respond to
natural hazards and mitigate their effects.
Earthquakes, tornadoes, and hurricanes destroy property and
take huge toll on families, communities, and businesses.
Billions are spent each year on recovery efforts, and the costs
associated with natural hazards are only expected to increase.
That is why we need cost-effective measures to reduce the
fallout of natural disasters. All 50 States endure windstorm
hazards, including tornadoes, tropical storms, hurricanes, and
thunderstorms. These storms and their associated flooding are
the most destructive and costly natural hazards in the United
States.
My home State of Georgia is no stranger to severe weather,
which frequently damages homes, businesses, and crop land.
Butts County, Georgia, where I live, suffered severe windstorms
last January, which killed a child and caused $15 million worth
of damage across the area. But of course, severe weather poses
a challenge throughout most of the country. Between 2010 and
2020, communities across America endured 6,000 tornadoes, which
cost an average of $2.5 million in property damage per storm.
Just as every State is affected by windstorms, they are
vulnerable to earthquakes. Nearly 75 percent of the United
States faces some risk from earthquakes. While rare in Georgia
it has been prone to small earthquakes over the years and as a
result of fault lines that run through our State. While we are
unable to predict when earthquakes may occur, by analyzing past
quakes, scientists can better assess the likelihood of future
earthquakes.
That's where NWIRP comes in. N-W-I-R-P, or NWIRP, and
NEHRP--those are going to get interesting--were created to
improve our understanding of natural hazards and their impacts
and to encourage the implementation of strategies that reduce
the damage from natural disasters. And we know that research
pays off. The National Institute of Building Science estimates
that for every $1 invested in mitigation strategies, $11 is
saved. Both NWIRP and NEHRP help coordinate research efforts
between the government, academia, and private sector. This
collaboration is needed to meet the challenge of responding to
severe weather events. Additionally, NWIRP and NEHRP both
conduct research and development to update building costs,
codes, voluntary standards, and construction practices to
improve the resiliency of structures.
I would like to thank our witnesses for being here, and I
look forward to hearing from them about these vital programs
and how they are protecting Americans from future weather
events and saving taxpayers and private sector money.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Collins follows:]

Good afternoon. Thank you to our expert panel of witnesses
for taking the time to be here with us today.
I look forward to hearing about how the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP) and the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program (NEHRP) have helped us respond to
natural hazards and mitigate their effects.
Earthquakes, tornadoes, and hurricanes destroy property and
take a huge toll on families, communities, and businesses.
Billions are spent each year on recovery efforts and the
costs associated with natural hazards are only expected to
increase. That is why we need cost-effective measures to reduce
the fallout of natural disasters.
All 50 states endure windstorm hazards including tornadoes,
tropical storms, hurricanes, and thunderstorms. These storms
and their associated flooding are the most destructive and
costly natural hazards in the United States.
My home state of Georgia is no stranger to severe weather,
which frequently damages homes, businesses, and crop land.
Butts County, Georgia, where I live, suffered severe windstorms
last January, which killed a child and caused $15 million worth
of damage across the area.
But of course, severe weather poses a challenge throughout
most of the country. Between 2010 and 2020 communities across
America endured 6,000 tornadoes, which cost an average of $2.5
million in property damage per storm.
Just as every state is affected by windstorms, they are
vulnerable to earthquakes. Nearly, 75 percent of the United
States faces some risk from earthquakes.
While rare, Georgia has been prone to small earthquakes
over the years as a number of fault lines run through the
State.
While we are unable to predict when earthquakes may occur,
by analyzing past quakes, scientists can better assess the
likelihood of future earthquakes.
That's where NEHRP comes in.
NWIRP and NEHRP were created to improve our understanding
of natural hazards and their impacts, and to encourage the
implementation of strategies that reduce the damage from
natural disasters. And we know that research pays off.
The National Institute of Building Science estimates that
for every $1 invested in mitigation strategies, $11 is saved.
Both NWIRP and NEHRP help coordinate research efforts
between the government, academia, and the private sector. This
collaboration is needed to meet the challenge of responding to
severe weather events.
Additionally, NWIRP and NEHRP both conduct research and
development to update building codes, voluntary standards, and
construction practices to improve the resiliency of structures.
I would like to again thank our witnesses for being here
and I look forward to hearing from them about how vital these
programs are protecting Americans from future weather events
and saving taxpayers and the private sector money.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Collins. Thank you, and I yield back the balance
of my time.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentlewoman from
Michigan, for an opening statement.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you so much, Chairman Collins, and
thank you to our distinguished panelists for today's hearing
examining two very important programs in our country's
preparedness for natural hazards. As the Chairman said, the
National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program, or NWIRP, and the
National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program, NEHRP.
And we have this reality in the country that no territory
is untouched by natural hazards, be it tornadoes, hurricanes,
earthquakes, flooding, wildfires, and more. And we've seen over
and over the destruction that these types of natural disasters
can cause. And as the Chairman indicated, in his district, he
had a weather event, and not far from mine just within the last
year, we had 100-mile-per-hour high-speed winds in Ingham
County, Ingham and Livingston, which is just right outside of
Oakland County where I represent. It killed two people and cost
$75 million in damages.
So the hazards are inevitable, but disasters are not. And
we've got to continue to push with our hazards research,
awareness, and preparedness not only to save lives, which is
critical and protect property and recover quickly, but to
really establish the best standards in the world for safety and
preparedness. And so everyone here knows that this is an all-
hands-on-deck kind of problem, and we need to understand the
science behind these hazards, particularly for earthquakes that
have oftentimes remained somewhat mysterious from the
preparedness angle.
I was an appointee in the Obama Administration about 13
years ago when we had an earthquake hit Washington, D.C., not
knowing that it was an earthquake at the time. And so we got to
think about our building structures, our community resiliency,
and people preparedness. Just as we prepare for the future,
this trend is only going to continue, right, and in some ways,
it's only going to accelerate. We've got awareness of our fault
lines here in the United States of America.
And we have also on this Committee and in the Subcommittee
evaluated the increase in tornado and windstorm events in areas
that traditionally haven't had those, so we don't have the
warning systems available, which is why it's been so important
for us to work with other Department of Commerce partners like
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), in
addition to our friends at NIST (National Institute of
Standards and Technology).
And so while these earthquakes and windstorms compel two
different types of research and response programs, we can look
at the structure for how we go about it. And we have a lot of
pride in the grounding of scientific research and fact and the
principles that guide the programmatic work of NEHRP,
particularly since 1977. This has just truly been a great model
for interagency collaboration and updating building codes,
protecting people and agency work in functional recovery gets
communities back up and running faster after an earthquake and
certainly saves lives.
Congress created NWIRP in just 2004 to build off of NEHRP's
successful model, and although the authorizations for NWIRP
expired in 2019, something we--or, excuse me, 2017, something
we've discussed on this Committee--the program agencies have
continued their important work in windstorm resilience and
improved forecasting and better safety measures like safe rooms
for tornadoes and hurricanes is absolutely saving lives.
And it's also, you know, frankly, the cost factor, and
we're recognizing ballooning costs from these hazardous events.
And the National Institute of Building Sciences found that for
every $1 invested in natural hazard mitigation through
retrofitting existing structures, we save an average of $4 in
future disaster costs. So infrastructure, infrastructure,
standards, standards, right? Investing in resilient communities
and hazards research is not only saving lives, it's very
fiscally responsible, so we've got some nice trajectory here.
And I'll submit the rest of my testimony to the record, but
thank you, Mr. Chair, for today's amazing hearing and look
forward to hearing from our witnesses. I'll yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Stevens follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Collins, for holding today's hearing to
examine two very important programs in our country's
preparedness for natural hazards: the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program, or NWIRP, and the National Earthquake Hazard
Reduction Program, or NEHRP. I would also like to welcome our
distinguished panel of witnesses.
No state or territory of our nation is untouched by natural
hazards, be it tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, flooding,
wildland fires, and more. We've seen over and over the
destruction that they can cause. Last summer, an EF-2 tornado--
with wind speeds over 100 mph--hit Ingham and Livingston County
near my district, tragically killing 2 people and causing $75
million in damages. Hazards are an inevitability, but disasters
are not. We must continue to push our hazards research,
awareness, and preparedness to save lives, protect property,
and recover quickly.
I know this is an all-hands-on-deck kind of problem. We
need to understand the science behind these hazards. We need to
know how to build our buildings, structures, and communities
resiliently. We need to help people prepare and to understand
human decision making under risk. And we also need to prepare
ourselves for the future, because this trend will only get
worse as our changing climate results in more frequent extreme
weather events.
While earthquakes and windstorms are two very different
types of natural disasters, our research and response programs
are similarly structured. We pride them in being grounded in
sound scientific principles. Since 1977, NEHRP has been a
fantastic model for interagencycollaboration spanning these
missions. Updated building codes protect people, and the
agencies' work in functional recovery gets communities back up
and running faster after a major earthquake.
Congress created NWIRP in 2004 to build off of NEHRP's
successful model. Although the authorizations for NWIRP expired
in 2017, the program agencies have continued their important
work in windstorm resilience. Improved forecasting and better
safety measures, like safe rooms, for tornadoes and hurricanes
are absolutely saving lives.
It's not just lives we're saving with these programs, it's
also money. We have a lot of older building stock that isn't up
to today's codes, especially in rural areas, but a 2019
benefit-cost analysis by the National Institute of Building
Sciences found that for every $1 invested in natural hazard
mitigation through retrofitting existing structures, we save an
average $4 in future disaster costs. Investing in resilient
communities and hazards research not only saves lives but is
fiscally responsible.
Lastly, I want to highlight that in both programs, NIST
plays the critical role of leading the interagency
coordination. That means taking the research from universities,
agencies, and NIST's own investigations, and synthesizing that
into standards and recommendations that, when adopted, improve
community resilience. Strong coordination makes all the
difference in bringing solutions together, and I hope to hear
today about NIST's work in catalyzing interagency efforts.
We have come a long way in understanding and preparing for
hazards. We know so much more now, and we must continue to help
communities prepare for these hazards. As the Science Committee
considers the reauthorization of NWIRP and NEHRP, I look
forward to hearing from the witnesses on changes to the
Programs that can continue to improve our nation's resilience
to earthquakes and windstorms.
Thank you. I yield back.

Chairman Collins. All right. The Chair now recognizes the
Ranking Member, Ms. Lofgren, for an opening statement.
The Chair is going to recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee.
Chairman Lucas. Full Committee Chairman, I'll always keep
an eye on the Subcommittee Chair, I promise you. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Collins. Well, the last hearing I'll chair.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Oklahoma saw 74 tornadoes last year. My home community in
Roger Mills County was significantly impacted by the February
26 tornado--yes, February 26 of last year that ripped through
several counties in the State. Five houses in my community were
deemed a total loss. Several State and local facilities were
significantly damaged and even took the life of one of my high
school classmates. So you could say I have a particular
interest in the lifesaving work being done through the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Oklahoma saw seventy-four
tornadoes last year. My home community of Roger Mills County
was significantly impacted by the February 26th tornadoes that
ripped through several counties in the state.
Five houses in my community were deemed a total loss, and
several state and local facilities were significantly damaged.
It even took the life of my high school classmate.
So, you could say I have a particular interest in the
lifesaving work being done through the National Windstorm
Impact Reduction Program.

Chairman Collins. Sorry about that, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member, Ms. Lofgren,
for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Chairman Collins and Ranking Member
Stevens, for today's hearing. And welcome also to our
distinguished panel of witnesses.
You know, all the Members of this Committee have--represent
areas that have been affected by natural disasters, some fueled
in part by our changing climate. Many Americans have suffered
personal losses from severe storms and flooding. Over the last
few years, changing atmospheric phenomena have led to a series
of devastating storms throughout my home State of California
that have resulted in flooding, power outages, mudslides. I
know this happened in my district last year when massive
flooding caused the Pajaro River's levee to fail, forcing 1,500
people to evacuate and flooding homes and businesses. The
climate crisis continues to put massive strains on aging
infrastructures and already vulnerable communities across the
country.
Now, I grew up in California, and all of us who grew up
there or lived there are very aware of the threat of
earthquakes. I vividly recall the Loma Prieta earthquake that
shook San Jose in 1989. And anyone who's been through an
earthquake, even those not as large as Loma Prieta, can easily
recall what they were doing the exact moment it hit and how
they reacted.
Since the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program was
established in 1977, the program has achieved great progress,
substantially decreasing loss of life and injuries and
improving the capabilities of seismic risk assessment. Thinking
back to Loma Prieta, we had a big section of freeway simply
collapse. The Bay Bridge collapsed. We need to harden our
infrastructure.
I also want to focus today on the science of predicting
earthquakes. We don't currently have the capability to predict
the exact time, location, and magnitude of an earthquake, but
we should continue the research. Even a few additional minutes
of warning could mean the difference between life and death.
We've seen this already with ShakeAlert, the earthquake early
warning system which can give a few seconds' warning before a
strong shaking is felt. This could make a difference in
operating rooms, from transportation systems. It's really
important. Even a small amount of time does help.
The Bay Area Rapid Transit system partners with USGS
(United States Geological Survey) to automatically stop trains
when a shake is detected. And we have to continue to look for
scientific and technological solutions to give people as much
time as possible to prepare.
Programs like these focus on wind and wind-driven storm
surge and the earthquake with this focus on earthquakes are
really important to our understanding of the science of hazards
and translating that understanding into more resilient
communities. I've long supported these programs, and I look
forward to hearing from the panel today about how we can
continue them and maybe even improve them.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Collins and Ranking Member Stevens, for
holding today's hearing on reauthorizing our critical research
programs focused on understanding and building resilience to
earthquakes and windstorms. I would also like to welcome our
distinguished panel of witnesses.
I--along with many other members of this committee--
represent areas that have been affected by natural disasters
fueled in part by our changing climate.
Many Americans have suffered personal losses from severe
storms and flooding. Over the last few years, changing
atmospheric phenomena have led to a series of devastating
storms throughout my home state of California, resulting in
flooding, power outages, and mudslides. All too often, due to
stark economic and racial disparities in where people live and
the resilience of their homes and communities, these storms
have an outsized impact on marginalized communities.
This happened in my district last year when massive
flooding caused the Pajaro River's levee to fail, forcing 1,500
people to evacuate and putting thousands of homes at risk. The
climate crisis continues to put massive strains on aging
infrastructure and already vulnerable communities across the
country.
The California communities I grew up in are also keenly
aware of the threat of earthquakes. I vividly recall the 7.1
Loma Prieta earthquake that shook the San Francisco Bay area in
1989. Anyone who has been through an earthquake, even those not
as large as Loma Prieta, can easily recall what they were doing
and how they reacted.
Since the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program, or
NEHRP, was established in 1977, the program has achieved great
progress--substantially decreasing loss of life and injuries
and improving the capabilities of seismic risk assessment.
In today's discussion, I would particularly like to focus
on the science of predicting earthquakes. We currently do not
have the capabilities to predict the exact time, location, and
magnitude of an earthquake, but we must continue to pursue this
research. Even a few additional minutes of warning could mean
the difference between life and death. We've seen this already
with
ShakeAlert--the earthquake early warning system--which can
give a few seconds of warning before strong shaking is felt.
California is a leader in adopting early warning measures, and
the Bay Area Rapid Transit system partners with USGS to
automatically stop trains when a shake is detected. We must
continue to look for scientific and technological solutions to
give people as much time as possible to prepare.
Programs like the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program, which focuses on both wind and wind-driven storm
surge, and NEHRP, with its focus on earthquakes, are critical
to improving our understanding of the science of hazards and
translating that understanding into more resilient communities.
I have long supported both programs and look forward to hearing
from the panel today about how we can continue to improve them.
Thank you again for holding this important and timely
hearing. I yield back.

Chairman Collins. All right. Next, we'll introduce our
witnesses. Our first witness today is Mr. Jason Averill, who is
the Deputy Director of the Engineering Laboratory at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Our next
witness is Mr. Edward Laatsch, who is the Director of the
Safety Planning and Building Science Division at the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Next, we have Dr. Gavin
Hayes, who is the Earthquake Hazards Program Coordinator at the
United States Geological Survey (USGS). And our final witness
is Dr. Susan Margulies, who is the Assistant Director for
Engineering at the National Science Foundation (NSF).
With that, I now recognize Mr. Averill for five minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JASON AVERILL,

DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF THE ENGINEERING LABORATORY,

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Averill. Thank you very much. Chairman Lucas, Chairman
Collins, Ranking Member Stevens, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Subcommittee. I'm Jason Averill, Deputy Director
of the Engineering Laboratory at the Department of Commerce's
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss NIST's
role in the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction Program and
the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.
NIST has two important roles in each program, a leadership
and convening responsibility, and an applied research role
aimed at reducing loss of life and property from earthquakes
and windstorms. Both programs align well within the larger
mission of NIST, which is to promote U.S. innovation and
industrial competitiveness by advancing measurement science,
standards, and technology in ways that enhance economic
security and improve quality of life.
In fulfilling our lead agency responsibilities, NIST is
guided by the strategic plan that we've published for each
program. For additional details, I will refer you to my written
testimony. This afternoon, I'd like to discuss three ongoing
programs that I think highlight the positive outcomes that
NEHRP and NWIRP can deliver.
The first is functional recovery. NIST and FEMA
collaborated closely to produce a landmark report entitled
``Recommended Options for Improving the Built Environment for
Post-Earthquake Reoccupancy and Functional Recovery Time.'' The
term functional recovery recognizes that we expect our built
environment not just to provide life safety, but to return to
its intended function within a reasonable period of time.
Following the release of the report, the Building Seismic
Safety Council has established a Functional Recovery Task
Committee comprised of dozens of leading experts in the
earthquake and building code community, and we anticipate
meaningful changes to building codes and standards that will
mean significant improvements to recovery time for communities
facing seismic hazards.
Next, tornado provisions. In 2011, an EF-5 tornado
devastated Joplin, Missouri. NIST conducted a comprehensive
technical investigation, resulting in an important report in
2014. NIST identified at the time that tornadoes were not
considered as a load for building design in any codes or
standards. In partnership with our NWIRP agencies and many
stakeholders, we identified two major missing elements: First,
maps that accurately characterize where tornadoes are a
significant hazard; and second, ways to design buildings to
resist tornadoes. Once developed, those two elements were
adopted by the American Society of Civil Engineers and then
incorporated by reference in the International Building Code,
marking the first time that U.S. critical buildings in tornado-
prone regions will resist tornado loads.
Finally, I'd like to highlight the important role that
NWIRP plays in the NIST investigation of the impacts of
Hurricane Maria on Puerto Rico in 2017. While the National
Construction Safety Team Act authorizes NIST to investigate how
the storm impacted buildings, how emergency communication
systems worked, and the patterns of mortality and morbidity,
the NWIRP authorities were critical in fully scoping the NIST
investigation. We utilize NWIRP authorities to study the
performance of critical infrastructure, including power, water,
and transportation, the recovery of social functions, and the
recovery of small- and medium-size enterprises and supply
chains, including manufacturing, retail, and the service
sectors. The additional projects provided important context to
fully understand the performance of buildings and the
subsequent injuries and deaths from Hurricane Maria.
NIST has a long history of improving the quality of life
and economic competitiveness of U.S. communities subject to
hazards, including windstorms and earthquakes. In leading the
Federal efforts through NEHRP and NWIRP, NIST is proud to be
regarded, as it has for more than a century, to be a trusted
party facilitating collaboration among industry, academia, and
government agencies to meet critical national needs.
We greatly appreciate the efforts of the Members of these
Committees and other Members of Congress to support Federal
agency leadership in the wind and earthquake communities that
keep the Nation resilient, economically competitive, and
secure, and contributing to our quality of life.
I'll be pleased to answer any questions you may have today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Averill follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Chairman Collins. All right. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Laatsch for five minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. EDWARD LAATSCH, P.E., DIRECTOR,

SAFETY, PLANNING, AND BUILDING SCIENCE DIVISION,

RISK ANALYSIS, PLANNING AND INFORMATION

DIRECTORATE, FEDERAL EMERGENCY

MANAGEMENT AGENCY

Mr. Laatsch. Thank you, Chairman Collins, Chairman Lucas,
Ranking Member Stevens, and Ranking Member Lofgren, and Members
of the Subcommittee. My name is Edward Laatsch. I am the
Director of Planning, Safety, and Building Science in the Risk
Analysis Planning and Information Directorate at FEMA. Thank
you for the opportunity to discuss FEMA's supporting role
within the NEHRP program and the NWIRP program.
FEMA's mission is helping people before, during, and after
disasters. FEMA is not just a response and recovery agency. We
also work to mitigate the worst impacts of disasters before
they occur. Strengthening the security and resilience of the
Nation against earthquakes and extreme wind events is a vital
aspect of this responsibility.
Earthquakes and windstorms can have devastating impacts.
The Puerto Rico earthquake sequence, which included a magnitude
6.4 quake in 2020, resulted in a large population being
displaced from their homes and an estimated $3.1 million in
economic--$3.1 billion in economic losses. In 2021, deadly
tornadoes swept through the western Kentucky area.
According to a joint analysis by the USGS and FEMA,
earthquakes cost an estimated $14.7 billion in annual average
losses in building damage and associated losses, while NOAA
reports that severe storms and tropical cyclones have cost an
estimated $41.7 billion annually in the United States over the
last 40 years.
The objective of NEHRP and NWIRP is to achieve major
measurable reductions in the losses of life and property from
earthquakes and windstorms, respectively. According to FEMA's
2020 ``Building Codes Save'' study, the adoption of building
codes and standards, which are informed by NEHRP
recommendations, have resulted in millions in total losses
avoided annually. Meanwhile, NWIRP has played an important role
in mitigating the number of fatalities and total disaster
damage caused by tropical storms and severe weather via the
creation of effective mitigation techniques and the promotion
of preparedness and mitigation measures.
FEMA's supporting role within NEHRP includes the
translation of results of research and applied science and
problem-focused studies into guidance, training, and support
services. Our supporting role within NWIRP includes development
of risk assessment tools and windstorm-related data collection
and analysis.
One of FEMA's primary contributions to both programs is the
improvement and promotion of better building and retrofit
practices through technical guidance, training, support, and
participation in the development of model building codes and
standards both before and after disasters. The development and
enforcement of up-to-date codes is among the most effective
strategies available for natural hazard risk reduction, while
also being one of the most cost-effective ways to safeguard our
communities. As was mentioned earlier, notably, every Federal
dollar invested results in more than $11 in savings and reduced
damage by helping communities recover more quickly.
In addition, FEMA's work with our Federal partners, the
Agency also supports other organizations and initiatives that
bring people together to reduce earthquakes and windstorm
risks. FEMA earthquake mitigation and preparedness activities
such as the National Earthquake Technical Assistance Program
train and support--provide training and support for the world's
largest annual earthquake drill, the Great American ShakeOut,
and these are all examples of these activities.
FEMA also promotes the goals of NEHRP and NWIRP by
providing grant funding for eligible products through our
hazard mitigation assistance grants and other FEMA grant
programs.
I want to specifically thank Congress both for its
bipartisan support to the Building Resilience Infrastructure
and Communities, or BRIC, program's development in 2018, as
well as its continued investment in the program. In October
2023, President Biden announced an additional $1 billion in
Fiscal Year 2023 funding for the BRIC program. This investment
will protect lives, result in less complex disaster recoveries,
and can help us break the cycle of disaster damage,
reconstruction, and repeated damage.
While FEMA will always be ready to respond when disasters
occur, we recognize that true success rests in mitigating the
worst impacts of disasters before they happen, reducing both
loss of life and economic disruption. These mitigation efforts
are particularly important for underserved communities that are
most vulnerable to the impacts of natural hazards. As we look
forward to the challenges ahead, FEMA looks forward to working
with both our NEHRP and NWIRP partners and the Members of this
Committee to build a more resilient nation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Laatsch follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Laatsch.
I now recognize Dr. Hayes for five minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. GAVIN HAYES,

EARTHQUAKE HAZARDS PROGRAM COORDINATOR,

UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Dr. Hayes. Thank you, Chairman Collins, Ranking Member
Stevens, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, Members of the
Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to the
Committee today on the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program and the associated functions of the U.S. Geological
Survey.
The USGS is the science arm of the Department of the
Interior, and NEHRP is one of our responsibilities. NEHRP
exists to reduce the losses associated with earthquake hazards
in recognition that, although earthquakes are inevitable, there
are consequences for people on the built environment and not.
Efforts to mitigate those effects help to improve the lives of
Americans exposed to this nationwide hazard.
Under NEHRP and in collaboration with partners, the USGS is
responsible for monitoring and reporting on significant
earthquakes and their potential impacts, developing hazard
assessment maps and associated products, and conducting
research necessary to improve our understanding of earthquake
hazards and our ability to assess earthquake risk, monitor
seismic activity, and generate accurate earthquake forecasts.
At the end of 2023, the USGS updated the National Seismic
Hazard Model (NSHM), producing the first-ever 50-State model.
This model demonstrates that earthquakes represent one of the--
our Nation's most significant and costly natural hazards.
Thirty-seven U.S. States and all U.S. territories have
experienced an earthquake exceeding magnitude 5 over the past
two centuries, and 50 percent of States have a significant
potential for future damaging shaking.
The USGS periodically releases updates to the National
Seismic Hazard Model, timed to coincide with development of the
next generation of building codes, a process that involves
close coordination between the USGS, NEHRP partners at FEMA,
and a variety of other groups. The NSHM is the basis for
seismic provisions and building codes that underpin domestic
construction efforts estimated to cost close to $2 trillion per
year.
Building a society that is earthquake-ready requires
critical information. A second major USGS responsibility under
NEHRP is domestic earthquake monitoring and reporting through
the Advanced National Seismic System, which involves
partnership between the USGS and university- and State-operated
regional seismic networks. The USGS also leads global
earthquake monitoring and reporting through the operation and
maintenance of the Global Seismographic Network (GSN) in
partnership with the National Science Foundation.
Recent expansion of these seismic networks has been driven
by the development of an earthquake early warning capability in
California, Oregon, and Washington called ShakeAlert.
ShakeAlert is managed by the USGS and again operated in
partnership with West Coast States and academic institutions.
ShakeAlert has issued public alerts across each of these three
States since 2021 and is scheduled to complete buildout by the
end of 2025.
USGS earthquake monitoring and hazard assessment activities
depend upon a robust program of targeted research. This
research improves our understanding of earthquakes, our
development of the National Seismic Hazard Model, and our
capability to develop information products that provide
situational awareness and support risk mitigation. Internal
research efforts are complemented by an external grants program
that provides funding to university, State, and nongovernment
partners and allows the USGS to leverage the wealth of
knowledge on earthquake processes in the broader community.
We also learn about earthquakes by investigating their
effects when they occur. The Earthquake Hazards Reduction Act
calls for the investigation of significant domestic and
international earthquakes to learn lessons that can be applied
to reduce future earthquake losses in the United States. USGS
leads the coordination of post-earthquake investigations on
behalf of NEHRP agencies and our partners through the plan to
coordinate NEHRP post-earthquake investigations. This plan is
in the process of being updated, and NEHRP implemented elements
of the revised plan following the devastating earthquakes in
southern Turkey a year ago.
The USGS and its partners in NEHRP continue to support
research, technology development, and outreach to improve our
Nation's resilience against earthquakes. We work closely with
partners around the world to advance our science, and we are
grateful for the many decades of support Congress has provided
for this work. We do not know where or when the next large
damaging earthquake will occur, but thanks to NEHRP, we can
make use of improved information and data that helps to
mitigate the impacts of such events.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I'd be happy to
answer any questions that the Committee has.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hayes follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Chairman Collins. All right. Thank you.
I now recognize Dr. Margulies for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. SUSAN MARGULIES,

ASSISTANT DIRECTOR FOR ENGINEERING,

NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

Dr. Margulies. Good afternoon, Chairman Collins, Chairman
Lucas, Ranking Member Stevens, and Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Susan Margulies, and
I'm the Assistant Director of the Engineering Directorate at
the U.S. National Science Foundation. It's a privilege to be
here today to discuss the important roles that the NSF plays in
understanding, mitigating, and building community resilience to
natural disasters, including the activities supported through
NEHRP and NWIRP alongside our Federal partners.
For decades, NSF has been investing in fundamental research
and innovation to improve community and infrastructure
resilience to national--natural hazards, including wildland
fires, flooding, drought, landslides, earthquakes, and
windstorms. NSF-funded researchers continue to play a critical
role in advancing our understanding of these hazards to improve
prediction, risk assessment, and resilience.
NSF invests in research across all fields of STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) and all levels of
STEM education. We have a broad mission and an agile approach
to investing in research and innovation. It enables us to
catalyze cross-discipline collaborations, as well as
partnerships with communities, the private sector, and others,
bringing critical resources and research to bear on the
societal challenges related to structural--to natural hazards.
This work in natural hazards has long been part of our mission
at NSF and was further emphasized with the enactment of the
CHIPS and Science Act.
NSF leverages an array of funding mechanisms and cutting-
edge infrastructure in support of these natural--national
priorities. Our standing programs across NSF receive and fund
many innovative investigator-driven proposals relevant to
natural hazards, including earthquakes and windstorms.
NSF also invests in critical research infrastructure. The
NSF Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure, or
NHERI, is a distributed, multiuser network and a prime example
of the infrastructure that NSF supports to advance NEHRP and
NWIRP goals. As one example, the recently upgraded NHERI Shake
Table at the University of California San Diego is now the
largest shake table test facility in the United States and
possesses the biggest payload capacity in the world, able to
test life-size structures undergoing real-world quake
conditions.
Another example is the Wall of Wind at Florida
International University, which enables researchers to test new
strategies and to reduce the economic impact of hurricane speed
winds on our civil infrastructure. These and other NHERI
facilities allow researchers to investigate the effects of a
wide range of natural hazards and their combinations and to
test groundbreaking approaches that will inform building codes
and protect individuals, communities, and critical
infrastructure.
As natural disasters unfold, it's critical to record and
preserve information that would otherwise be lost and
impossible to recreate. Through its RAPID (Rapid Response
Research) award mechanism, NSF can quickly fund researchers who
deploy and collect data in the aftermath after earthquakes and
windstorms, including the 2020 magnitude 6.4 earthquake
sequence in Puerto Rico, the 2020 Easter Sunday tornado
outbreak in the Southeast, the 2020 derecho in the Midwest, as
well as hurricane Ian in 2022.
A good example of how we use this data following the 2018
Hurricane Michael in Florida, an NSF RAPID team was supported
by a RAPID award, and they investigated the wind performance of
elevated housing and the results of which have already been
incorporated into the American Society of Civil Engineers' wind
load standards that now inform our current building codes.
NSF is proud to work closely with our Federal partners in
support of NEHRP and NWIRP. Just this month, NSF and NIST
announced a second quarter--a second cohort of disaster
resilience research grants, a collaborative effort that
attracts hundreds of proposals. We also partner with other
agencies in research--for research infrastructure. The Global
Seismographic Network has been an NSF-USGS partnership for
decades.
NSF investments will continue to provide essential value in
our shared efforts to better understand, mitigate, and build
community resilience to natural disasters. NSF appreciates
Congress' continued support for the agency's mission and its
important contributions to NEHRP and NWIRP and the natural
hazards research more broadly. We look forward to continuing to
work with the Committee and with our partner agencies on these
important priorities.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
I'm happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Margulies follows:]
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Chairman Collins. All right. Thank you, and I thank the
witnesses for their testimony.
The Chair will now recognize himself for five minutes.
Mr. Laatsch, in your testimony you share that for every $1
invested in building code adoption, communities save $11 in
costs related to natural disasters. You also say that
communities that have adopted modern building codes are already
saving an estimated $1.6 billion a year with a projected
savings of $132 billion through 2040. Can you highlight some
other examples of how your research translates into practical
applications that help save lives and taxpayers' dollars?
Mr. Laatsch. I thank you for that great question, sir. And
yes, in addition to the items in the testimony, there are some
other areas along similar hazards lines that we think are great
examples of how mitigation activities will save long-term
damage. One of them is in the space of tornado shelters or
storm shelters. The NWIRP agencies have worked together to
advance storm shelter criteria over the last several decades
and have developed criteria that provide life safety protection
from high winds such as hurricanes and tornadoes.
FEMA, through its grant programs, has invested over $1
billion in community and residential safe room programs over
the last several decades, and it's led to any number of lives
saved in critical areas, particularly tornado-prone areas.
Likewise, FEMA and NIST have conducted post-hurricane and
post-tornado investigations on the existing storm shelters to
determine what improvements can be made and how to interpret
those or how to translate those into the Nation's standards,
whether it's design standards or whether it's Nation's model
building codes.
Chairman Collins. OK.
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you.
Chairman Collins. All right. Thank you. Mr. Averill, I own
a trucking company, and I know how storms and tornadoes and
earthquakes can do damages to our highways and our roads and
pretty much all of our infrastructure. To what extent has NWIRP
or NEHRP incorporated transportation infrastructure into their
hazard resilience plans?
Mr. Averill. Thank you. Yes. As I mentioned earlier, this
notion of functional recovery really is a new concept for our
building codes and voluntary consensus standards processes. And
one of the big things that I think that really recognizes is
the importance of all of our critical infrastructure,
transportation included. If you have a hospital, for example,
and the ambulance can't make it or the staff can't get to the
hospitals, it's difficult for it to perform its critical
healthcare function.
We do research that looks at how to improve our critical
infrastructure's performance when subject to both chronic, as
well as long--acute hazards. So a good example of that is
following the Anchorage earthquake in Alaska, we sent a team up
there to look at damages. One of the findings there was to look
at the performance of fiber-reinforced polymer systems. These
are oftentimes used to reinforce concrete structures such as
bridges and others needing reinforcing. But the question is how
does--how did those weather and perform as a function of time?
And we have an active research program now to put fiber-
reinforced polymer systems out in the real world, measure how
their performance degrades as a function of time.
Chairman Collins. Yes. You know, I always think back--it
probably hadn't been five years ago when Atlanta was virtually
shut down from a quick snowstorm where people were just
stranded on all the interstates and virtually couldn't move for
days. Do you engage with the U.S. DOT (Department of
Transportation) or the State DOTs?
Mr. Averill. We do. All of our NWIRP and NEHRP working-
group-level meetings are open to other agencies, and we've
engaged with a number of agencies not named in the program as
appropriate. Our concrete research program at NIST has worked
specifically with DOT--most notably the Federal Highway
Authority--and State DOTs to look at how to strengthen the
performance concrete as a function of time.
Chairman Collins. Yes. OK. Thank you.
With that, I yield back. And I now recognize Ms. Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you.
So as I mentioned in opening remarks, in 2011 the 5.8
magnitude earthquake from central Virginia was historic for two
reasons. First, it cracked the Washington Monument
unfortunately; and second, it was felt much more widely than
seismologists would have previously predicted, challenging our
geological understanding at the time. The risks posed by quakes
are directly tied to the geological formations under our feet.
And that changes whether I'm in Michigan or if I'm in
Washington, D.C.
And that's why we're just so pleased to see that USGS
released an updated National Seismic Hazard Model, the NSHM,
last year for all 50 States. The cutting-edge data is just
critical in fully understanding the risks posed by earthquakes
to our entire Nation, including areas in the Eastern United
States, which have a higher population density, older building
stock, and increased likelihood of amplified shaking, of which
I experienced in the U.S. Department of Commerce there, a
fateful day in 2011.
So, Dr. Hayes, how is the USGS facilitating the
dissemination of this latest data to partners in the NEHRP and
outside to better prepare our country for the unique risks?
Dr. Hayes. Thank you for the question. We just released the
National Seismic Hazard Model in December, and we've since then
undergone a campaign to monetize the NSHM. And the changes that
underlie the model that has been released, we will be actively
working with our partners at FEMA to undergo a process to
introduce the NSHM in the future to building code updates that,
again, underpin the construction around the Nation and allow
the translation of that science into practice through those
policy changes. We will continue, through our active community
engagement, with taking our NSHM to communities to help them
understand the changes that are brought through that National
Seismic Hazard Model.
Ms. Stevens. Well, count me in for a roundtable in metro
Detroit, and I will cajole my colleagues to do the same, and
maybe I'll join them because we really--I mean, look, we lived
through this pandemic. You know, it's always the things you're
not really thinking about. We got access to the information on
this one. We really salute you. And, you know, maybe others
have some things to chime in here on that front.
But I did want to get Dr. Margulies in about how the NSF is
ensuring the data collected by the seismic station network is
available to non-NEHRP partners and affiliated researchers,
particularly because the NSF and the USGS operate, you know,
hundreds of seismic stations as part of several seismic
networks, including the Global Seismographic Network, and the
GSN also includes internationally operated seismic stations as
well.
Dr. Margulies. So the seismic data, as well as geodata as
part of the gage system, as well as that data that I discussed
in terms of the RAPID award that is that very ephemeral data
that's gathered right after a natural disaster, as well as data
from our Extreme Event Response networks, or EERs. And we have
a number of those across the country. That data is all in a
design-safe facility. It's a data depot. It is also--has a
cyber infrastructure component for data security. It is
publicly available data, not just to researchers around--across
the Nation, but also to businesses across the Nation as well
and other agencies.
Ms. Stevens. Tweetable for a Member of Congress or----
Dr. Margulies. Well----
Ms. Stevens. We're not going that far.
Dr. Margulies. I think an important aspect of this is
access to the computational infrastructure that's so sorely
needed, as well as data visualization. So data that's stored is
not data until you can give it life----
Ms. Stevens. Right.
Dr. Margulies [continuing]. Through models, through
visualization, and through others knowing that it's there.
Ms. Stevens. Yes. Well, thank you so much. And, you know,
we really want to continue to keep you all on speed dial
because it's also this awareness chain of command as well and,
you know, who briefs and how do we get alert and how do we make
sure we're prepared. So count me in, too. I'd love to spend
some more time with you in that data space.
And with that, Mr. Chair, will yield back.
Chairman Collins. The Chair now recognizes Chairman Lucas
for five minutes.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Anyone in Oklahoma can tell you that tornado shelters are a
lifesaving tool that not enough Oklahomans have access to. Dr.
Margulies, what research and development efforts are needed to
develop low-cost tornado shelters that can benefit communities
literally in the countryside, too?
Dr. Margulies. I grew up and spent nearly half of my life
in Minnesota, so we have a bonding there. At the National
Science Foundation, we fund unsolicited at that--no calls for--
most of our funding goes to unsolicited research across the
spectrum from fundamental science and engineering, to
translation, to a particular use. In this case, a design of a
new shelter would definitely come to the engineering
directorate, and those would be supported eagerly. It would
have incredible societal impact.
Chairman Lucas. And along with that, what role can research
universities and land grant universities with their statewide
extension networks play in these efforts?
Dr. Margulies. So we welcome and encourage proposals from
every institution, and we have a mandate in CHIPS and Science
to broaden the participation and funding to our EPSCoR States
at the National Science Foundation. We have many initiatives
that bring in land grant institutions, of course, but also two-
year and technical colleges as well to really fund the great
work, as well as educational initiatives that the National
Science Foundation invests in.
Chairman Lucas. Mr. Laatsch, you touched on some of these
issues in your earlier comments. Could you expand on that, too?
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you for the question, sir. And I would
add that for several decades, FEMA and its partners have been
at the forefront of developing what we believe are relatively
cost-effective and near absolute protection storm shelters
initially for individuals, and then later for communities. We
have seen in places like Oklahoma where there have been
circulating grant programs that have been extremely helpful to
get people on board with it. And yes, there were real costs
involved. But if folks can find a way to cover the mortgage
part of a $3-5,000 additional fee, they can turn an existing
room, whether that's a dressing room or an interior bathroom or
whatever else it might be, into a safe room. And lately, and
recently, we've seen a lot more work of communities choosing to
develop community safe rooms in schools and other critical
facilities.
Chairman Lucas. Continuing with you, for communities like
my home county of Roger Mills, even a 45-second increase in
lead time can be the difference between life and death. Could
you shed some light on how FEMA is working with other agencies
to bolster our understanding of tornadoes and increase those
lead times?
Mr. Laatsch. I do know that the work we've been doing--and
we work with collaboratively--whether it's our partners at NIST
or other Federal agencies inside and outside this program
space, we have developed guidance and tools. We have done
education and awareness work with the public and private
sector. We have nonprofit and other partners who we work with
who help us spread the message about how do you make folks
aware of what the risks are that they face and how can you
drive action?
Chairman Lucas. Absolutely, absolutely. With that, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chair now recognizes Ranking Member Lofgren for five
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Hayes, I think, you know, the earthquake prediction
mission has been described as the holy grail of seismology. Can
you update us? Where are we? What progress has been made? Where
do we think we're going to end up in that and what timeframe?
Dr. Hayes. Thank you for the question. As you pointed out
in your opening statement, earthquake prediction is currently
not possible. But the USGS does lead a National Earthquake
Prediction Evaluation Council that is happy to evaluate any
credible earthquake predictions and prediction or forecasting
techniques. We distinguish earthquake prediction from
earthquake forecasting. Earthquake forecasting are our
approaches to estimate the chances----
Ms. Lofgren. Sure.
Dr. Hayes [continuing]. The probability of future
earthquakes and where----
Ms. Lofgren. Important----
Dr. Hayes [continuing]. They may occur.
Ms. Lofgren [continuing]. But I'm more into--the question
is about giving people a little bit of advance warning for the
real event.
Dr. Hayes. So as we continue in our research investment
into forecasting, we're hoping to be able to shrink the amount
of time--timescales of those forecasts and continue to invest
in approaches to change forecasting into prediction evaluation
in the future.
Ms. Lofgren. Quick question there, as I understand it, 12
technical partners who have license-to-operate agreements with
ShakeAlert, what sectors are covered and what sectors aren't
covered and should be?
Dr. Hayes. There are several sectors covered by those
Licensed to Operate, the LTOs, as part of ShakeAlert,
transportation, there are those in the medical sector. And I'd
be happy to follow up with more details of what sectors exactly
are covered and any future detail.
Ms. Lofgren. That would be very, very helpful. I appreciate
that. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Collins. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Baird for five minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank the witnesses
for being here today. I always learn something from these
sessions, and I appreciate that.
But, Mr. Averill, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology, or NIST, is the lead agency for the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program. And as such, your agency is
charged with promoting the implementation of windstorm
reduction measures. This past year, west central Indiana
suffered from at least a dozen tornadoes and occluding storm
systems. Schools, businesses, farms, churches, and homes were
severely damaged, if not destroyed. These storms destroy
communities.
So, Mr. Averill, your National Advisory Committee on
Windstorm Impact Reduction (NACWIR) assessed there is, and I
quote, ``a general opposition to any and all strengthening of
regulations and standards.'' So my question is, is this
statement based on any concrete data? Or why can't we let each
State decide what is best for their communities?
Mr. Averill. Thank you. That's an excellent question. And I
will point out that the NACWIR, the advisory committee for
the--the NWIRP program was sunset two years after the
authorization. So I might suggest that while that statement was
accurate at the time, particularly noting following the Joplin
tornado, that there were no provisions in the building codes
that dealt directly with tornadoes.
I do think the fact that we now in the 2024 version of the
International Building Code have our first tornado-resistant
provisions for building codes shows that that thought process
has evolved, and I do think it is entirely possible.
As my colleague from FEMA mentioned, there has been good
and active work in the storm shelter area. There's a standard
ICC (International Code Council) 500 that's been developed that
is a resource for people that want to provide storm shelters
locally, as well as additional provisions for schools and other
certain types of construction to provide community shelters. So
I think that that is moving in the right direction in terms of
finding cost-effective measures.
At NIST we work with--we're a nonregulatory agency in the
Department of Commerce. We bring our science into a consensus
standards process making sure that what is discussed and
proposed has a strong grounding in science, but it is a
consensus process. And ultimately, it is up to the local States
and local jurisdictions to adopt the provisions of the building
code model that ICC puts forward.
Mr. Baird. Thank you for that. My next question goes to all
the witnesses, and I must remind us all that I got about a
minute and a half left, so if you can be brief. But what role
do you see emerging technologies like artificial intelligence
(AI) and quantum computing playing in enhancing the resilience
and preparedness strategies for communities vulnerable to
natural hazards? How can Federal policy support and integrate
the deployment of these technologies to effectively mitigate
the impacts of natural hazards? Mr. Averill, start with you.
Mr. Averill. Thank you. That's an excellent question. And I
think artificial intelligence and quantum technology have
immeasurable promise to make real progress in these areas. I
know there's national initiatives that are underway to put some
infrastructure to that, including at NIST, and I think the
opportunities for application to that technology to advance our
mitigation measures in both the NWIRP and the NEHRP space are
quite significant.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. We've got about 40 seconds left, so
each one of the last three of you have about 10 of that.
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you, sir. Two areas, one, in FEMA in the
future, the Agency will use AI and technology to improve the
response recovery effectiveness, and we will also assess damage
more effectively afterwards using AI and other electronic
means.
Mr. Baird. Thank you.
Dr. Hayes. Thank you, sir. I'll just say that at the USGS
we're already incorporating machine learning and AI into our
earthquake monitoring approaches to improve the ways that we
locate and characterize earthquakes.
Dr. Margulies. At NSF, we've already invested in three
artificial intelligence institutes in Oklahoma, Minnesota, and
Pennsylvania to improve our prediction and bring in
heterogeneous data to be able to decrease loss.
Mr. Baird. Thank you very much. I'm very proud of you.
We're on time, and I learned a lot. Thank you. I yield back,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Dr. Baird. And you know how we
run a tight ship around this place, too, don't you?
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Bonamici for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Well, thank you to the Chair and Ranking
Member. Thank you to the witnesses for your expertise.
So I represent northwest Oregon, so the question there is
not if we will have an earthquake; it is when we will have an
earthquake along the Cascadia Subduction Zone. And, Dr.
Margulies, I noticed in your testimony, you said--and I quote--
``subduction zones where one tectonic plate slides beneath
another produce some of the most devastating earthquakes on the
planet.'' So needless to say, there are many efforts in the
region to educate people about the risks presented by
earthquake. Thank you, ShakeAlert. We are following and very,
very much appreciate the ShakeAlert work.
And I'm really grateful that my Tsunami Warning, Education,
and Research Reauthorization Act passed out of Committee. It's
estimated people will have somewhere between 15 and 30 minutes
to escape into a safe space outside of a tsunami inundation
zone, which is not very much time, needless to say. So we have
some meaningful steps that we're doing, strengthening, of
course, the Geological Survey's Earthquake Hazards Program, a
lot of things that we're doing, but we know we need to do more.
So these investments and these early warning systems save
lives, protect critical lifeline infrastructure, including
utility lines, telecommunication systems, transportation
systems that are essential before, during, and after a major
disaster. As we were just reminded in Oregon during a very
brutal storm just mid-January with a combination of ice and
strong winds that knocked over massive trees, caused loss of
several lives, at least six people died, and then there's been
tremendous property damage. And many Oregonians were without
power for days and without Wi-Fi, which was very frustrating to
people. But without power is dangerous.
So, Mr. Laatsch, there are some small coastal cities, for
example, Cannon Beach, Astoria. So they deal with the
challenges of limited resources as small rural communities, but
also a population that tends to approximately quadruple during
tourism season. So if there's an earthquake, these cities have
the added responsibility of communicating about risk and
response to a visiting population, so we need a policy that
considers the unique challenges these communities face with
lifeline services that will keep both resident and tourist
population safe. So how does current Federal policy support the
development of these lifeline telecommunications, utility,
transportation? Where could investments make the greatest
difference, especially in meeting the needs of small rural
communities?
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you very much for that question. From
our perspective, from FEMA's point of view, we operate and rely
on, when it comes to earthquake risks, the National Earthquake
Strategy. We will be publishing this year a new document, a
framework to establish lifelines, infrastructure system
recovery objectives for seismic resilience. I apologize for the
long title. But that is foray back into the lifeline space. We
have in past years done additional work in the lifeline space
for the American Lifelines Alliance, but that was back during
the turn of the last century. And we think that there's a need
to revisit lifelines as an important and underserved technology
in an area.
Ms. Bonamici. Terrific. Thank you so much.
Dr. Margulies, last fall, Oregon State University was
awarded $15 million by the NSF to establish the Cascadia Region
Earthquake Science Center, CRESCENT, as you're aware, a multi-
institutional earthquake research center collecting seismic
data and research. I'll note that previous studies indicate we
could see an earthquake as large as 9.0 magnitude, which the
estimate is by the workgroup approximately 10,000 deaths,
30,000 injured, and $70 billion in economic damage.
So how can we integrate the data forecasting and the
recommendations developed by CRESCENT into the planning and
information disseminated by the appropriate emergency response
agencies?
Dr. Margulies. Thanks for this opportunity to respond. The
CRESCENT includes a Partnerships Committee, and they will be
meeting in late June to really talk about how--where
researchers will be interacting with local and tribal
government officials and--as well as utility representatives,
engineers, teachers, and other community members to really find
what their needs are and establish that bilateral
communication. This is about really accelerating the science-
to-practice aspect of what the National Science Foundation is
so proud of.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. That communication is so key.
And, Mr. Chairman, I just want to note that, you know, the
at-risk communities that we represent really appreciate the
work that you're doing, and we know that we need these systems
to work correctly. Lives are on--at stake. So, Mr. Chairman, as
I yield back, I request unanimous consent to enter into the
record a very thorough report by the National Institute of
Building Sciences that highlights the importance of lifeline
infrastructure, infrastructure to support community resilience
and recovery after an earthquake.
And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Collins. All right. So ordered.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Kean of New Jersey for five
minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
our witnesses for joining us today.
Today's discussion is particularly important, focusing on
the role these programs play in mitigating risks and bolstering
American resilience factors that resonate strongly in my home
State of New Jersey where effective emergency response measures
are vital in the face of evolving natural disasters that
continue to extend further and further to the Northeast.
Mr. Averill and Mr. Laatsch, mitigation techniques exist to
save lives and reduce damages, but it's widely known that
communities are leaving highly cost-effective mitigation
practices on the table. Could the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program and the National Earthquake Hazard Reduction
Program help decrease the cost of mitigation measures even more
to make a difference, or is increasing education and outreach
to property owners to ramp up the adoption of techniques the
most effective way to do things?
Mr. Averill. Thank you. Great question. So NIST is part of
the Department of Commerce. And as such, our mission includes
both life safety, but also U.S. economic competitiveness. So we
engage in the consensus development of both codes and
standards, and we supplement our scientific research oftentimes
with economic studies. And those economic studies look at the
benefit-costs of proposals to make changes to ensure that those
are actually supportable and implementable at the local level,
and we think that's a real value add to the consensus process.
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you for the question, sir. I would add
that in our agency, FEMA provides incentives and support for
communities to adopt current building codes wherever possible,
both through the codes and standards and by providing technical
assistance to implement proven strategies and best practices.
Our role, as we like to call ourselves, the translation arm
from research to practice.
Under the BRIC Fiscal Year 2023 funding opportunity,
building code adoption enforcement efforts are eligible as set-
asides and activities under State and tribal set-asides. And we
spend a great deal of time working on awareness, advocacy, and
partnership building to bring building code knowledge and
awareness to States, locals, and the public.
Mr. Kean. OK. Thank you.
Dr. Margulies, as a geographic area historically impacted
by windstorms shifts eastward, how is NSF supporting research
activities to understand and address the novel challenges that
arise with communicating risk to communities that lack the
necessary infrastructure and resources such as tornado shelters
to improve public safety during these events?
Dr. Margulies. If I might, I'm going to answer the previous
question as well from a social and economic sciences aspect,
which the NSF also supports.
Mr. Kean. Yes.
Dr. Margulies. There's an award in New Jersey to Rutgers
University which really is exploring ways to incentivize
communities to actually manage their coastal hazards. And
they're using 20 years of tax and local State budgets, as well
as the tax records and phone calls to really understand what
will it take to incentivize communities to actually to adopt
those practices to mitigate economic harm.
So to answer your questions about how we communicate, in--
our funding includes in it a mandate to disseminate the
findings as broadly as possible. So by passively disseminating
findings, our agency, as well as other communities of research,
are expecting those dissemination of findings. We also fund
many research conferences where they come together to discuss a
particular topic. That's another way of disseminating. And most
of our centers include--and these are large investments--a
mandate to reach out to communities about the research findings
and to bring them in early so that the research that's being
conducted is one that's relevant to the research communities
that will be impacted and hopefully improved by the research
findings.
Mr. Kean. And then for whomever is most appropriate to
answer this--thank you for that--in 2018, the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program released a strategic plan
developed with stakeholders from across government, academia,
and the private sector to support research aimed at improving
the understanding of windstorms and their impacts. Could you
provide some examples of how NIST, NOAA, FEMA, and NSF work
with academia and the private sector to address windstorm
resiliency? Whomever is the best----
Mr. Averill. Sure, I can give a quick example. And it was
mentioned earlier. We have the partnership between NIST and NSF
and the Disaster Resilience Research Grants program. And it's
an opportunity--we get hundreds of applications through that.
And it is great because it goes from the fundamental research
that NSF does through to some of the applied research, and it's
an opportunity to engage in both the wind space, as well as the
earthquake space.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. My time has expired, but if I may,
through the Chair, ask if anyone on the panel can send through
the Chair to my office examples with regard to that question. I
yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Collins. Thank you, Mr. Kean.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Salinas for five minutes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you to the Chair and Ranking Member for
holding today's hearing and to our witnesses for providing your
expertise.
So I'm going to build on what my colleague from just the
south of me in Oregon has already stated. You know, it is a
very timely discussion that we're all here today. We--many
Oregonians are still dealing with the aftermath of the ice and
windstorms we just saw that really ravaged our State and
certainly in my district.
At the same time, Oregonians have long been bracing for a
potentially catastrophic earthquake and tsunami, again, as my
colleague mentioned. The research programs that we're
discussing here are critically important for preparing to and
responding to these events.
So my first question is, Dr. Margulies, I was grateful for
NSF's award of the $15 million last year to support CRESCENT.
And it's critical, however, that we're able to effectively
translate research findings from the lab to local policymakers.
How does NSF actually bring together geoscience with the social
and behavioral sciences to help policymakers consider the human
element to disaster messaging, preparedness, and response?
Dr. Margulies. I'll take that and answer it from within
NSF. So we have eight directorates, science-based directorates
at NSF. And we have working groups that cross across all the
National Science Foundation to bring our directorates together.
So when we think about Climate Change Coordination Committee,
when we think about wildland fires, when we think of these
topics are topics that bring us all together on the urgent
societal problems that face our Nation. And so we coordinate
within NSF. So we come up with and hold then meetings and
conferences to bring in the words of others. We participate
actively in interagency committees. We also then make sure that
solicitation for proposals on a particular topic are circulated
within NSF and all the program directors that are--might be
interested in this then add their input and then often engage.
So the communication within our agency is the real way that
we engage the broader community because when they see that such
a conference is actually sponsored by multiple directorates,
the communities that those directorates serve are--
automatically feel like members and welcome to the--to those
discussions----
Ms. Salinas. Thank you.
Dr. Margulies [continuing]. And those opportunities.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. That's a lot of work and
coordination.
Mr. Laatsch, as you noted, modern building codes can go a
long way toward saving lives and protecting critical
infrastructure in the event of a major earthquake. However,
these decisions are made at the State and local level. And many
structures, especially in Oregon, were built long before
seismic standards were in place. Oregon still has thousands of
structures built with unreinforced masonry, putting them at
especially high risk of collapse during a catastrophic
earthquake. Does FEMA have sufficient resources to effectively
work with communities to implement modern building standards?
Mr. Laatsch. Thank you very much for that question. FEMA
uses its programs and its assistance and its research
activities and its applied research activities broadly and
generally to maximize or advance building code effectiveness
wherever and however we can, whether that's working through
partners. We do a lot of leveraging with public and private
sector partners. We rely on other agencies and other elected
officials and States and locals in pretty much everything we
do.
So our approach has always been to maximize our resources
to advance codes the best we can. For instance, we track code
adoption nationally through the International Services
Organization, or ISO. And we have other activities that allow
us to track overall progress or rates of adoption enforcement,
and we use awareness and guidance development and other tools
to educate the public and make best use of our resources.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. How can Congress better incentivize
State and local governments to implement modern standards and
retrofit older structures?
Mr. Laatsch. Some of that is happening through programs
like the BRIC grants program where they have this year and in
the current NOFO (Notice of Funding Opportunity) have set aside
funding for States and territories a certain amount for each
State and territory to use on targeted building codes
activities. There is also an effort underway through the
mitigation Federal liaison group to advance what's called the
National Initiative to Advance Building Codes. It's being led
through the MitFLG (Mitigation Framework Leadership Group) and
directed and supported by the White House Office of CEQ
(Council on Environmental Quality) and CPO (Climate Policy
Office), whose purpose is to use a currently published best
practice to get agencies and agency programs and policies to
use current building codes in their programs and policies.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Collins. Thank you.
Seeing no other Members, I want to thank the witnesses for
their valuable testimony and the Members for their questions.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional comments
and written questions from Members.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:35 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Mr. Jason Averill
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Responses by Mr. Edward Laatsch
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Responses by Dr. Gavin Hayes/United States Geological Survey
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Responses by Dr. Susan Margulies
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Report submitted by Representative Suzanne Bonamici
GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

(For full report see: https://www.nibs.org/projects/natural-hazard-
mitigation-saves-2019-report)
