- MEMBERS' DAY HEARING: HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBERS' DAY HEARING:
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE,
SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

JULY 19, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-21
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

52-833 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                     Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

July 19, 2023
Opening Statements

Page

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     1
Written Statement............................................     1

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     2
Written Statement............................................     2

Additional Statement

Representative Summer Lee, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Oral Statement...............................................     2
Written Statement............................................     4

Discussion.......................................................     5

Appendix: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative August Pfluger, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10

MEMBERS' DAY HEARING:
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE,
SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 19, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:04 p.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank
Lucas [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
Welcome to the Science Committee Members' Day hearing for
the 118th Congress. And before we proceed, I would like to, by
unanimous consent request, that a letter from Representative
Pfluger of Texas referencing his priorities be added into the
record. Seeing no objection, so ordered.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good afternoon, and welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's Members' Day hearing for the 118th
Congress. I want to thank our colleagues for joining us today.
We appreciate your time and look forward to hearing your
priorities under the Committee's jurisdiction, especially those
issues that are important to your districts.
This Committee has a history of bipartisan consensus,
dedicated to driving American scientific progress. Whether it's
supporting pioneering research and basic science in our
national labs, promoting cutting-edge technologies, or
maintaining America's global leadership in space exploration,
we are keen to foster meaningful advances that will not only
benefit us today, but the generations of tomorrow. I look
forward to continue our priorities as Congress and welcome my
colleagues' thoughts on these important topics today.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good afternoon and welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's Members' Day hearing for the 118th
Congress.
I want to thank our colleagues--both on the Committee and
off--for joining us today. We appreciate your time and look
forward to hearing your priorities under the Committee's
jurisdiction, especially those issues that are important to
your districts.
This Committee has a history of bipartisan consensus,
dedicated to driving American scientific progress.
Whether it's supporting pioneering research and basic
science at our national labs, promoting cutting edge
technologies, or maintaining America's global leadership in
space exploration, we are keen to foster meaningful
advancements that will not only benefit us today, but the
generations of tomorrow.
I look forward to continuing our priorities this Congress
and welcome my colleagues' thoughts on these important topics
today.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.

Chairman Lucas. I now recognize the Ranking Member for her
opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and for this hearing
today. I look forward to hearing from our witness and our
colleague. The Space and Science Committee has looked at a lot
of important issues so far this Congress from artificial
intelligence (AI), drones, advanced air mobility systems, and
most importantly, fusion energy. And when you say it out loud,
you realize how much this Committee really is about the future.
These topics should never be partisan issues, and I want to
once again acknowledge you, Mr. Chairman, for your efforts to
work toward bipartisan consensus. It is in keeping with the
long tradition of this Committee, and it's really the only way
that we can address these profound issues in a meaningful and
thoughtful way. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back, and I
look forward to hearing from our colleague.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding today's hearing. I
look forward to hearing from Members today to hear their
priorities for the Science, Space, and Technology Committee.
So far this Congress, the Science Committee has looked at
an array of issues- from artificial intelligence, to fusion
energy, to drones and advanced air mobility systems. When you
say it out loud you realize just how much this Committee is
really about the future.
These topics shouldn't be partisan issues, and I want to
once again acknowledge Chairman Lucas and his efforts to try
and work with bipartisan consensus. It is in keeping with the
long tradition of this Committee, and it's really the only way
we can address these profound issues in a meaningful
andthoughtful way.
I thank the Chair, and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. Thank you, Ranking Member
Lofgren. Other Members are welcome to submit written statements
for the record.
Our colleague, Representative Lee from the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, is recognized for 5 minutes to present her
testimony.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss the opportunities for
this body to be more reflective of the Nation it serves.
This Committee strives to excellence and enhance innovation
and problem-solving through funding and direction we provide
these agencies to carry out groundbreaking research. For too
long, we have failed to prioritize or even acknowledge the vast
contributions that the Black community and other minoritized
groups have made toward scientific discovery and innovation.
Well-documented gaps exist between the number of recognized
works produced by women compared to men in science, bearing
significant consequences for the retention and promotion of
women.
Black and Brown bodies have for centuries been used to save
the lives of others while losing our own. For example, the
genetic materials of Henrietta Lacks, taken without consent,
has been studied and use globally in major developments on
vaccine production, cancer treatments, fertility treatments,
and numerous other applications. Katherine Johnson's hand-
calculated orbital equations where electronic machines failed
helped NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration)
safely send an astronaut into space and back to Earth. Her
coauthored report on orbital spaceflight just 2 years prior was
the first time a woman in the flight research division received
credit as an author of a research report. This highlights the
ethical imperative for diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)
in the scientific fields, unbiased pursuit of knowledge without
discrimination, promoting fairness and equal opportunities for
all.
The 118th Congress has demonized all things remotely
related to DEI. It's not surprising, seeing that one of my
colleagues just last week referred to Black people as colored
people on the House floor. When I look up at the walls of this
Committee room and only see one person who looks like me, I
feel reminded that many people for a long time did not believe
that people like me belong here. Eddie Bernice Johnson, the
first and only Black person to ever chair this Committee, she
dedicated 40 years of her life to public service, and her work
championed STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) education, diversity--and diversity. Fittingly,
her contributions helped generational investment through the
CHIPS and Science Act. And that became law. She leaves a legacy
of providing access to career paths and opportunities in STEM
for countless Americans across the country. I look at her work,
and I'm inspired to make sure some more diverse portraits are
hung on this wall.
Diversity fosters a wider range of ideas and approaches,
leading to more innovative solutions and better problem-solving
capabilities in the scientific community. As legislators who
are entrusted with driving the policies that will help shape
the Nation for years to come, we are better-positioned to serve
our constituents, our country by listening to individuals with
diverse backgrounds, perspectives, and experiences.
Last month, I introduced and withdrew an amendment at the
request of Chairman Lucas that encapsulates my legitimate
concerns on disparate impacts AI technologies have on people
that look like me. Chairman Lucas and this Committee have been
supportive of addressing these issues, and I'm eager to discuss
what progress has been made on this in any way I or my staff
can be supportive of that work.
I also look forward to circulating and presenting a letter
to Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member Lofgren highlighting the
need for improved representation in the witnesses we invite to
testify before us. The scientific community serves the public
interest through space, science, and technology. Inviting a
more diverse pool from the scientific community ensures that
research questions, methodologies, and findings are more
reflective of the American population that research serves--
aims to serve, excuse me. To inspire the next generation of
innovators, we must commit to fully embracing diversity,
equity, and inclusion, fundamental principles that hold immense
significance in the scientific field. These cannot be mere
buzzwords.
Many of my colleagues on this Committee have had more
experience on analyzing scientific topics than me, but my
constituents sent me to this seat to address the unique
everyday needs and challenges faced by communities in western
Pennsylvania. You don't need to be an astrophysicist to be a
member of this Committee, and that is a good thing.
The work this Committee does has an impact on people of all
creeds, all backgrounds, regardless of your last name or your
alma mater. When I chose to be a Member of the Science--of the
Science, Space, and Technology Committee, I did so to help
create a more equitable and just society, specifically within
the realm of STEM. Embracing DEI initiatives and ensuring
diverse representation among congressional witnesses will be a
crucial step this Committee can take towards creating a more
inclusive, innovative, and ethical future for everyone. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lee follows:]

Chairman Frank Lucas and Ranking Member Zoe Lofgren,
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss opportunities for
this body to be more reflective of the nation it serves. This
committee strives for excellence in enhanced innovation and
problem-solving through the funding and direction we provide
these agencies to carry out ground-breaking research.
For too long we have failed to prioritize, or even
acknowledge, the vast contributions that the Black community
and other minority groups have made towards scientific
discovery and innovation. Well-documented gaps exist between
the number of recognized works produced by women compared to
men in science, bearing significant consequences for the
retention and promotion of women.
1
Black and brown
bodies have for centuries been used to save the lives of others
while losing their own.
For example, the genetic material of Henrietta Lacks, taken
without consent, has been studied and used globally in major
developments on vaccine production, cancer treatments,
fertility treatments, and numerous other applications.
Katherine Johnson's hand-calculated orbital equations,
where electronic machines failed, helped NASA safely send an
astronaut into space and back to Earth. Her coauthored report
on orbital spaceflight just 2 years prior was the 1st time a
woman in the Flight Research Division received credit as an
author of a research report.
This highlights the ethical imperative for diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DE&I) in the scientific field's unbiased
pursuit of knowledge without discrimination, promoting fairness
and equal opportunities for all. The 118th Congress has
demonized all things remotely related to DE&I; it's not
surprising seeing that one of my ``colleagues'' just last week
referred to Black people as ``colored people'' on the House
floor.
When I look up at the walls of this committee room and only
see one person who looks like me, I feel reminded that many
people, for a long time, did not believe that people like me
belong here. (Point to portrait)
Eddie Bernice Johnson, is the 1st and only woman African
American to ever chair this committee. She dedicated 40 years
of her life to public service, and her work championed STEM
education and diversity.
Fittingly, her contributions helped generational investment
through the CHIPS & Science Act become law. She leaves a legacy
of providing access to career paths and opportunities in STEM
for countless Americans across the country. I look at her work
and I am inspired to make sure some more diverse portraits are
hung in this room, be it myself or others.
Diversity fosters a wider range of ideas and approaches,
leading to more innovative solutions and better problem-solving
capabilities in the scientific community. As legislators who
are entrusted with driving the polices that will help shape the
nation for years to come, we are better positioned to serve our
constituents, and the country, by listening to individuals with
diverse backgrounds, perspectives, and experiences.
Last month, I introduced and withdrew an amendment, at the
request of Chairman Lucas, that incapsulates my legitimate
concerns on the disparate impacts AI technologies have on
people that look like me. Chairman Lucas and this committee
have been supportive of addressing these issues, and I am eager
to discuss what progress has been made on this, and any way
myself or my staff can be supportive of that work. I also look
forward to circulating and presenting a letter to Chairman
Lucas and Ranking Member Lofgren highlighting the need for
improved representation in the witnesses we invite to testify
before us.
_______________________________________________________________________

1
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-022-04966-
w.pdf
The scientific community serves the public interest through
space, science, and technology. Inviting a more diverse pool
from the scientific community ensures that research questions,
methodologies, and findings are more reflective of the American
population that research aims to serve.
To inspire the next generation of innovators, we must
commit to fully embracing diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DE&I)--fundamental principles that hold immense significance
in the scientific field. These cannot be mere buzzwords.
Many of my colleagues on this committee have had more
experience on analyzing scientific topics than me, but my
constituents sent me to this seat to address the unique,
everyday needs and challenges faced by communities in Western
Pennsylvania. You don't need to be an astrophysicist to be a
member of this committee--this is a good thing.The work this
committee does has an impact on people of all creeds and
backgrounds, regardless of your last name or alma mater.
When I chose to be a member of the Space, Science, and
Technology Committee, I did so to help create a more equitable
and just society specially within the realm of STEM. Embracing
DEI initiatives and ensuring diverse representation among
congressional witnesses will be a crucial step this committee
can take towards creating a more inclusive, innovative, and
ethical future for everyone.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the very
thoughtful statement. The testimony given in these hearings is
very important to us. I would acknowledge that I agree with
you. My formal training is as an agricultural economist. And
while the inelasticity of the demand for food, which is a key
issue in ag econ, occasionally will put people to sleep,
nonetheless, economics is about taking limited resources and
allocating them amongst unlimited demands to create the
greatest possible return--rate of return.
Our people in this great country is our greatest asset and
our greatest resource. How we make sure that everyone has a
fair and equitable opportunity to live up to their potential
will determine everyone's future.
That said, I do share your concerns about the disparate
impacts of AI. And that is one of many facets we must consider
as we address the development of the technology. And I remain
committed to working with you and the Ranking Member on this
issue and supporting the development of fair, transparent,
unbiased, artificial intelligence.
Again, thank you for being who you are and the
representative of your constituents that you are. And with
that, I yield back.
And I believe the Ranking Member seeks recognition for 5
minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. I do. And first, let me thank you for your
testimony. I am sure that your constituents are proud to see
you here not only today, but every day and the contributions
you make to our Committee, as well as to our country.
I agree with you that diversity is one of our greatest
strengths as a nation, and that ensuring that our agencies and
the broader science and tech community, as well as our witness
panels reflect the beautiful diversity of our Nation is an
important endeavor.
Now, I had the honor of serving with Eddie Bernice Johnson
for the entire time I've been in Congress. I was--became a
Member of Congress in January of 1995, and her years of work on
STEM diversity, which was codified in the CHIPS and Science
Act, was extremely meaningful and is making a difference around
the country today. And I am sure that our Committee and every
Member understands we can continue to build on her fabulous
record, so we owe her a lot.
I have just a couple of questions if I could. Greenhouse
gas emissions, as we know, are fueling more frequent and more
devastating weather-related disasters. Now you're a freshman
Member of Congress, but you have had an environmental justice
advocacy role prior to your service here. How do you look
forward to championing that cause on this Committee?
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Ranking Member, for that question. As
we know, climate change and our climate crisis is a massively
critical issue that can't be solved in one Congress. I believe
this Committee's work will be an important start. Abandoned oil
and gas wells are a growing problem in the United States as we
transition to a clean energy economy. Some unplugged wells date
back to the 1850's and continually emit methane and cause
environmental damage. I and my colleague Rep. Bice plan to
introduce our bipartisan Abandoned Well and Remediation
Research and Development Act to create an abandoned wells
research development and demonstration program at the
Department of Energy. I look forward to working with both of
you, of course, at the eventual markup to make this legislation
as thorough as possible to support R&D (research and
development) that will help drastically reduce methane
emissions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you for that, and I look forward to
working with you on that. As matter of fact, California just
today announced a program for capping abandoned wells to try
and reduce emissions, and I'm hoping that will be very
successful.
One final question. A few weeks ago, as you mentioned, we
had a hearing on artificial intelligence and machine learning
and some of the practical applications. And at that time, you
highlighted how both have the potential to possibly criminalize
people of color, who have historically been victims of racial
bias in the algorithms that are used in AI and machine
learning. Can you highlight any examples of these biases and
resulting consequences? And do you have thoughts on what are
some of the more worrying implications of the use of AI and
machine learning in law enforcement that would inform our
thinking in terms of what we might do to set guardrails and
prevent harm?
Ms. Lee. Yes, so this technology has become more and more
common in recent years. It's--but when we--when I think about
the question you're asking, a case that comes to mind is the
case of Randall Reed. That makes us worry about the criminal
justice system that almost indiscriminate--indiscriminately
incarcerates Black and Brown people, and it's going to be
worsened by AI. In Randall's case, he was wrongly arrested and
jailed for a crime he didn't commit, and it was in a State that
he had not been in. But the reason why he had been jailed is
because there was a use of a bad facial recognition match. Six
days he spent in jail, thousands of dollars he had to spend on
lawyers, and really an investigation to find these answers,
right? It was irreparable damage to his mental well-being and
his loved ones who have went through--gone through that with
him because of this colorblind technology.
But the reality is, is that in this case, you know, it was
not even documented that there was a use of this technology,
this facial recognition technology, which is why we had the
factfinding mission that there was to even figure out that this
was him or that this is how he was identified. So the detective
who sought the arrest warrant and affidavit, he said that there
was only--that he had only been advised by a credible source.
In this case, there was no source. It was AI. It sets a
dangerous precedent that this Committee, I believe, has a
responsibility to answer or really to kind of account for.
That's why it's so important that we look at the biases
that AI technology presents, that we look at ways that, as we
are providing and kind of got that guidance and the--excuse me,
directing money for R&D, that we are aware of these biases,
that we are aware of the ways in which they're being used in
our criminal legal system, and that we take those into account
as we are pushing forward and forging forward with this
technology that's inevitable, of course, but making sure that
we're using it in the best way possible and that we are
supporting the development in an ethical and biased--and
unbiased ways.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you for that. And it stimulates a lot of
ideas on my part and how we might take a look at the data bases
that are used for machine learning to make sure that they are
not feeding discrimination, as well as holding those who rely
on to--on machine learning and then have detrimental outcomes
to have some culpability for that.
But with that, I just want to thank you for your thoughtful
presentation, and I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. With that, the gentlelady yields back.
Seeing no other questions, I want to thank the gentlewoman
from Pennsylvania for her valuable testimony and the other
members of the Committee.
Seeing no further witnesses at this time, the record will
remain open for 10 days for additional comments and written
questions from Members. This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:19 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative August Pfluger

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
