- RETURNING TO THE MOON: KEEPING ARTEMIS ON TRACK

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RETURNING TO THE MOON:
KEEPING ARTEMIS ON TRACK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 17, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-502PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              GABE AMO, Rhode Island
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. BRIAN BABIN, Texas, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois,
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida                  Ranking Member
MIKE GARCIA, California              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

January 17, 2024

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    18
Written Statement............................................    19

Statement by Representative Eric Sorensen, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    20
Written Statement............................................    21

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    21
Written Statement............................................    22

Written statement by Representative Brian Babin, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    23

Witnesses:

Ms. Catherine Koerner, Associate Administrator, Exploration
Systems Development Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Written Statement............................................    27

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    31
Written Statement............................................    33

Mr. George A. Scott, Acting Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    50
Written Statement............................................    52

Dr. Michael D. Griffin, Co-President, LogiQ, Inc
Oral Statement...............................................    62
Written Statement............................................    63

Discussion.......................................................    73

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Ms. Catherine Koerner, Associate Administrator, Exploration
Systems Development Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.......................................    94

Mr. William Russell, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office............   112

Mr. George A. Scott, Acting Inspector General, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration...........................   118

Dr. Michael D. Griffin, Co-President, LogiQ, Inc.................   128

RETURNING TO THE MOON:
KEEPING ARTEMIS ON TRACK

----------

WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 17, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Returning to the
Moon: Keeping Artemis on Track.'' And before I make--offer my
opening statement, I would like to acknowledge that I
appreciate our witnesses being here today. Mother Nature is
proving to be somewhat challenging this week, as you can see by
the turnout of membership. This has been a hearing that's been
much anticipated by the Members in a very enthusiastic way, but
you have to physically get here. And that's a challenge we're
working on. And Subcommittee Chairman Babin is in the air
somewhere between here and Houston, so the moment he arrives,
we will have a proper Chairman to preside over this process.
With that, I want to recognize myself for five minutes for
an opening statement.
Good morning, and I welcome everyone to the Science
Committee's first hearing of 2024. It's fitting that we're
kicking off the year with a hearing on Artemis, given its
importance to our space program and to U.S. competitiveness. My
top priority since becoming Chairman of the Science Committee
has been to ensure that American competitiveness and leadership
in the fields of research and technology development. This
includes U.S. activities in space, especially human
exploration.
The importance of U.S. leadership in space is why some of
our top legislative priorities this Congress include a NASA
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration) reauthorization
bill, which we'll consider this spring, and the Commercial
Space Act. It has been almost seven years since a comprehensive
NASA authorization bill was signed into law, and that's simply
too long for an agency of NASA's importance.
Much has happened during that period, and this Committee
should provide direction to NASA's activities for the coming
years, especially in the areas of human exploration. How we
address future human exploration beyond low Earth orbit is
undoubtably a topic we'll address in the NASA authorization
bill. Artemis is a cornerstone of that effort. I'm confident
that I speak for everyone on this Committee when I say we all
support Artemis. This Committee has long directed NASA to
return humans to the Moon and eventually Mars. But this
Committee's support of Artemis means asking detailed questions
of NASA and providing oversight of the agency's proposals.
Congress must have proper insight in the agency's planning and
execution of this mission to ensure its success.
This also means listening to inputs from external
stakeholders and hearing differing viewpoints, which is why
we've assembled a panel of witnesses with a variety of
perspectives today.
Last week, NASA announced the delay of Artemis II to
September 2025 and Artemis III to September 2026. I look
forward to hearing from NASA about the cause of these delays
and potential impacts to future missions and about the steps it
is taking to mitigate future risks. We have a responsibility to
not only our constituents, but the international community to
see that Artemis is executed in a timely and fiscally
responsible manner without sacrificing safety.
I remind my colleagues that we are not the only country
interested in sending humans to the Moon. The Chinese Communist
Party is actively solicitating international partners for a
lunar mission, a lunar research station, and has stated its
ambition to have astronauts on--human astronauts on the surface
by 2030. The country that lands first will have the ability to
set a precedent for whether future lunar activities are
conducted with openness and transparency or in a more
restricted manner.
I'm grateful to our panel for appearing before us today to
share their experience and expertise, and I look forward to a
productive discussion on how we can ensure the success of
Artemis and the best way for the U.S. to be the world leader in
human space exploration.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning. I want to welcome everyone to the Science
Committee's first hearing of 2024. It's fitting that we're
kicking off the year with a hearing on Artemis, given its
importance to our space program and to U.S. competitiveness.
My top priority since becoming chairman of the Science
Committee has been to ensure American competitiveness and
leadership in the fields of research and technology
development. This includes U.S. activities in space, especially
human exploration.
The importance of U.S. leadership is space is why some of
our top legislative priorities this Congress include a NASA
authorization bill, which we will consider this spring, and the
Commercial Space Act.
It has been almost seven years since a comprehensive NASA
authorization bill was signed into law, and that is simply too
long for an agency of NASA's importance. Much has happened
during that period, and this Committee should provide direction
to NASA's activities for the coming years, especially in the
area of human exploration.
How we address future human exploration beyond Low Earth
orbit is undoubtedly a topic we will address in the NASA
authorization bill. Artemis is a cornerstone of that effort.
I am confident that I speak for everyone on this committee
when I say we all support Artemis. This committee has long
directed NASA to return humans to the Moon and eventually Mars.
But this Committee's support of Artemis means asking
detailed questions of NASA and providing oversight of the
agency's proposals. Congress must have proper insight into the
agency's planning and execution of this mission to ensure its
success.
This also means listening to inputs from external
stakeholders and hearing differing viewpoints, which is why we
have assembled a panel of witnesses with a variety of
perspectives today.
Last week, NASA announced the delay of Artemis 2 to
September 2025 and Artemis 3 to September 2026. I look forward
to hearing from NASA about the cause of these delays and
potential impacts to future missions, and about the steps it is
taking to mitigate future risks.
We have a responsibility to not only our constituents, but
the international community to see that Artemis is executed in
a timely and fiscally responsible manner without sacrificing
safety.
I remind my colleagues that we are not the only country
interested in sending humans to the Moon. The Chinese Communist
Party is actively soliciting international partners for a lunar
research station and has stated its ambition to have astronauts
on the human surface by 2030.
The country that lands first will have the ability to set a
precedent for whether future lunar activities are conducted
with openness and transparency or in a more restricted manner.
I am grateful to our panel for appearing before us today to
share their experience and expertise. I look forward to a
productive discussion on how we can ensure the success of
Artemis and the best way for the U.S. to be the world leader in
human space exploration.
I now recognize Ranking Member Sorensen for his opening
statement.

Chairman Lucas. I now recognize Ranking Member Sorensen for
his opening statement.
Mr. Sorensen. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, for
holding today's hearing ``Returning to the Moon: Keeping
Artemis on Track.'' I want to welcome our distinguished
witnesses. Thank you for your time and your expertise and for
being here today.
I was not alive, huddled around the TV for Apollo 11, but
my parents watched that landing. I'm the son of an aerospace
engineer and a meteorologist with a deep love of science. I
know the profound impact it has had on our country and on our
world. When I look up in the night sky, I wonder what's up
there. I want us to know what's up there.
Today, we're examining NASA's Artemis mission. The program,
separated into several stages, is designed to bring humans step
by step to the Moon and beyond. Artemis will inspire the next
generation, strengthen our aerospace industry and international
partnerships, and demonstrate capabilities needed to eventually
send humans to Mars.
Last year, I was proud to host NASA astronaut Dr. Kate
Rubins in my district in western Illinois. Dr. Rubins spoke
about her excitement for the upcoming generation. She believes
that--and I spoke with our witnesses earlier--that the first
humans that will set foot on Mars may be in a first grade
classroom today. What an exciting possibility for the next
generation, for our children.
The Artemis I mission was an important first uncrewed test
that sent the Orion vehicle thousands of miles beyond the Moon
before its return to Earth. Artemis II will test additional
systems as it brings humans around the Moon, and Artemis III
will land humans back on the lunar surface.
The difficulty of these missions cannot be underestimated.
Last week, we learned that NASA's delaying the Artemis II and
III missions by about a year. I stand behind NASA in
prioritizing safety for Artemis, and I look forward to gaining
further insight into the delays and any related costs.
Artemis requires a sustained national investment. In a 2021
report, the NASA Office of the Inspector General (IG) said,
quote, ``NASA is projected to spend $93 billion on the Artemis
effort from Fiscal Year 2012 to 2025,'' end quote. And that's
even before we land our astronauts on the Moon. As authorizers
with oversight responsibility, this Committee needs to ensure
that those investments are made wisely.
This hearing provides a timely opportunity to get both an
update on the progress and an understanding of the pressing
issues of the Artemis program, including does NASA and Congress
have an appropriate level of understanding of the cost of key
Artemis systems, individual Artemis missions, and a sustained
lunar exploration effort? What is the critical path for
returning humans to the Moon? And what is the plan for
addressing all of the challenges? How would a fiscal 2024
budget at enacted 2023 levels or even a cut below the 2023
levels affect this program? How are NASA and its partners
addressing risks? And how will risk be communicated to the
American people?
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I want the Artemis to be safe and
successful. Artemis and Moon to Mars are tremendous
opportunities and of importance to the United States and the
rest of the world. America's international leadership and
engagement in the Artemis program and the Artemis Accords will
promote peaceful, safe, and sustainable exploration of the Moon
and other celestial bodies.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time,
Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sorensen follows:]

Good morning and thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding
today's hearing Returning to the Moon: Keeping Artemis on
Track.
I want to welcome our distinguished witnesses. Thank you
for being here.
I was not alive during the Apollo 11 landing, but as the
son of an aerospace engineer, and a meteorologist with a deep
love of science, I know the profound impact it has had on our
country and on the world. When I look up at the night sky, I
wonder what is up there? I want us to go so I can know.
Today, we are examining NASA's Artemis program. This
program, separated into several stages, is designed to bring
humans, step by step, to the moon and beyond.
Artemis will inspire the next generation, strengthen our
aerospace industry and international partnerships, and
demonstrate capabilities needed to eventually send humans to
Mars.
Last year, I was proud to host NASA astronaut, Dr. Kate
Rubins, in my district. Dr. Rubins spoke about her excitement
for the upcoming generation. She believes that first graders
are the perfect age to one day go to Mars. What an exciting
possibility for our nation's children!
The Artemis I mission was an important first uncrewed test
and sent the Orion vehicle thousands of miles beyond the Moon
before its return to Earth. Artemis II will test additional
systems as it brings humans around the moon. And Artemis III
will land humans back on the moon. The difficulty of these
missions cannot be underestimated.
Last week, we learned that NASA is delaying the Artemis II
and Artemis III missions by about a year. I stand behind NASA
in prioritizing safety for Artemis, and I look forward to
gaining further insight into the delays and any related costs.
Artemis requires a sustained national investment. In a 2021
report, the NASA Office of Inspector General said, ``NASA is
projected to spend $93 billion on the Artemis effort from FY
2012 through FY 2025.'' And that's even before we land our
astronauts on the Moon.
As authorizers with oversight responsibility, this
committee needs to ensure those investments are made wisely.
This hearing provides a timely opportunity to get both an
update on the progress and an understanding of the pressing
issues for the Artemis program, including,

Do NASA and Congress have an appropriate level of
understanding of the cost of key Artemis systems, individual
Artemis missions, and a sustained lunar exploration effort?

What is on the critical path for returning humans
to the Moon and what is the plan for addressing those
challenges?

How would an FY2024 budget at enacted FY2023
levels, or even a cut below the FY 2023 appropriated levels,
affect the Artemis program?

How are NASA and its partners addressing risks
and how will risk be communicated to the public?
In closing, Mr. Chairman, I want Artemis to be safe and
successful. Artemis and Moon to Mars are of tremendous
importance to the United States and the world.
America's international leadership and engagement in the
Artemis program and the Artemis accords will promote peaceful,
safe, and sustainable exploration of the Moon and other
celestial bodies.
Thank you, and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Sorensen.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Full Committee
for a statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. Good morning, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding today's hearing. I want to welcome our
witnesses, and thank you for being here to discuss the topic of
``Returning to the Moon: Keeping Artemis on Track.''
This Committee, as the Chairman has noted, has long
maintained its bipartisan support for Artemis in the NASA's
Moon to Mars efforts, and I don't see that changing in any way.
I was thrilled with the success of the Artemis I test flight.
In my own State of California, NASA's Moon to Mars campaign
supports 11,600 jobs and created an economic impact of $2.8
billion according to NASA's 2021 Economic Impact Report.
So let me be clear, I support Artemis, but I want it to be
successful, especially with China at our heels, and we need--we
want to be helpful here in the Committee in ensuring that
Artemis is strong and staying on track as we look to lead the
world hand-in-hand with our partners in the human exploration
of the Moon and beyond.
Now, sending people into space, let alone the Moon, isn't
easy. And NASA recently announced delays to the Artemis II and
III missions. I have confidence in NASA's workforce and the
decision to keep safety as a top priority. To that end, I look
forward to understanding the details behind the recent delays
and what's involved in addressing those issues.
As the Artemis efforts continue, we as the authorized
Committee must have our eyes wide open. Moon to Mars is a
multidecadal effect--effort that will span several Congresses
and Administrations. Full situational awareness requires that,
one, we know how much the key Artemis systems cost, as well as
the missions themselves; two, have a realistic understanding of
how NASA is assessing schedule; and three, have clarity on the
top most technical challenges and risks and how they're being
addressed across NASA and among its diverse set of partners and
acquisition mechanisms.
We also know NASA has a lot on its plate. The future of low
Earth orbit and the planned end of the International Space
Station operations in 2030, the need for critical yet costly
deorbit vehicle, the transition to the use of future commercial
space stations and their readiness to come online, all this has
to be kept in mind.
In addition, key considerations on the Mars sample return
are on the horizon. And as we learned last week from NASA and
NOAA's (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's)
annual assessment of global temperature, we must continue to
obtain the measurements and observations needed to understand
and mitigate the impacts of climate crisis.
In short, NASA is a multi-mission agency, and we can't lose
sight of the benefits and challenges of a balanced portfolio.
But supporting balance won't be made any easier by the
dysfunctional appropriations process that I think threatens to
undermine what we know is best for the--for leading the world
and growing our economy in a sustainable way, investments in
R&D (research and development) and innovations such as those at
NASA.
I'm excited about Artemis and Moon to Mars, and I look
forward to working with our Chairman, with the Administration,
and with stakeholders on building a smart, strong, and
sustainable path forward.
And I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning, and thank you, Chairman Babin, for holding
today's hearing. I also want to welcome our witnesses. Thank
you for being here to discuss the topic of ``Returning to the
Moon: Keeping Artemis on Track.''
The Committee has long maintained its bipartisan support
for Artemis and NASA's Moon to Mars efforts, and I don't see
that changing in any way. I was thrilled with the success of
the Artemis I test flight. In my own state of California,
NASA's Moon to Mars campaign supports 11,600 jobs and created
an economic impact of 2.8 billion dollars, according to NASA's
FY2021 Economic Impact Report.
So let me be clear upfront. I support Artemis. I want it to
be successful, especially with China at our heels. We want to
be helpful in ensuring Artemis is strong and staying on track
as we look to lead the world, hand in hand with our partners,
in the human exploration of the Moon and beyond.
Sending people into space, let alone to the Moon, will
never be easy. NASA recently announced delays to the Artemis II
and III missions. I have full confidence in NASA's workforce
and the decision to keep safety as the top priority. To that
end, I look forward to understanding the details behind the
recent delays and what is involved in addressing the issues.
As Artemis efforts continue, it's incumbent upon us, as the
authorizing committee, to have our eyes wide open. Moon to Mars
is a multi-decadal effort that will span several Congresses and
Administrations.
Full situational awareness requires that:
1)  We know how much the key Artemis systems cost, as well
as the missions themselves;
2)  Have a realistic understanding of how NASA is assessing
schedule;
3)  Have clarity on the topmost technical challenges and
risks and how they are being addressed across NASA and among
its diverse set of partners and acquisition mechanisms.
Moreover, we can't ignore that NASA has a lot on its plate.
The future of low Earth orbit and the planned end of
International Space Station operations in 2030, the need for a
critical yet costly deorbit vehicle, the transition to the use
of future commercial space stations and their readiness to come
online must be kept in mind. In addition, key considerations on
Mars Sample Return are on the horizon. And, as we learned last
week from NASA and NOAA's annual assessment of global
temperature, we must continue to obtain the measurements and
observations needed to understand and mitigate the horrific
impacts of the climate crisis. In short, NASA is a multi-
mission agency, and we can't lose sight of the benefits and
challenges of a balanced portfolio.
Supporting balance won't be made any easier by the
dysfunctional appropriations process that threatens to
undermine what we know is best for leading the world and
growing our economy in a sustainable way--investments in R&D
and innovation such as those at NASA.
I'm excited about Artemis and Moon to Mars. I look forward
to working with the Chairman, the Administration, and
stakeholders on building a smart, strong, and sustainable path
forward.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair would note that when Subcommittee Chairman Babin
arrives, we will make his time for an opening statement, too.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Babin follows:]

Good morning. I want to welcome everyone to the Science
Committee's first hearing of 2024. It's fitting that we're
kicking off the year with a hearing on Artemis, given its
importance to our space program and to U.S. competitiveness.
The nation that leads in space earns tremendous scientific
knowledge, reaps the rewards of technological advancements, and
sets the rules of the road for future exploration. It's
critical that we continue to lead so that our values of
transparency, openness, and freedom guide exploration rather
than communist principles and dictatorial regimes. That's why
it's so important for Artemis to succeed.
The origins of the Artemis program stem from President
Bush's Vision for Space Exploration, announced in January of
2004. In 2005, this committee directed NASA to plan to return
American astronauts to the Moon as a stepping-stone to Mars and
beyond. This committee, and Congress as a whole, has not
wavered in its commitment to that goal. All too often NASA
programs have suffered from cost over-runs, under-performance,
schedule delays, or changing political directions that have led
to cancellations. Recognizing this history, Congress has
provided "continuity of purpose" for Artemis through multiple
NASA Authorization Acts, robust appropriations, and consistent
oversight to ensure the program remained focused across several
Administrations.
This was no small task, and we still have our work cut out
for us to maintain the program and ensure success. I was
incredibly pleased to see the success of Artemis' first mission
in November of 2022, which sent an uncrewed Orion capsule
around the Moon and back to Earth, where it was successfully
recovered in the Pacific Ocean. But last week, NASA announced
delays to the Artemis 2 mission, which would send astronauts
around the Moon, and the Artemis 3 mission, which would return
humans to the lunar surface for the first time in more than 50
years. Artemis 2 has been delayed until September 2025 and
Artemis 3 has been pushed back to September 2026. This is in
addition to proposed delays to Artemis 4 that were included in
the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request last year.
While an argument could be made that those schedules were
aggressive, it is important for Congress to monitor contract
performance and NASA program management to gain insight into
trends and indicators that could portend future issues.
Every delay costs the United States time and taxpayer
dollars and risks our preeminent role in space exploration. As
I said at the beginning of my remarks, we cannot afford to cede
U.S. leadership in space, so it's critical that we keep Artemis
on track and on time.
That is the focus of the hearing today. My goal is for this
Committee to come away with a better understanding of the
current challenges facing Artemis and our efforts to return to
the Moon.
There are plenty of topics for us to explore today ranging
from acquisition strategies, architecture decisions, concept of
operation choices, contractor performance, and NASA oversight.
While we will only touch the surface of these complicated
issues today, we will surely continue our oversight through
additional hearings, information requests, budget reviews, and
stakeholder engagement.
Today, however, we have witnesses from NASA, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO), the NASA Inspector General, and
the private sector, all of whom can give us more insight into
the program and what's needed to keep it moving forward on time
and on budget.
I look forward to their testimony, and discussing how we
can ensure future success. Thank you.

Chairman Lucas. Let me introduce our witnesses. Our first
witness today is Catherine Koerner, Associate Administrator for
the Exploration Systems Development Mission Directorate of
NASA. Her responsibilities include the development of the Moon
to Mars infrastructure, management of systems development for
Artemis, and planning NASA's deep space exploration approach.
Ms. Koerner previously served as the Deputy Associate
Administrator for the directorate and prior to that served as
the Orion Program Manager.
Our next witness is Mr. William Russell, Director of
Contracting and National Security Acquisitions at GAO
(Government Accountability Office). He manages a portfolio
which includes issues related to NASA and DOD's (Department of
Defense's) industrial base and supply chain integrity, among
other topics. Mr. Russell joined GAO in 2002 and has previously
served on GAO's Homeland Security and Justice team.
Our third witness is Mr. George Scott, acting Inspector
General at NASA. He assumed the role in January of this year,
having previously served as the Deputy Inspector General. Prior
to joining NASA, Mr. Scott served over three decades at GAO,
which included serving as the managing director of GAO's
Homeland Security and Justice team.
Our final witness is Dr. Michael Griffin, Co-President of
LogiQ, a scientific and technical consulting firm he cofounded.
Dr. Griffin previously served as the 11th Administrator of
NASA, leading the agency from 2005 to 2009. He has also served
as the Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering,
as well as the Space Department head at the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory.
Again, thank you all for being here today. And I now
recognize Ms. Koerner for five minutes to present her
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MS. CATHERINE KOERNER,

ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR, EXPLORATION SYSTEMS

DEVELOPMENT MISSION DIRECTORATE,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Ms. Koerner. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Sorensen, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on NASA's Artemis campaign.
Under the Artemis campaign, the United States, along with
our international and commercial partners, will return humans
to the Moon to explore, conduct scientific research, and
establish the capability for long-term human presence on and
around the Moon. Then, using what we learn at the Moon, we will
take the next giant leap, sending the first humans to Mars.
In November 2022, NASA took the first major step in
America's return to the Moon with the Artemis I mission. That
historic launch and 25 1/2-day mission tested the Space Launch
System (SLS) rocket, the Orion spacecraft, and the Exploration
Ground Systems in preparation for Artemis II. On Artemis II,
NASA astronauts Reid Wiseman, Victor Glover, Christina Koch,
and Canadian astronaut Jeremy Hansen will journey beyond low
Earth orbit and around the Moon, the farthest humans have
journeyed into space in more than 50 years.
Approximately one year after Artemis II, the Artemis III
crew will land on the lunar south pole and begin building out a
robust long-term exploration program. With Artemis IV,
astronauts will again visit the lunar surface and start
assembly of the space station in lunar orbit called Gateway.
NASA's plan for a successful and sustainable return to the
Moon requires the development of several new space systems,
including the SLS rocket, the Orion spacecraft, the Exploration
Ground Systems, lunar landers, the Gateway space station, and
new lunar spacesuits and lunar rovers. Last year, pursuant to
the NASA Authorization Act of 2022, NASA established the Moon
to Mars program office, which focuses on the development of
these new systems, mission integration, and risk management
across the portfolio. This new office also leads planning and
analysis for long-lead technology developments to support
humans to Mars.
In the year since NASA's successful Artemis I flight test,
NASA has continued to refine the schedule of the follow-on
Artemis missions. Based on data from Artemis I and the
readiness of the space systems needed to safely transport our
crews from Earth to the lunar surface and back, the Artemis II
adds several new systems to support astronauts inside of Orion.
In addition, we are continuing to study the Orion heat shield
from Artemis I to ensure the safety of our crew on future
missions. Based on these factors, we're planning for Artemis II
to launch in September 2025. Artemis III will build on the
progress of Artemis I and II and adds a commercial lunar lander
and advanced spacesuits for walking on the lunar surface. In
2026, Artemis III will send humans back to the surface of the
Moon.
While sending humans back to the Moon will be a significant
accomplishment, we do not intend to stop there. NASA's long-
term goal is to send humans to Mars, and the Moon will help us
get there. Mars is a rich destination for scientific discovery
and a driver of technologies that will enable humans to travel
and explore far from Earth. By using what we learn on and
around the Moon under Artemis, NASA is working to understand
and overcome the future challenges associated with landing and
living on Mars.
As NASA builds a blueprint for human exploration throughout
the solar system for the benefit of humanity, we conducted our
first two architecture concept reviews, the culmination of a
robust analysis process designed to align NASA's Moon to Mars
exploration strategy and codify the supporting architecture.
This annual review is a milestone that enables our Moon to Mars
strategy to evolve over time as we consider lessons from
previous missions and provide opportunities to onramp new
technologies, as well as new industry and international
partners.
Through the Artemis campaign, NASA is partnering with the
most diverse and broad exploration coalition in history,
including multiple international and commercial partners. For
example, NASA's Gateway program is an international
collaboration with the Canadian Space Agency, European Space
Agency, Japan Exploration Agency, and now the United Arab
Emirates Mohammed bin Rashid Space Centre to establish
humanity's first space station around the Moon. Similarly, NASA
is exploring additional international partnerships for lunar
surface habitats, logistics, and mobility capabilities that
will enable long-term human presence and enhanced scientific
returns.
Together, we will continue to develop the technology and
the systems needed to live and work on and around the Moon in
preparation for human missions to Mars. Because of our diverse
astronaut corps, we will be able to fly the first woman, first
person of color, and the first international astronaut to the
Moon. We will align with our international partners toward a
future of expanded economic opportunity and scientific
discovery while investing in the next generation of STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics) leaders as
we support the limitless possibilities of space exploration.
NASA is grateful for this Committee's continued support of
the Artemis campaign, and I appreciate this opportunity to
update you on behalf of NASA and our Artemis partners and would
be pleased to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Koerner follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Russell for five minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. WILLIAM RUSSELL, DIRECTOR,

CONTRACTING AND NATIONAL SECURITY ACQUISITIONS,

U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Russell. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren,
Ranking Member Sorensen, Members of the Subcommittee, thank you
for the opportunity to discuss NASA's efforts to return
astronauts to the surface of the Moon and ultimately human
exploration of Mars through the Artemis missions.
NASA has requested at least $38 billion over the next five
years to support this ambitious undertaking. The projects
supporting Artemis are complex and specialized and often push
the state-of-the-art in space technology. These new projects
include a Human Landing System (HLS) to transport crew to the
lunar surface and spacesuits for lunar operations. In addition,
NASA plans to rely on existing programs, including the Orion
multipurpose crew vehicle and the Space Launch System.
Successfully executing the Artemis missions will require
extensive coordination across programs and with a wide range of
contractors to ensure systems operate together seamlessly and
safely.
Our work has highlighted NASA's progress toward its Artemis
flight tests and lunar landing mission. Examples include the
successful launch of Artemis I in November 2022, which
demonstrated the initial capability of the Space Launch System,
as well as the Exploration Ground Systems. For Artemis II, the
first flight with crew, NASA is currently conducting
integration and testing of the crew capsule and the launch pad.
And for Artemis III, the first crewed lunar landing mission,
the HLS contractor has conducted two test flights. NASA also
continues to make progress on its integration and risk
management plans, such as establishing mechanisms for
identifying and tracking Artemis III risks and the
establishment and implementation of the Moon to Mars program
office.
While NASA continues to develop capabilities needed to
support Artemis efforts, the agency does face several
challenges. These include the Artemis schedule, a lack of
transparency into the Artemis mission and program costs, and
other acquisition management challenges. In terms of Artemis
III's schedule, in our November 2023 report, we found that
there were a variety of factors that made the previous December
2025 date unlikely. These included an ambitious schedule,
delays to key events, and the remaining technical work.
Specifically, we found that if the HLS development took as many
months to complete as an average NASA project, it was likely
Artemis III would be likely to occur in early 2027. Just last
week, NASA adjusted the launch date to September 2026 to allow
contractors more time to complete a significant amount of
remaining technical work.
In terms of Artemis III mission costs, in December 2019 we
found that NASA didn't plan to establish an official cost
estimate for this mission. We made a recommendation, and NASA
concurred with it, to establish one but has not yet done so.
While NASA requested $6.8 billion to support Artemis III
programs in the Fiscal Year 2024 budget request, decisionmakers
will have limited knowledge into the full scope of the Artemis
III mission costs until an estimate is created.
Last, in terms of acquisition management, NASA has been on
GAO's high risk list for a number of years related to
acquisition management and has made a lot of progress there,
but NASA's largest, most complex projects, including those that
support the Artemis missions, continue to shape the agency's
entire acquisition portfolio. When these projects exceed their
cost or schedule baselines, it can have cascading effects on
other projects and efforts. In our '23 assessment of NASA
projects, we found that NASA anticipated setting baselines for
six Artemis programs, including HLS. As these projects enter
the portfolio, they will drive the agency's acquisition
performance over the next several years for good or ill.
In summary, NASA's made important progress on its Artemis
efforts, but challenges remain. NASA will need to manage
multiple risks seamlessly. It will need to continue to find
ways to elevate risks across programs and mitigate those. That
includes increasing transparency on how much Artemis III and
future Artemis missions are likely to cost. Implementing our
past recommendations will help NASA to improve in these
critical areas.
Chairman Lucas, this completes my prepared remarks. I look
forward to any questions the Subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Russell follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. I now recognize Mr. Scott for
five minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. GEORGE A. SCOTT,

ACTING INSPECTOR GENERAL,

NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Scott. Good morning. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, Ranking Member Sorensen, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me here today to discuss
key challenges facing NASA's Artemis campaign. At the outset, I
would like to thank the Subcommittee for your continued support
of our oversight work.
Also, I would like to thank Paul Martin, our former
Inspector General, for his exceptional leadership of our office
over the past 14 years. It was a pleasure serving as his deputy
for the last 5 1/2 years.
Historically, NASA has struggled to establish credible cost
and schedule estimates, and Artemis is no exception. After more
than a decade of preparation and delays, NASA successfully
completed the Artemis I mission in December of 2022. Despite
this achievement, NASA faces additional challenges to meeting
its Artemis goals. Of utmost importance is resolving technical
issues that could threaten astronaut safety. The agency will
need to do this while also addressing longstanding concerns
such as unsustainable costs, unreliable project schedules, and
the lack of transparency into funding needs.
In terms of technical challenges, NASA's most immediate
issue is preparing for the Artemis II mission, the first crewed
test flight of SLS and Orion. For example, the Artemis I flight
revealed unexpected erosion of protective material on Orion's
heat shield. In addition, the agency has identified other
issues with Orion that it needs to correct before the next
launch.
Recognizing the challenges that lie ahead, last week, NASA
announced delays to the next two Artemis missions. This will
allow more time to address technical issues identified during
the first mission, as well as support for the development and
testing of other systems, including the Human Landing System
and next-generation spacesuits.
The second challenge is the campaign's enormous cost.
Overall, we projected that total Artemis costs will reach $93
billion between 2012 and 2025. We also estimate that SLS and
Orion production and operating costs will total at least $4.2
billion per launch for the first four Artemis missions. This
figure does not include $42 billion in formulation and
development costs spent over the past dozen years.
Given these costs, it is imperative that NASA identify and
effectively implement cost-saving measures. To its credit, the
agency recognizes the need to reduce costs and is attempting to
do so. Our work, however, has found that some key cost
reduction efforts may fall short. This is due in part to NASA
not capturing certain costs when developing estimates or
relying on unrealistic assumptions. NASA also wants to make its
Moon to Mars effort more sustainable by sharing costs with its
international partners. However, the agency current plans--the
agency's current plan does not include cost estimates for these
partners beyond Artemis IV.
Finally, the Artemis campaign lacks cost and schedule
transparency. NASA has not developed a comprehensive estimate
for all Artemis costs. And, unlike its other major projects and
programs, NASA has not established lifecycle costs or made cost
and schedule commitments for some programs supporting Artemis.
Without the agency fully accounting for and accurately
reporting the overall cost of current and future missions, it
will be difficult for Congress to make informed decisions about
NASA's long-term funding needs. Further, without credible,
complete, and transparent costs and schedule estimates, NASA
will be hard pressed to achieve meaningful cost savings, a key
step to making Artemis truly sustainable over time.
We look forward to assisting NASA in achieving its Artemis
goals and will continue to provide independent, objective, and
comprehensive oversight of this effort. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. I now would like to recognize
Dr. Griffin for five minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MICHAEL D. GRIFFIN,

CO-PRESIDENT, LogiQ, INC.

Dr. Griffin. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Sorensen and
Lofgren, Members of the Committee, thanks for the invitation to
appear here today. I will try to use less than my five minutes,
and I will be direct.
In my judgment, the Artemis program is excessively complex,
unrealistically priced, compromises crew safety, poses very
high mission risk of completion, and is highly unlikely to be
completed in a timely manner even if successful. This matters
because our self-declared adversary--adversaries--the Chinese
Communist Party, together with their Russian partner, fully
understand the role that being on the space frontier has in the
world of global power politics. We seem no longer to understand
that.
For the United States and its partners not to be on the
Moon when others are on the Moon is unacceptable. We need a
program that is consistent with that theme. Artemis is not that
program. We need to restart it, not keep it on track, per the
subject of this hearing. The Congress should provide specific
direction to the executive branch to address this issue.
Thank you. I would request my full statement, written
statement, be entered into the record and I'm--will stand down
for your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Griffin follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Without objection, so ordered.
I turn to myself now for five minutes for questions.
Ms. Koerner, NASA announced last week that Artemis II is
now targeted for launch in September 2025 and Artemis III
targeted for launch in September 2026. Can you share the
scheduling margin built into the updated Artemis II and III
launches?
Ms. Koerner. So thank you, Chairman Lucas, appreciate the
question today. We are--have adjusted the Artemis II schedule
based on crew safety. As you recall, from coming out of Artemis
I we had a tremendously successful mission, and one of the
follow-on investigations from that mission is the performance
of the heat shield. That has taken us some time to analyze the
data. The heat shield performed perfectly from a thermal
perspective, but we saw some unusual characteristics, and we
want to fully understand that before we put Reid, Victor,
Christina, and Jeremy on Artemis II. So that has contributed to
the delay in the mission. We have sufficient time to complete
that investigation with a 10-month adjustment to that launch
schedule.
Also, with Artemis II, we have additional capabilities on
the Orion spacecraft. The life support systems have proven to
be more difficult and challenging to develop. And during the
testing of some of those systems, we identified an issue with a
digital motor controller that has impacted our ability to be
able to continue the processing the vehicle as previously
planned. The additional time that we have given ourselves in
the adjusted schedule permits us the opportunity to address the
challenges that we've seen with that digital motor controller.
So we have a number of issues, and those issues are all
encapsulated with this margin that we have on the schedule for
this September 2025. There is margin built into that schedule
for us to complete all of the necessary testing and to address
all of the regular processing that we--lessons learned that we
had from the Artemis I launch.
Chairman Lucas. To the rest of the panel, based on these
margins, do you believe that these revised schedule launches--
dates are realistic? Whoever would care to touch that first.
Mr. Russell. Yes, Chairman Lucas, I can jump in. I think
for Artemis II, certainly, that that provides more time to get
through the issues and figure out the heatshield life support
challenges that Ms. Koerner referenced. The one thing that
jumps out with the revised Artemis III date is the span of time
between Artemis II and III is one year. So if you consider the
successful conclusion of Artemis I in 2022 and now it's going
to be a few years to the '25 date to do essentially the same
Artemis test flight the second time with the crew, Artemis III
is more complicated, so there's not a lot of time, and as you
saw with Artemis I, there are things that are going to happen
that you need to learn that you need to investigate. One year
is not a lot of time to do that learning, turn around and be
ready for a September 2026 launch date. So that's the one
scheduled pressure that we see with the new dates.
Chairman Lucas. Any observations, gentlemen, that you care
to add?
Dr. Griffin. I would say that the Artemis circumlunar
mission is, I think, very doable on the timescale that NASA has
said. I don't think the Artemis III, the landing mission, is at
all realistically scheduled.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Chairman Lucas. I think NASA will
continue to be challenged on the schedule front, particularly
with the Artemis III mission. Now, historically, certain
spaceflight missions, in terms of going from contract to
development have taken, you know, 8 1/2 years. And with HLS,
NASA was trying to do it in a much more condensed timeframe. So
I think based on lessons learned from Artemis II, I think that
the agency will be better positioned to come up with a more
realistic launch date for Artemis III.
Chairman Lucas. Ms. Koerner, can you share with the
Committee what milestones NASA uses to measure contractor
performance on the Human Landing System and spacesuit contracts
and, along with that, what the consequences are for contractors
if they don't meet the milestones by the assigned deadline?
Ms. Koerner. So with regards to the contract milestones, we
have a number of milestones that are significant for the
Artemis III landing--ultimate crew landing. The first would be
an uncrewed demo that has to happen prior to a crewed landing.
We are keeping track on SpaceX, our prime contractor, for the
Human Landing System. We're keeping track of their progress. If
you recall, they've had a number of test flights, and they will
actually conduct their next test flight here, likely in the
February timeframe. And they have good scheduled margin to
support that launch.
We are anticipating a number of launches in calendar year
'24 by our SpaceX industry partners to support the development
of not only the Human Landing System capability but also their
cryogenic fuel transfer capability, which is essential for us
to be able to understand the process for refueling the Human
Landing System prior to when we send our crews.
So we have various milestones throughout their contract
that enable us to be able to measure their performance. We also
have recently made contract modifications that allow us to
incentivize them to meet those milestones on the schedule that
we need in order for us to support the launch date of the crew
in September 2026.
I will note that we do parallel processing of a lot of our
missions, so it's not like we have just one year between
Artemis II and Artemis III to get everything accomplished. We
are right now working on the hardware for Artemis III, and in
particular, I will note things like the European Service Module
will be shipping here in the spring to the Kennedy Space Center
for processing and to complete assembly of the Orion
spacecraft. So I fully expect that before we ever launch
Artemis II, Artemis III vehicle processing will be far enough
along that we'll be able to take advantage of the one year
between the two missions to be able to fully be ready for the
Artemis III mission in September of '26.
I will also note that if you recall the press conference
that we did just last week when we announced the slip to those
launch dates, we had our 11 industry partners online with us
for that, and all of them has signed up for the launch date of
Artemis III that we are currently showing.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you. And before I yield to the
Ranking Member, I would note that I've had several
conversations with the Administrator, and he has a great deal
of confidence in you. I just want to pass that along.
Ms. Koerner. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. And with that, I yield back and turn to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Sorensen, for five minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Koerner, we have heard from GAO and the NASA IG about
the importance of cost transparency for Artemis. Artemis is not
just one system, one mission, or even one capability. It's a
set of increasingly complex missions and activities. NASA now
has successfully completed Artemis I. Could you explain how
NASA is documenting the lessons that we have learned in Artemis
I such that we are applying those lessons to Artemis II and
III?
Ms. Koerner. Certainly. So we did a very extensive lessons-
learned process coming out of Artemis I that enabled us to at
every level within the organization and within the hardware
production, whether it's at the contractor level or NASA doing
integration and analysis, to be able to factor that into the
Artemis II learning, as well as future missions.
As I indicated previously, we have--we're--we have a lot of
missions in flow and in development simultaneously. What that
does is it enables us to--when we learn a lesson on Artemis I,
we can flow that into all of the development that we have
currently ongoing. It also allows us if, for example, we've
already built some equipment for Artemis II, we already have
Artemis III at nearly the right level in its production to be
able to make modifications to that hardware and then bring it
forward to incorporate it into Artemis II, just as an example.
So having the rich, I'll say, production cadence that we have
established with our Artemis missions and our hardware has
enabled us to be able to incorporate all of those lessons
learned.
I will also note to the comment about the cost and cost
transparency, one of the challenges that we face in answering a
per-mission cost is our contracts are set up to do bulk buys.
In other words, we get--if I go buy three of something, I can
get it less expensive than if I buy one of something three
times. So when we have--establish our contracts and we purchase
some of our equipment, those bulk buys give us cost savings.
But what those do is it lumps costs together in by program and
by purchases. It doesn't allow us--we don't, for example, get
appropriations for Artemis missions. I don't get an Artemis I
appropriation and an Artemis II appropriation. I get one for
SpaceX--excuse me, for HLS, for Orion, for the Space Launch
System.
So aggregating those costs where we'd make bulk buys and we
make purchases based on different contract mechanisms makes it
very challenging for us to put together a per-mission cost. But
we are very transparent in the cost numbers that we have with
the contract structures that we have in place and with the way
that we are appropriated.
Mr. Sorensen. So you would say that it is an investment--
Artemis I is an investment in II, and then II is an
investment----
Ms. Koerner. All of these missions build on each other,
yes, sir.
Mr. Sorensen. Great. You know, humans landed on the lunar
surface in 1969. In the year 2024, we still use some of the
same technology that was developed, you know, some 55 years
ago. And I like to say that we wouldn't have computers in our
pockets if we didn't have that investment. So, Ms. Koerner,
could you speak to what returning to the Moon and eventually
going to Mars will mean for the science and technology of
tomorrow?
Ms. Koerner. Yeah, if you'll permit me an analogy, so I was
here, by the way, and watched Apollo 11 astronauts walk on the
Moon, so I remember that. And I remember the inspiration that
that was to me and to those from my generation. The analogy
that I'll use for you is, right, a car today and a car from the
early 1900's look pretty similar in some regards. They have a
steering wheel, they have wheels, they transport people, any
number of people depending on the design. But when you look
inside the engine, they're very different. They're very
different machines.
The technology that we're going to the Moon with this time
is very different. And the technologies that we're developing
are actually developing entire industries to support those
technologies, industries, craft trades, that things of that
nature that are helping the economic engine of the United
States, as well as our partnering countries.
Mr. Sorensen. I lived in east Texas, and I remember
everything about that Saturday morning when Space Shuttle
Columbia disintegrated. I still feel it to this day. Next week,
we will recognize NASA's Day of Remembrance to honor the heroes
that made that ultimate sacrifice to advance our Nation's
spaceflight and exploration programs.
I know my time is waning. How do we plan to communicate the
upcoming risk as we continue to go farther? Would anyone like
to answer that?
Ms. Koerner. I would like to at least start out by doing
that. So many of us lived through the tragedy of Columbia, and
many of us witnessed the tragedy of Challenger as well. And
those of us who are still within the agency take those lessons
very seriously, and we make sure that when we have a day of
remembrance, we remember not only the tremendous lives that
these people lived and the sacrifices that they made, but we
remember why we do what we do and why we are so focused on risk
and on safety, which is the reason--for example, we did not
hesitate to adjust the launch date for Artemis II when it
became evident that safety was of utmost importance with the
challenges we were facing.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Posey, for five minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
The Chinese Communist Party threatens almost every
component of our government and the lives of Americans
obviously. And, Ms. Koerner, your written testimony, you didn't
mention China at all. Mr. Russell, you mentioned diversity, but
you didn't mention China. Mr. Scott didn't mentioned China. Dr.
Griffin, your testimony does mention our adversary China, and I
wonder if you expound upon why you went into such detail, for
the clarification of others?
Dr. Griffin. In my judgment, China--and I don't want to say
China. I want to say the Chinese Communist Party, fully
understands and frequently says that their goal is to be the
world's great power. They regard the Western democracies as
decadent and outmoded and ineffective and inefficient. China's
President--he has other titles--Xi bullies neighboring
countries, presumes to take control of international waterways,
supervises a military establishment that has recently sunk
other people's ships fishing in their own waters. Everything
about the behavior of the Chinese Communist Party suggests that
they are their adversary, and they say so.
To allow a situation to develop where the human frontier is
populated by our adversary and we are not there should be
unacceptable to this Nation and to our Western and Asian
partners. It should be unacceptable. We are not on a path to
recognize that. The rest of the world looks and will always
look to the nations that occupy the frontier and exploit the
frontier and extend the frontier as leaders of the world. I
believe that's the position that the United States should
occupy in preference to our adversaries. Thank you.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Dr. Griffin. And you mentioned
frontier. Add to that ultimate military high ground. Whoever
controls space will control the destiny of this Earth.
Dr. Griffin. As you know, I've spent considerable time in
the national security side of our space programs as well, and I
really consider them to be one program. But I came here today
to discuss civil space, sir, and----
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Dr. Griffin [continuing]. We can discuss military space at
another occasion.
Mr. Posey. How should America make it our goal to ensure
that we emerge as first among equals when it comes to setting
standards? We've had a couple of hearings on that.
Dr. Griffin. Well, the standards are set by the people who
show up. They're not set by the people who watch what happens
with others. So by returning to the Moon in a focused and
expeditious manner, which we are not today, we will inevitably
bring along--we will be required to bring along communications
and navigation and other infrastructure systems, which we
expect others will use as well.
By that mechanism, we will have established the standards,
just as we did with the ICAO (International Civil Aviation
Organization) starting at the end of World War II for global
air transport. But again, those are facts on the ground that
are created by the people who are on the frontier first. They
are not created by the people who follow.
Mr. Posey. Now Thank you, Doctor.
Now, Ms. Koerner, what specific steps are being taken to
address what some consider to be the outdated gas and
propellant pipelines and other ground systems at Kennedy Space
Center to ensure that we have the capacity to support our
booming commercial space sector?
Ms. Koerner. So the infrastructure at the Kennedy Space
Center, as well as at all of our centers, is very much aging,
and we are aware of that within the agency. I will tell you
from an Artemis perspective, we are investing heavily in the
capabilities that we need to support the Artemis mission. Last
year, we had over 70 launches from the Florida Space Coast.
It's an exciting time for all of us in the space industry. Most
of those were on the cape side, but we also had a number of
them from our side on the--at the Kennedy Space Center.
And in order--excuse me. In order to support those, we have
poured heavily, as I said, into the infrastructure. But we also
recognize that there's still more that is needed there. Many of
the launches from that area are commercial in nature, and we
have use agreements with our commercial and industry partners
that allow them to actually invest in the infrastructure as
well. We know as an agency that our infrastructure is older
than I am in some cases. And our NASA leadership has
established what's called NASA 2040, which is an internal
effort to look at all of the agency's infrastructure and
mission support functions to be able to set us up properly for
what the agency's mission is going to be in the 2040 timeframe.
Infrastructure like that at the Kennedy Space Center, which is
critically important to us in Artemis, is part of that
discussion.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back with a
request that we also have a weather modification technology
hearing again. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. Duly noted. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of the Full
Committee for five minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Now, as I understand it, our effort to go to the Moon is
going to rely on at least five major, distinct, multibillion
dollar development programs that have to sync up perfectly. The
SLS rocket, the Orion crew vehicle, the Exploration Ground
System, the Human Landing System, as well as the spacesuit. I
am--they're all going to be procured under different
acquisition mechanisms. I particularly would like to know about
the cryogenic fluid management and other new technologies. What
happens if these five major programs don't sync up or if one
gets slowed down? How do we proceed? Can you address that, Ms.
Koerner?
Ms. Koerner. Certainly. Thank you for the question. So we
established the Moon to Mars program office just last year,
pursuant to the NASA Authorization Act, to do just what you're
talking about, to integrate all of those programs that are
essential for Artemis and ensure that we are properly level-
loading the risk between those programs so that they all
converge together for a mission. We know that it's going to be
challenging and difficult for us to--especially as we get into
later missions to get all of those missions to align to the
same timeframe. And so we have put our contracts in place to
continue to develop hardware for the subsequent missions so
that we can be ready to execute a mission as soon as all the
elements are available.
We also recognize that there might be some development and
technology challenges that come along the way, and so we are--
have a very flexible and adaptable mission structure that
allows us to be able to make updates to our mission profiles if
we need to in the event that one element in the Artemis
program's cadre does not make it in time for the original
planned mission.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, just following up, if one of these
elements is delayed, what happens to the whole program?
Ms. Koerner. So we would--depending on how long the delay
is, depending on the reason for the delay, we would potentially
execute a slightly modified version of that mission. And I
mention that only because we have set in place for our agency a
process that allows us to keep our eye on the exploration
objectives, and all of our missions contribute to those
exploration objectives. So we can modify the mission content to
adjust to still accomplish those objectives. Unlike, for
example, when we flew space shuttle missions, each mission was
very independent and different. With Artemis, we're building a
capability, not just a launch capability, but a capability in
cislunar orbit, capability on the surface of the Moon over
time. And as any large-scale development activity knows, when
you do that you can make adjustments for when something gets
delivered late or something shows up differently, you focus
then on another aspect or another objective that you're trying
to achieve.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me ask this. The IG issued a report in
October of last year about the supply chain monitoring. What
has NASA done to adopt those recommendations relative to the
Artemis supply chain?
Ms. Koerner. So we certainly do appreciate our governing
organizations that provide us feedback and contribute to the
benefit of the program. We have looked at our supply chain and
supply chain management and looked at how we can better manage
that, and I'll speak again to what I mentioned previously. The
Moon to Mars program office, that office was deliberately
established so that we can connect all of the what were
previously disparate programs and look across the board and
address some of these supply chain issues.
Ms. Lofgren. I want to say I also saw the landing on the
Moon. It was a stunning thing. But I'll confess at the time, I
thought, how is this helping us here on Earth? Now, I listened
closely to Dr. Griffin's assessment of the Chinese. I
completely agree with him. I do think it's important to outline
for the American public why this matters to them. And I'm
wondering, Ms. Koerner, if you could outline efforts that NASA
is making to explain why this matters to America. And, by the
way, I concur in the Chairman's comment that the Administrator
has huge confidence in you, so if you could answer that.
Ms. Koerner. Thank you. That's a little bit embarrassing,
I'll admit. But I'll say one of the efforts that we have done
within our agency within the last couple of years really focus
on the why, the why of exploration. And we identified three
pillars associated with that why: science, national posture,
and inspiration. Science, I think, is obvious. It's the engine
that generates economic benefit wherever it goes, in addition
to inspiring the next generation of STEM, as well as teachers
and those of us who look to the scientific discovery with
wonder and decide that is something I want to learn more about
and want to pursue.
Additionally, national posture, I think we've spoken to
that a little bit already with Dr. Griffin's testimony. But
I'll state we believe that--and our Administrator spoke about
it just last week--that we will be on the surface of the Moon
before China is. And it's our intent for that to happen. Now
there are other government agencies that can provide a much
more detailed briefing that we can do in a different
environment than here that could give you more insight and
information about China's progress and about our progress along
those lines.
Let's see. I mentioned the--two of the three pillars. The
third one, inspiration, again, you know, it's what inspired me
to pursue a STEM career. It's what inspired many people in my
generation and really developed that next generation that we're
starting to see. And we hope to do that inspiration not just
here in the United States, but around the world.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, I thank you very much. Just by the way
before I yield back, we had an astronaut come and meet with
students in Hollister, California, just a few days ago,
inspiring those young people. It's very important.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
And before I turn to my next colleague for questions, I
would note since it's true confession time, yes, I was nine
years old that summer, too. But in my part of rural Oklahoma,
we had one television station. We only had AM radio and this
strange concept called party lines for a phone system.
Ms. Koerner. I remember those.
Chairman Lucas. You know exactly how many relatives you
have based on what you've said on the phone.
That said, I turn to the gentleman Mr. McCormick for five
minutes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The Artemis mission is not only about returning humans to
the Moon, but about advancing technology, fostering
international cooperation, stimulating the economy, inspiring
the public, and securing the United States' position as leaders
in space exploration.
Similarly, in the 1960's, we were again faced with the
space race only this time with the Chinese, not just the
Russians. The United States must be a leader in space, and we
must lead by setting the standards we know will continue the
incredible innovation and advancement we have fostered here. I
have a keen understanding of the important implications of the
Artemis program for our economy, national security, and
advancement of technology, but do think we need to evaluate the
real challenges of NASA we are facing to achieve their goal in
a timely and cost-effective manner.
I'm going to take a little tack away from our typical
questioning and get into a little bit of medicine and human
physiology in space as a physician. Recently, the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and Walter Reed Army
Institute of Research have come together to look at a promising
technology known as mitochondrial organelle transplantation to
address the mitochondria dysfunction in the neurodegenerative
diseases we've seen in human beings but also in astronauts for
some reason. We don't even know why. Is NASA aware of the work
that the VA--and this is an obscure question, so I understand
I'm probably talking outside the normal purview. But is NASA
aware of this study between the VA and Walter Reed addressing
mitochondrial dysfunction? And would they be willing to work
toward advancing technology to help these astronauts protect
their energy cells if you will?
Ms. Koerner. So you may or may not know this about me, but
one of the interesting career path--parts of my career path is
that I spent five years running the Human Health and
Performance Directorate at the Johnson Space Center in Houston,
Texas. As an engineer running a health and medical
organization, I found it very fascinating, and I learned a lot
of things about human physiology and how very little we
actually understand about the--how the human system responds in
a microgravity environment. And we, today, do not understand
how the human system would respond in microgravity followed by
partial gravity back to microgravity. The longest duration crew
member that we have just recently returned last year, and he
only spent 371 days in space. When we go to Mars, we're going
to have to spend close to 1,000 days in space.
So I recognize that the human as a system is something that
we need to investigate and explore further. I also know that we
have done a number of studies and a number of investigations
with the team that we have at the Johnson Space Center on the
exact problem that you indicated. I'm not even going to try to
spell it or say it as you so eloquently did because I am not a
physician. But I will say that we have made great strides in
understanding not only what happens to the astronauts, but what
happens to the astronauts and how that can then apply to
similar, I'll say, subjects on the ground. And that
transferring of that technology and that information has made
great strides in a number of medical fields. You can find
equipment that we use to--for treating astronauts in an
emergency room anywhere in the United States and around the
world.
So we do actually partner with them and with others. And I
would welcome further conversation on that and putting you in
touch with some of the folks that we have that do that work on
a regular basis.
Mr. McCormick. I think that is amazing. As matter of fact,
if you want to consider somebody who's a pilot and a physician
and maybe a Congressman going on one of those missions, just
let me know.
Ms. Koerner. I'll keep that in mind. Thank you.
Mr. McCormick. Dr. Griffin, it's no secret that China has a
goal to surpass the United States by 2045. As global leaders in
space, we can't allow this to happen. I think the leading edge
that we have in space technology will protect the United States
in not just the economy, but technologies that can benefit
humankind like we just discussed.
As the United States works to recruit additional
international partners, how can we in the government continue
to promote its vision in space diplomacy over China's? In other
words, you can see countries like India putting a vehicle on
the dark side of the Moon for about $75 million. Now, granted,
it's not manned, so it does cut some corners and they maybe
don't have the same bureaucracy requirements, but how can we
partner with other countries to make this a more efficient
process?
Dr. Griffin. The way we effectively partner with other
countries is to establish that we are going to do great things
and that there is room for everybody of like mind to join us.
We can't partner with people with an empty bag, OK? We have to
be clearly seen to be doing things in an efficient,
expeditious, focused, determined way. And when that happens,
partners will appear.
Mr. McCormick. Great, thanks. And I'll just yield with the
statement that this investment is an investment in the future
and has great economic and technological benefit to us as we
continue to invest in Artemis. Thank you. I yield.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back. I recognize my
colleague, Ms. Caraveo, for five minutes.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Chair Lucas and Ranking Member
Sorensen, for holding this hearing, and thank you to the
witnesses for joining us today.
If there's one State that perhaps unexpectedly is
synonymous with the Artemis mission, it's my home State of
Colorado. Excuse me. From navigation tools associated with the
mission to the Orion capsule itself, Colorado's advanced
aerospace infrastructure has been pivotal in the development of
these missions. I'm also proud to say that I represent many of
the workers and contractors who have made Artemis possible, and
I'm excited to continue my support for these missions.
However, I think we have heard a lot of concerns here about
the timeline for the Artemis missions. And I think something
that we've kind of been beating around the bush about is
overall funding for NASA and whether you have the money to
carry these missions out.
So, Associate Administrator Koerner, in particular, when we
hear today about the pressures that you have to cut costs, to
maintain crew safety, to keep things on time, but also, when we
have a Congress that has been unable to pass a budget overall,
what are the implications for Artemis if NASA is appropriated
with flat budgets beyond not just 2024, but potentially the
rest of the decade?
Ms. Koerner. So as I mentioned earlier, we are in
production on not only Artemis II, but Artemis III, Artemis IV,
Artemis V. We have hardware and builds for all of those
missions at various stages, right? So consistency and budget
helps us be able to keep the cadence of those missions to where
we can keep our team fresh and keep our team active and have
them be able to actually produce the hardware in a timely
fashion.
We have been challenged by Congress to have an annual
cadence of our missions, and if we get stuck in either a
flatline or a reduced budget kind of environment, what that
means is we will prioritize the near-term missions. Artemis II
and Artemis III will be prioritized. And those other missions
in the interval between those other missions will continue to
push out to the right. It would be my hope that we wouldn't be
faced with that kind of a situation, but that's how I would
envision that playing out.
I would add, though, resources is more than just budget in
my mind. Time is also a resource, but also personnel is a
resource. And one of the benefits of flying these Artemis
missions is we inspire the next generation of engineers, of
technicians, of welders, of people that can actually do the
work, which there's a tremendous shortage of skilled labor in
some areas that it's--I'm sure you know, if you've talked to
your--for example, some of the contractors that are in your
home State, they'll tell you it's sometimes challenging to find
the right skill level for building and doing the things that
we're trying to do with Artemis. So consistency both in in
budget, but also the resources and the inspiration that we can
provide to inspire that next individual who can help us build
the generation that we're looking forward to building.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you so much. Those are very good points.
And I think that consistency and budget probably has a direct
implication on people being willing to take these jobs. So, Dr.
Griffin, in that same kind of vein in your experience, what can
the impact of flat budgets and budgetary uncertainty for short-
term CRs (continuing resolutions) and shutdown threats, which
we've had many of this session, have on the NASA contractor
workforce and its ability to meet NASA's needs.
Dr. Griffin. Sorry. In my experience in both DOD and NASA,
multiple occasions over the years, it's not so much a flat
budget that is a problem. Actually, most of the time I would
welcome a flat budget if I knew I was going to have it. It's--
it needs to be at an appropriate level to accomplish the task
at hand. But flatness in itself is not the issue.
The issue is that when we do not have an appropriation on
time, year after year, we force our--the government actually
does very little work itself. It may plan and may integrate
work, but the work is done by American industry and in some
cases our partner industries. And when we cannot--when we stop
and start that funding by delaying our--or even skipping our
appropriations cycles, as we did in 2008, that is a huge
problem.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you very much. I yield back the
remainder of my time.
Chairman Lucas. The Chair recognizes the gentleman from
California, Mr. Issa, for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Over a decade ago, almost two decades ago now, Elon Musk
began telling us here on the Capitol and around the country,
anywhere someone would listen, that the United States was
getting ripped off, that in fact it shouldn't cost more and
take longer to take the same basic rocket and drive the same
number of pounds into space. Until he got through the almost
infinite blockade by the established launch people, nothing
happened. Today, we are launching and, in theory, we're
launching for less.
But I guess my question is whatever happened to fixed,
firm, and fair? Whatever happened to that? I think the question
primarily for the IG is, is there any reason that these
contracts particularly to go to the Moon and circle it weren't
done on a tell us what it'll cost half a century after you
already did it?
Mr. Scott. Thank you Mr. Issa. As we've previously
reported, you know, NASA has been challenged to establish
credible costs and schedule estimates. While certainly
appropriate----
Mr. Issa. And they haven't met that challenge. Is that more
or less correct?
Mr. Scott. Today in the way that we would say is most
transparent, that is correct. I think while it's certainly
appropriate to have commercial partners involved in the launch
activities, a key challenge that we continue to remind the
agency it's important to hold them accountable for delivering
the promised goods and services at the promised price. You
know, we've previously reported that, at times, even though
contractors were behind schedule and over cost, NASA was still
paying them overly generous performance awards. And so I think,
again, this is less about like the ``who'' and more about just
making sure that you hold them accountable for delivering at
the price they promised.
Mr. Issa. Well, a follow up to that, when you've got--I
mean, because you're in the business of figuring out the why.
Is it because the contractors are not living up to their
original promise, perhaps never intended to? Or is a portion of
the blame the shifting sands of NASA starting a project and
then endlessly changing it even when it's to return to do what
you did half a century ago?
Mr. Scott. I mean, our work has identified various factors
contributing to some of these challenges. You know, one is
workforce challenges. It's harder--you know, while you can set
a requirement, if you don't have the workforce available at the
time to actually execute it, that's challenging.
Mr. Issa. But----
Mr. Scott. Also, NASA's changing requires----
Mr. Issa. But workforce is a great question. If I'm any of
these contractors, either the historic incumbents or the newer
combinations, isn't that in the bid?
Mr. Scott. There's always optimism that you'll be able to
get the workforce to complete the work, right? Some of these
contractors are actually competing for the same workers, for
example. And again, whether it's workforce issues, whether it's
changing requirements on NASA's part, all of those add into
these eventual cost overruns that NASA experiences on some of
these contracts. Again, this is about accountability for
holding the vendors responsible for what they're promising.
Mr. Issa. OK. Well, I'm going to go back again. When you
look at the current cost overruns and time delays, can you pull
your slide rule out and figure out why? Or do we have to rely
on computers now that cost more and take longer? Sorry, but I
can't resist the fact that we truly did go to the Moon with
slide rules, and we now seem to be--take longer with more
indecision when we're simply retracing the steps. Perhaps it's
because we're not measuring with a slide rule.
Mr. Scott. Our work previously talked about some of the
challenges NASA faced with project management. Part of it was
overoptimism, right? NASA can get things done. Sometimes that
confidence in getting things done so overrules what you know
it's going to take to actually get it done. Part of it is--and
Cathy spoke to this earlier--the unstable funding stream,
right, it's hard to plan in the long term if you're not sure
about your funding stream in the near term. And finally, sort
of making sure you continue to grow the workforce within NASA
and within the industry to continue to support the work you're
doing. So there are a number of challenges to NASA being able
to get these projects done on time and at the promised amount.
Mr. Issa. Well, if we assume for a moment that Congress
isn't going to change, we assume for a moment that the Moon
isn't moving differently than it did half a century ago, what
should we demand that NASA do in order to deliver the rest of
Artemis II and III on time and with no greater overruns than
we've already experienced? What would be the steps that
Congress would be required to take?
Mr. Scott. In my view, one would be locking the agency down
into making lifecycle cost and schedule commitments. We
understand that the world is complex, things will change, but
it's incredibly important for Congress to at least have an
initial idea of what it's going to cost and when NASA can get
it done.
Mr. Issa. I thank you. The questions could go on again and
again, but I probably really would have to bring a slide rule
if I were going to calculate all the overruns. So with that, I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. It would be fascinating watching you use a
slide ruler.
Mr. Issa. I've got a whole bunch in my collection if you
want me to bring it in.
Chairman Lucas. Not a doubt in my mind, not a doubt at all
in my mind.
The Chair now recognizes the--Congresswoman Lee for five
minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, for
holding this important meeting.
Serving in this office for over a year now has been a
unique experience learning more about the scientific
communities and the ways I can serve my constituents beyond the
personal passions that drove me to serve in western
Pennsylvania. Recent inclement weather across the country has
affected us all in one way or another, but space science
particularly through the use of satellites is crucial for
meteorologists like yourself, Mr. Sorensen, to make more
accurate and timely weather predictions, ultimately improving
our ability to respond to and mitigate the impact of various
weather events.
While we continue to race to the Moon and all the
discoveries that we may uncover there, I continue to look
toward the research and work of countless scientists here on
Earth and 1,000 miles above that will help innovate our
approach toward realizing things like cleaner air and water,
sustainable infrastructure, and more equitable transportation
in southwest PA and across the Nation.
Today, we've discussed what path forward entails and
returning men and hopefully landing our first woman on the
Moon. In this arena, just as in life, the concept of failure is
an essential step in the pathway to success. I'm proud to
represent Astrobotic in Pittsburgh, who, for the last 16 years,
has worked tirelessly to make returning Americans to the Moon
surface a reality. While last week's unfortunate anomaly with
the Peregrine lunar landing reaffirms the unforgiving nature of
the space environment. It also further highlights that
success--the success that we can achieve through the pursuit of
innovation and pushing boundaries. Between the lander's launch
and its expected reentry to Earth's atmosphere tomorrow, the
vehicle's flight has provided irreplaceable knowledge,
experience, and insight that will feed forward into making
Artemis and the U.S.'s return to the Moon a sustained success.
Onboard flight systems like avionics, propulsion
controllers, thermal control systems, and more have been tested
and qualified, creating new capability in the U.S. space
industrial base that could be utilized for other missions and
programs in the future. So I'd say now is not the time to
retreat. Our Nation has consistently, throughout its history,
built upon our ability to adapt and respond to failures, and we
must continue to support CLPS efforts so the Nation gets the
benefit of hard-earned lessons learned from the missions--that
mission and others like it.
Ms. Koerner, while setbacks are often inevitable in science
and in life, commercial space industry leaders like Astrobotic
find a measurable value and constancy of purpose and programs
critical to the Artemis mission. Why is it critical for the
Nation to keep supporting missions like those on Commercial
Lunar Payload Services (CLPS), despite the challenges?
Ms. Koerner. So part of our charter is also to develop an
economic engine that generates and stimulates activity in the
space sector. And so what we've been doing with the Commercial
Lunar Payload Services contract--and we call it CLPS. I think
you referred to it as C-L-P-S.
Ms. Lee. Oh, CLPS.
Ms. Koerner. CLPS----
Ms. Lee. I'll do that one next.
Ms. Koerner. CLPS is the way we refer to that--is one of
those opportunities to help spur on the development of new
space entrants. We know that there's a lot of space industry
and the big names that have been out there for years, and they
do contribute tremendously to the Artemis program. But we want
to also make the entrance bar lower so that we can more broadly
generate economic activity across the board. Plus, we find a
lot more innovation in some of these commercial providers.
It was disappointing that the CLPS provider had challenges
last week, but we did still get tremendous data. And we will
continue to get data from CLPS missions as we launch those as
precursors. It's really important for us to have robotic
precursor missions because that gives us data that helps inform
and enable, and it makes our mission safer. What we discovered
and what they learned very, very much so last week, but what we
have discovered over a number of tragedies is that space and
space exploration is unforgiving.
And what we are doing with Artemis is infinitely safer than
what we did in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo days. In just
recently talking to one of the first flight directors from that
era, he told me that he didn't realize until more recently just
how close they were to having a national tragedy during a
number of those Apollo missions. And that's because they were
just young, and they didn't understand what they didn't know.
We're a lot smarter now with the missions that we've flown and
with the sacrifices that we've made, and so every step that we
make with Artemis makes us safer as we explore.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. That's my time. So I will yield back
now instead of launching into another question, but I
appreciate you all for coming today and for sharing your
testimony.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
I would note to the witnesses that we're still 40 minutes
away from noon, and after consultation with the Ranking Member,
I believe we'll do another round, conscious of your time.
Associate Director, let's go back for a moment to that
measure contractor performance discussion. You talked about the
incentives if contractors produce ahead of schedule, on time,
and I think the carrot is always very important. Let's discuss
for just a moment the stick. What are the consequences for
contractors if they don't meet the milestones by the assigned
deadline?
Ms. Koerner. So again, it depends on the type of contract,
right, that we have. We have performance awards that we can
decrement associated with not meeting milestones. For firm
fixed price contracts, it depends again on the way the
contract's written. They have to perform, and in some cases we
have penalties if they perform--they have to reimburse the U.S.
Government for the cost. And by reimburse, I say it basically
decrements the payment that they would get in that milestone
payment. So they may not, for example, get all of a milestone
payment if they don't meet in a timely fashion.
So again, it depends on the contract mechanism what
penalties that we can put in place, but we also have ways that
we can reflect the contractor performance in a more broad scale
to the rest of the community, so it does affect their ultimate
bottom line.
Chairman Lucas. So speaking of the milestones, for
instance, have any of the milestones been divided up into
interim milestones, or have interim milestones been created to
allow for earlier payments? I ask because this data would be
helpful in providing insight into program progress.
Ms. Koerner. So I'm not entirely sure I understand the
question. We do break certain milestones up and, for example--
and I can speak to the experience I had managing the Commercial
Resupply Services contract for the International Space Station
years ago. If we got to a milestone, and we felt like the
contractor didn't do all the things or completely meet the
milestone in a timely fashion, we would withhold a certain
amount of that award. That's what I mean by decrement. So
instead of them getting X, they would get X minus a certain
amount. And we did that based, again, on the value judgment for
what that milestone was worth. And then they had an opportunity
in some cases--not in all. Some cases, that was just money that
came back to the program. But in some cases, we would defer the
payment until they accomplished it in the manner in which we
needed. And there were plenty of opportunities that we got from
them. And I'll say in-kind work and additional work and benefit
to the U.S. Government that was performed as a result of them,
for example, being late on some of those milestones.
Chairman Lucas. Because I think sometimes we get questions
from appropriators and other oversight entities that perhaps
the milestones should be--of course, should be designed to
accomplish the work in an efficient and effective fashion and
accelerate if helpful, but that the milestones not be designed
just to help the contractor move along----
Ms. Koerner. No, they----
Chairman Lucas [continuing]. Through the process.
Ms. Koerner. They certainly are designed, I'd say,
mutually. So when--a lot of times when we award these,
especially the firm fixed price contracts, the contractor will
propose to the U.S. Government what they would like to see in
the milestones. And as part of the negotiation before we even
award that contract, we will adjust those milestones, but the
values, but the timing of them also in order to make sure that
it meets the timeline that we need for whatever it is that that
contractor is providing.
Chairman Lucas. Speaking of the international element of
all these efforts, again to you, Associate Director, NASA
recently announced a partnership with the UAE on Gateway under
which the Mohammed bin Rashid Space Center would provide
Gateway's crew and science airlock module, as well as a UAE
astronaut to fly to the lunar space station on a future Artemis
flight. How will NASA and UAE share costs related to this
partnership?
Ms. Koerner. So I don't know that we--I would say we share
costs, right? So when we negotiate with an international
partner for a contribution to Artemis or to any activity, there
is a--I'll say a value that we assess, that we, the U.S.
Government, assess on the--on what they are contributing, and
then in kind we return a value to them. So for example, the one
that you mentioned there, the UAE will be providing the
airlock, and in exchange, we, NASA, are going to be training a
crew member and launching a crew member and giving that country
an opportunity to have a crew member on the Gateway space
station. So it's more of a value-to-value contribution as
opposed to a cost.
Chairman Lucas. By the way, is the UAE providing airlock on
the Gateway a critical path, an important part----
Ms. Koerner. Absolutely----
Chairman Lucas [continuing]. Of the concept?
Ms. Koerner. It absolutely is critical. So it enables us to
have access both internal as well as now external access to
scientific payloads that we can put on the exterior of Gateway
and enables us to be able to do maintenance on the Gateway.
Having an airlock provides more flexibility for how we use the
Gateway space station in cislunar orbit for future missions. I
spoke to it earlier when I talked about the flexibility in our
missions. Having different elements of the Artemis program
enables us to have that mission flexibility.
Chairman Lucas. Ranking Member, humor me for one more
question. The UAE is of course an example of international
partnership. They have resources with which to work, which is
critically important. But I ask this question in the context of
the technology. They also have a history of partnering with
China in lunar efforts. For instance, the same entity has an
agreement to include a rover on the Chinese mission to the
lunar south pole. I guess my question is how--when we are
partnering with people who are partnering with others, how do
we ensure that the technology shared through a partnership
doesn't, shall we say, inadvertently contribute to someone
else's space capacities?
Ms. Koerner. So we have a fairly rigorous export control
process that monitors and manages our interactions with our
international partners at every level to ensure that exactly
what you just said does not happen.
Chairman Lucas. My time has expired.
I recognize gentleman Mr. Sorensen for five more minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. In my opening statements, I had mentioned how
important it was to bring a NASA astronaut to my district. Dr.
Kate Rubins has been back and forth to the International Space
Station several times. And one of the simple problems that she
discussed with me and with the students in my district as we
were going to schools was that spacesuits were designed for
men. They weren't designed for women. And that was something
that she had to deal with in real time.
And so that brings me to another line of questioning for
Mr. Russell. GAO's recent report on Artemis programs noted
challenges with developing and testing the exploration
spacesuit. Can you discuss these challenges and what measures
can NASA take to help address such challenges, including issues
that we have with the supply chain?
Mr. Russell. Certainly. Thank you for the question. I think
the first challenge to note was, originally, NASA designed the
spacesuit in-house, and then made the decision to contract that
out, which is happening now. As we took a look at some of the
current challenges, certainly one has to do with sufficient
life support. You need to have backup as you're doing lunar
operations, have confidence that the system can operate and
sustain the astronaut's life as they go through the mission. So
there are some technologies that need to be matured there, some
refinements to the requirements that the contractor is working
on. That's some of the key things that we pointed to in our
recent report.
Mr. Sorensen. Ms. Koerner, I'd like to go a little bit more
in depth on that. Could you talk about the significant work
that is needed to mature technologies for the exploration
spacesuit life support systems, as Mr. Russell was talking
about. Are the spacesuits on the critical path for Artemis III?
Does NASA have the roadmap for how spacesuit life support
systems will be matured and then maintained?
Ms. Koerner. So, as was noted, NASA designed the spacesuit
and gave this--made that design available to U.S. industry to
be able to produce. And one of our spacesuit providers is using
that design. We have a long history of doing space walks and
developing spacesuits but also managing spacesuits and managing
those systems. I think it's obvious, but I just want to make
sure it's very--I state it very clearly. A spacesuit is like a
personal spacecraft. And it's very complex. It has all of this
same kinds of systems that a spacecraft would have but in a
much smaller environment. And it has to be, as you noted,
adaptable for both male and female of various sizes and shapes.
So the design and the development of the hardware for that
is something that while NASA has experience on, we're trying to
foster that experience in our commercial industry partners and
are helping them. One of the ways we do that is through
government task agreements, and we are enabling their
development and helping them with some of that testing through
those government task agreements. So it really is a partnership
activity. Even though it is a service contract and they are
doing the development of the exploration suit, NASA is standing
side by side with them and enabling that to happen.
Mr. Sorensen. Do you--and I'll open this to anyone who
wants to answer. Are there other opportunities for public-
private partnership that we haven't yet--done yet, for
instance, with spacesuits, to open that up to companies to be
able to come up with a technology to learn? Are there other
ways as we look forward to Artemis II and Artemis III that we
can look forward to that?
Ms. Koerner. So I'll offer that there's plenty of
opportunity, I would say, for partnerships and for on-ramping
new technologies, not just in spacesuits, but in every aspect
of what we're doing with Artemis. One of the things that we've
done over the last couple of years is we established a process
for our architecture, which is the entirety of our plan for
exploration that does an annual review where our entire
organization, all of NASA, all of our mission directorates, all
of our technical authorities, all of our centers all get to
weigh in on the path that NASA is moving forward on. And we get
to share the technologies that are developed in industry and
onramp those. We share the output from that review with
industry, and we have a constant and regular dialog with
industry, with our international partners, with academia, to do
just that, to identify opportunities for partnerships, but also
to make sure that what we're doing with our exploration
activities aligns with the direction that our stakeholders want
us to go.
Mr. Sorensen. Great. So we're on the right path for
Artemis----
Ms. Koerner. I believe we are.
Dr. Griffin. I would----
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you.
Dr. Griffin. If I might add?
Mr. Sorensen. Yes, sir.
Dr. Griffin. I would add that if the United States and its
international partners have a consistent program to return to
the Moon and stay, that there are an enormous number of
infrastructure development opportunities available in which
commercial industry can invest because they know that there
will be a return. So I mentioned communications, navigation
functions earlier, command and data handling, data storage. The
CLPS program was brought up. There will be a need in supplying
a human lunar base for all types of cargo ranging from small,
high-value items to bulk cargo that industry could supply if
they know that there is going to be a consistent market for
such.
Mr. Sorensen. And I think that's an important part is we're
not just going back to the Moon. We're going back to the Moon
to stay on the Moon.
Mr. Russell. I would hope so, although I've been trying for
over 30 years to promote such an activity and have so far
failed, so I possibly should retire from the field.
Mr. Sorensen. No, don't do that. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back. You never give
up. Speaking of never giving up, I recognize the gentleman from
California for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Associate Director, you talked about reducing the mortality
or potential mortality? We've lost 15 astronauts over the
years. I guess my question is, what statistic or fact would
show that we've become safer over time in space?
Ms. Koerner. So I don't know that I can point to a single
statistic, but what I will tell you is that we have more
redundancy in our systems. We have more reliability in our
systems. We have more capability in our systems. And I think
that alone gives us a greater confidence that even though we're
doing something that is extremely, as I said earlier,
unforgiving, that we have more safeguards and safety in the
system.
Mr. Issa. I understand, but today, we're talking--we're
looking at significant delays in doing something that we did
before. Nobody died going to the Moon and back. As a matter of
fact, the program that killed most of our astronauts was the
cost-saving, redundant-use, new and improved shuttle.
Ultimately, that program killed the majority of all astronauts
that ever died. The early exploration had its death, including
three on the ground. We learned from that, don't sit in a bag
of oxygen on the ground, not able to get off the ship quickly.
So there have been lessons. But I'm--you know, I've
listened for quite a while to this discussion about the
spacesuit and, you know, what we're going to do and the
discussion as though that women were new to space. I'm sorry,
but we've had women in space for longer than some Members of
Congress have lived now. So I--I'll ask again. We're looking at
overruns and delays.
And so I think I'll go to Mr. Russell. When they're putting
that figure out there--we've had--2.9 percent of all those who
have gone to space have died, so it's not an insignificant
number. But if you take away two events of a single program
type, you suddenly go from nearly 700 flights and 19 dead to
almost nobody in the rest of those flights.
So when we're looking at the cost and delivery, are we in
fact looking at Artemis--looking for new solutions to things
which have already been solved? You know, I'm from the
generation of the joke about the difference between our
inverted writing instrument and the Russians, OK? And for those
who haven't seen it, exactly, we came up with the space pen, it
cost millions. They came up with a pencil. And for redundancy,
they had a second one.
So again, as we're looking at firm fixed pricing and
predictability of time, should we in fact push NASA to
accomplish the mission with the highest level of reuse of
technology, or should we allow them to continue to say, but
we're exploring all kinds of new technology, which inherently
brings in--at least in my examination, it brings in risk
assessment of new technology? One only needs to look at the
Boeing MAX and ask the question, is there anything that new
about a 737 going 34,000 feet? No. But somehow, every change is
a variable.
So if we're looking to deliver on time, on budget, are we
doing all the right things, or are we doing all the things that
have led us to this inevitable delay and cost overrun?
Mr. Russell. Great question. I think that's the--as I see
it, NASA is at an inflection point right now because they are
about to set the agency baseline commitments for a number of
these efforts. And you referred to the firm fixed price
contracts and things. And once you settle on a number that is
great, you can hold the contractor to that price, that
deliverable, but it's up to the government to have stable
requirements, right? When you change those requirements, then
that changes the deal that you have with the contractor that
could cost additional funds.
So right now, what we expect to see is really----
Mr. Issa. Contract changes are where all the profit is,
isn't it?
Mr. Russell. Right, that equals dollars. If it's a cost-
plus contract, you know, if there's a delay, you're paying the
contractors cost plus whatever fee goes along with that.
So I think as we look to these new efforts, how those
technical and cost baselines are set and the realism of those
are going to be very important. And we'll see in the coming 12
to 18 months whether the projects can adhere to those
baselines, meet the technical challenges. There's going to be
some margin for cost and schedule reserves to deal with issues,
but the fidelity and the realism of those baselines will be
extremely important for what are some new and novel
technologies. A lot of these systems, you know, it's not just a
rocket, it has a payload. That's never been done before.
There's a lot of firsts. The way that the HLS system will work
with, you know, essentially a gas station in space that will,
you know, fill up the lander and help accomplish the mission,
all of those are new and novel things. So capturing that
technical risk, putting it in a realistic baseline, I think,
will be essential.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
Seeing no additional questions, I want to thank the
witnesses for their valuable testimony and the Members for your
questions. We will have more of these hearings and expect, with
a different attitude from Mother Nature, a really big crowd.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and written questions from the Members. This hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:38 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
