- AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2024 PROPOSED BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2024
PROPOSED BUDGET REQUEST
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

APRIL 27, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-10
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

51-885PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                     Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           PAUL TONKO, New York
TOM KEAN, New Jersey
VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

April 27, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Witnesses:

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Discussion.......................................................    24

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.......................................    60

AN OVERVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2024
PROPOSED BUDGET REQUEST
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 27, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:02 p.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess of the
Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing, which is entitled ``An Overview
of the Budget Proposal for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) for Fiscal Year 2024.'' I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good afternoon. I want to welcome everyone to today's
hearing to review the Administration's proposed budget request
for NASA for Fiscal Year 2024. And I'd like to thank you for
joining us before us today, Administrator Nelson.
The Administration requested $27.2 billion for NASA, which
would be an increase of $1.8 billion over current funding
levels or about a 7 percent increase. The submission of the
Administration's budget request kicks off the annual
appropriations process. As authorizers, we play an important
role in this process by establishing priorities and policy
direction for NASA. In our oversight capacity, we ensure the
agency is operating consistently with congressional intent, and
this oversight helps ensure our colleagues at the
Appropriations Committee can feel justified in spending our
limited dollars on these efforts.
That is why one of the top priorities of this Congress is
the passage of a comprehensive NASA authorization bill. It's
been more than 6 years since a comprehensive authorization bill
was signed into law, and that's far too long for an agency of
NASA's importance. Today's hearing will inform our
deliberations as we draft this bill.
It's also a chance to reflect on NASA's many recent
accomplishments and consider what we can learn from these
successes. I know I speak for everyone in the room when I say
how proud I am that I was to see the first--like everyone else,
the first successful launch of Artemis 1 last November.
Returning humans to the Moon is one of our highest priorities,
and this was an incredible first step toward that goal.
I also continue to be amazed by the stunning images and
groundbreaking science produced by the James Webb Space
Telescope. We're seeing farther back in history than ever
before, and I'm excited to see what we'll learn next.
I'm interested in the success of these missions and of
NASA's other work. And I'm mindful that future achievements
require hard work for both NASA and this Committee.
Importantly, Congress and NASA must work together to ensure
Artemis remains on track to return humans to the lunar surface.
That's why I'm interested in understanding why the budget
request would delay Artemis 4 from 2027 to 2028.
We must also be certain that missions in NASA's science
portfolio remain on time and within budget. As impressive as
the images and science produced by the James Webb Space
Telescope might be, we cannot forget that it was billions of
dollars over budget and years behind schedule. Because of those
massive costs and time overruns, the telescope came at the
expense of many other worthy science missions. And yet, here we
are again seeing how cost estimates ballooning for a single
mission, the Mars sample-return, can negatively impact other
missions.
Because of these overflowing costs, NASA has been forced to
make difficult choices in their science portfolio. It postponed
a select mission to Venus indefinitely, paused a flagship
heliophysics mission, and delayed launch of an important
asteroid detection spacecraft. If this trend continues, then
NASA may have to make difficult decisions to postpone or cancel
future missions. This is unacceptable, and we must do better,
so I look forward to hearing how NASA intends to ensure that
current science missions remain on schedule and within budget.
And there are many other areas where we need to review the
agency's activities, from NASA's works on aeronautics to its
development of new technologies to allow us to explore further
into the solar system, to the transitioning to new orbital
platforms in low-Earth orbit (LEO). There's no shortage of work
for the Committee in the coming months.
I will remind my colleagues that we are not the only
country interested in returning to the Moon and traveling
beyond. China has made no secret of its ambitions to also have
a sustained human presence on the Moon. I want to be clear that
I will do everything within my power to ensure that the next
astronauts on the Moon are Americans.
And I want to welcome Administrator Nelson back to this
hearing room, where he spent many years as a Member of this
Committee, and I look forward to his testimony and a productive
discussion about NASA's plans for the future.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good afternoon. I want to welcome everyone to today's
hearing to review the Administration's proposed budget request
for NASA for fiscal year 2024. And I'd like to thank you for
joining us here today, Administrator Nelson.
The Administration requested $27.2 billion for NASA, which
would be an increase of $1.8 billion dollars over current
funding levels, or about a 7% increase.
The submission of the Administration's budget request kicks
off the annual appropriations process.
As authorizers, we play an important role in this process
by establishing priorities and policy direction for NASA.
In our oversight capacity, we ensure the agency is
operating consistently with Congressional intent. This
oversight helps ensure our colleagues at the Appropriations
Committee can feel justified in spending our limited dollars on
these efforts.
That is why one of my top priorities this Congress is the
passage of a comprehensive NASA authorization bill. It has been
more than six years since a comprehensive authorization bill
was signed into law and that is far too long for an agency of
NASA's importance.
Today's hearing will inform our deliberations as we draft
this bill.
It's also a chance to reflect on NASA's many recent
accomplishments and consider what we can learn from these
successes.
I know I speak for everyone in this room when I say how
proud I was to see the successful launch of Artemis 1 last
November. Returning humans to the Moon is one of our highest
priorities, and this was an incredible first step towards that
goal.
I also continue to be amazed by the stunning images and
groundbreaking science produced by the James Webb Space
Telescope. We're seeing farther back in history than ever
before, and I'm excited to see what we'll learn next.
I'm invested in the success of these missions, and of
NASA's other work. And I'm mindful that future achievements
require hard work for both NASA and this Committee.
Importantly, Congress and NASA must work together to ensure
Artemis remains on track to return humans to the Lunar surface.
That's why I'm interested in understanding why the budget
request would delay Artemis 4 from 2027 to 2028.
We must also be certain that missions in NASA's science
portfolio remain on time and within budget.
As impressive as the images and science produced by the
James Webb Space Telescope might be, we cannot forget that it
was billions of dollars over budget and years behind schedule.
Because of those massive cost and time overruns, the
telescope came at the expense of many other worthy science
missions.
And yet here we are again, seeing how cost estimates
ballooning for a single mission--the Mars Sample Return--can
negatively impact other missions.
Because of these overflowing costs, NASA has been forced to
make difficult choices in its science portfolio. It postponed a
selected mission to Venus, indefinitely paused a flagship
heliophysics mission, and delayed launch of an important
asteroid detection spacecraft. If this trend continues, then
NASA may have to make difficult decisions to postpone or cancel
future missions. This is unacceptable and we must do better.
So I look forward to hearing how NASA intends to ensure
that current science missions remain on schedule and within
budget.
And there are many other areas where we need to review the
agency's activities. From NASA's work on aeronautics, to its
development of new technologies to allow us to explore farther
in the solar system, to transitioning to new orbital platforms
in low Earth orbit, there is no shortage of work for the
Committee in the coming months.
I will remind my colleagues that we are not the only
country interested in returning to the Moon and traveling
beyond. China has made no secret of its ambition to also have a
sustained human presence on the Moon. I want to be clear that I
will do everything within my power to ensure that the next
astronauts on the Moon are Americans.
I want to welcome Administrator Nelson back to this hearing
room, where he spent many years as a member of this Committee.
I look forward to his testimony and a productive discussion
about NASA's plans for the future.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for her opening
statement.

Chairman Lucas. And with that, I yield back my time and
recognize the Ranking Member from California for an opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome,
Administrator Nelson. It's good to see you here today.
You know, for the 11th consecutive year, NASA has been
named the best place to work in the Federal Government among
large agencies. And I want to congratulate you, Administrator
Nelson, your team, and all of the NASA civil servants, for
creating a leading workplace in the Federal Government. You
know, people are the core of NASA's mission, and I want to
thank them for their talent, for their dedication, and for
their service.
What you're doing is truly exceptional. There's a lot to
celebrate in NASA's work. The James Webb Space Telescope, which
began scientific operations, they're returning mind-blowing
science. The Double Asteroid Reduction Test (DART) demonstrated
for the first time that we have the ability to deflect an
asteroid. That will be a very welcome tool should we need to
use it. NASA also launched the Surface Water and Ocean
Topography Mission that's going to give us unprecedented detail
of the planet's freshwater and oceans, something we need as we
explore climate change and its impact on all of us. And of
course, Artemis, which the Chairman has already discussed.
The President's request for this fiscal year, I'd say, is a
winner, a big bump up. But I would be remiss if I didn't
express my concern about the bill that the House passed
yesterday, an estimated 22 percent reduction across all
civilian agencies. And I am concerned that this could have a
bad impact on a NASA.
Would future Artemis missions need to be delayed, halted,
even eliminated? Would missions essential to observing our
Earth and collecting data on natural hazards and climate
change, would they be delayed? One of the most complex
scientific undertakings ever initiated, to return samples from
the Martian surface, would that be possible?
So those are a few examples that cause me great concern.
Such reductions could affect also, I think, our universities,
industry, our economy, the many high-paying jobs that our
investments produce. NASA not only is a space agency, but it's
a promoter of economic development as a side matter, and that's
important to all of us.
I know also that NASA is known for its cooperation and
collaboration with other nations, and I'm worried that that
might impact--these reductions might impact that capacity. We
can't give up leadership in the international space efforts,
and we're not--we cannot cede our leadership to China when it
comes to space. So now more than ever, we need you, NASA. We
need your leadership, your expertise, and I'm hoping to hear
from you, Administrator Nelson, on what you need from us. The
Chairman and I work very closely together. I have deep respect
for him, as you know, so I'm hoping that with all of us working
together, we can end up with a win for the space program and
NASA.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Lucas, and welcome Administrator
Nelson. We're pleased to have you with us today.
For the 11th consecutive year, NASA has been named the best
place to work in the Federal government among large agencies. I
want to congratulate you Administrator Nelson, your team, and
all of the NASA civil servants for creating a leading workplace
in the Federal government. People are the core of NASA's
mission, and I thank them for their talent, dedication, and
service.
And what they are doing is truly exceptional. There is much
to celebrate in NASA's successes over the last year. The James
Webb Space Telescope, which began science operations, is
returning mind-blowing science, the Double Asteroid Redirection
Test (DART) demonstrated for the first time the ability to
deflect an asteroid, a necessary tool should we ever be faced
with the threat of an asteroid headed toward Earth. NASA also
launched the Surface Water and Ocean Topography mission to
provide unprecedented detail on our planet's freshwater and
oceans. And last November, the nation and the world got to
witness the historic Artemis I mission, NASA's first step
toward our inspiring goal to send humans back to the Moon in
preparation for Mars. These are incredible accomplishments, and
there's so much more to come.
The President's Fiscal Year 2024 request for NASA is a
strong step toward doing just that. The proposal for FY 2024 is
$27.2 billion, a 7.1 percent increase over the FY 2023 enacted
appropriation. This request provides increases across NASA's
science, space technology, aeronautics, exploration, STEM, and
mission support activities.
NASA is a crown jewel in our nation's research and
development enterprise, an engine of innovation and job-
creation, and an ever increasingly important symbol of
geopolitical soft power. I'm looking forward to today's
discussion to gain a clear understanding of what NASA needs to
carry out the challenging and inspiring goals that Congress has
asked it to achieve.
I would be remiss if I didn't express my concern about the
bill that the House passed yesterday, an estimated 22%
reduction across all civilian agencies and I am concerned that
this could have a bad impact on NASA. As I said last week, the
Speaker's bill puts science at risk.
Would future Artemis missions would need to be delayed,
halted, and even eliminated? Would missions essential to
observing our Earth and collecting data on natural hazards and
climate change be delayed? One of the most complex scientific
undertakings ever initiated-to return samples from the Martian
surface-would that be suspended? Space Grant awards and STEM
programs would see reductions resulting in significantly
decreased participation by students and educators, affecting
efforts to expand diversity, equity, and inclusion in the NASA
and aerospace workforce. And those are just a few examples.
Wouldn't this affect our universities, industry, our
economy, and the many high-paying jobs that our investments in
NASA provide to Americans?
Given the extent of NASA's cooperation and collaboration
with other nations, could the damage spread beyond our borders?
If the U.S. isn't leading international space efforts, others
will step in.
We can't give up leadership in the international space
efforts and we cannot cede our leadership in space and
aeronautics to China.
Now more than ever we need to secure the health, strength,
and future of our nation's civil space and aeronautics
programs. NASA must have the people, resources, and
infrastructure it needs to continue to succeed.
I look forward to working with Chairman Lucas and the Biden
Administration to ensure that NASA can continue to lead this
country and the world in discovery, exploration, innovation,
and inspiration. Thank you and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
Let me introduce our witness for today's hearing. Bill
Nelson has served as the 14th Administrator for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration since May of 2021.
Administrator Nelson has worked in public office for over four
decades, including 30 years in Congress where he represented
Florida in both chambers. And during this time, Administrator
Nelson chaired the Science Committee's Space, Science, and
Applications Subcommittee for 6 years. So we want to thank you
for being here.
And a little slight deviation of normal custom. Mr.
Director, would you like a moment of personal privilege before
we begin your testimony?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. As a matter of fact, there are many
very, very favorable, heartfelt memories from this room. I have
served with--on the portraits on the wall, starting with Don
Fuqua, Bob Rowe, all the way around, have served either in the
House or the Senate with every one of those. And these are some
extraordinary people, and each of them have their handprint on
the Nation's space policy, and I'm very grateful. I'm very
grateful for the leadership that each of them gave. Don Fuqua
was the big Chairman when I was here. And I appreciate the
opportunity to be with you all.
I want to give the Committee a gift, and it is of
historical significance. It is a recognition back that a lot of
the program that we have going on now was set, chiseled into
law in 2010 in the NASA Authorization bill of 2010. It was
bipartisan. It was Kay Bailey Hutchinson and me in the Senate.
It passed the Senate unanimously. It came over here on the last
day of the session before the August break. Fortunately, the
majority leader, who did not want to take the Senate bill but
said OK, he said, but you got to pass it on the special order
calendar. And, of course, that needed a 2/3 vote. And, of
course, at the beginning of the day, we didn't have the vote.
Two Members of the House, one of whom is still in the
House, Dutch Ruppersberger and John Culberson from Texas, took
me by the hand and took me around the House floor for the
entire day. And by the time that it passed about 11 o'clock at
night, we not only had the two-thirds vote, we had a three-
quarters vote. That bill set us off on the course that we're on
with a public-private partnership with international partners,
corporate commercial partners, starting the commercial program,
and a nod--a significant nod to science.
Unbeknownst to me, when Artemis flew beyond the Moon 40,000
miles deeper than any human-rated spacecraft, Orion, had ever
gone in the test flight before we put our crew, which has now
been named--a crew of four, three Americans and one Canadian--
on Artemis 2, which should go at the end of next year.
Unbeknownst to me, they put four copies of the law that are
signed by the President and signed by the Speaker, and I have
one of those four to give to you all today.
So this engraved part of the bill is--not only has it flown
270,000 miles from Earth, but along with it, this American
flag, a picture of Artemis at its farthest point where it is
taking a selfie photograph of itself, looking back and what's
in the background, the Moon 40,000 miles from the spacecraft,
and there is home, the bright blue marble 270,000 miles from
the spacecraft.
So we wanted you, Mr. Chairman and the Committee, to have
one of the copies that has flown in space.
Chairman Lucas. I can say enthusiastically that the Ranking
Member and I are very pleased to accept that on behalf of the
Committee.
[Applause.]
Mr. Nelson. And so the two of you have already given my
opening comments. You've named just what's happened in the last
2 years. For example, the only thing that wasn't mentioned was
the rover on Mars.
Chairman Lucas. And, Mr. Chairman, for the record,
following House procedure, you're recognized for 5 minutes for
your testimony. Please proceed, sir.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE BILL NELSON,
ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Nelson. Well, since you all gave my speech for me, I'll
turn to questions but just to say that NASA is a place where it
makes the impossible possible. What we just--in this 2-year
period, the Artemis, the DART that hit the asteroid that was
350 feet in diameter, 7 million miles away, hit it bullseye.
The fact of the climate predictions, the climate instruments
that are giving precision on so many things, those instruments,
for example, if they're operated by NOAA (National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration), they were designed, built, and
launched by NASA.
The rover on Mars and the preparation that it is now
digging core samples of that dry lake bed at the place of the
mouth of where that river came into that lake and they're
digging those core samples, putting them into titanium tubes
about that size, 10 of them already on the surface of Mars, 10
of them in the rover, another 20 will be put in the rover
Perseverance. And then when we send the lander back to pick
them up, if the rover is pooped out, the backup is--and of
course, you've known Ingenuity, the helicopter flying in a 1
percent atmosphere on Mars, it's flying. It not only flew, it's
flown 50 times. It's become a scout for the rover.
So on the lander that comes, they're going to put two
helicopters. So if Perseverance doesn't have the energy to get
over to the lander to deposit its 30 tubes, it's got 10 tubes
on the surface, and the helicopters will go over and pick them
up and bring them back and deposit them in the lander, which
then will be returned to Earth. And so this is the kind of gee-
whiz stuff that we are privileged to do.
I'll say one more thing, Mr. Chairman. I mentioned that we
go back to the Moon in a different way now than we did a half-
century ago. A half-century ago, we went as the U.S.
Government. This time, we go in a public-private partnership
with our commercial partners, and we go back with our
international partners. The first crew has an astronaut from
Canada. I was just there the last couple of days. You can't
imagine the enthusiasm of the Canadians and the goodwill that
we see not only there, but around the world with our
participants. We have 15 total of us, international partners on
the International Space Station (ISS), and that's just one
example.
So, Mr. Chairman, if I may, let me just stop right there
and entertain your comments and your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nelson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Absolutely, Administrator, and a wonderful
presentation, and the Committee is very appreciative of the
kindness.
You've sat on our side of the table for many years on both
sides of the building, so you know we are by our nature
obligated to ask lots of questions----
Mr. Nelson. Of course.
Chairman Lucas [continuing]. That protect the taxpayers'
resources to make sure that things are accomplished in the
spirit of the authorizations. And I have to note, of course, as
we've touched on here, in many ways, one of the Committee's
highest priorities is the success of Artemis, and I know I
speak for my colleagues when I, too, share--we, too, share the
excitement about the successful completion of Artemis 1 mission
late last year.
However, much work remains to be done before we see our
astronauts return to the Moon surface, including development
and successfully testing many of the new technologies such as
the spacesuits, the human landing system. NASA currently
projects that Artemis 2 will launch in November of '24. Artemis
3 will launch in 2025. How confident are you, Mr.
Administrator, on those dates, and what would potentially cause
the agency to reevaluate those dates?
Mr. Nelson. A budgetary decision was made about 10, 12
years ago to save money by taking the avionics out of Artemis 1
and putting them over into Artemis 2 instead of having
concurrently a second set of avionics built for Artemis 2. That
is the driver of the 2 years between Artemis 1 and Artemis 2.
And so I keep asking the questions, and they tell me that it
will be the end of 2024 that we will launch the first crew to
the Moon in over a half-century.
It is thought to be that we can have Artemis 3, which is
the first landing, ready about a year after that. Now, the big
driver there is we know we've got Orion, the capsule and the
rocket, because we've already tested that. But we're going into
lunar polar elliptical orbit, and we're going to rendezvous
with a SpaceX lander. And the SpaceX lander is a developing
program of which, in the State to the south of yours, Mr.
Chairman----
Chairman Lucas. We call it the Republic of Texas, yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. And it blew a hole in that
launchpad. So I have asked so I could report to you, as of
today, that SpaceX is still saying that they think it will take
about at least 2 months to rebuild the launchpad, and
concurrently, about 2 months to have their second vehicle ready
to launch.
Now, understand that the explosion, that's not a big downer
in the way that SpaceX does things. They are hardware-rich,
meaning they've got a lot of those rockets ready to go, and
that's their modus operandi. They launch. If something goes
wrong, they figure out what it is, they go back, and they
launch it again. So I anticipate that we will see a number of
launches from Boca Chica, Texas, and then they're going to
bring that rocket to Bill Posey's and my home county and launch
it. They are after--they have already proven and had the
experience. So I'm fairly confident, but there are a lot of
things that still have to be done.
Chairman Lucas. I'm also concerned about the proposed
budget's decision to delay the launch of Artemis 4 until
September 2028, as laid out in the budget. Could you explain
how NASA reached that decision, that the delay was necessary?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. Artemis 4 is a different vehicle. It
is a larger vehicle. In that law that I just gave the Committee
a copy of from 2010, it provides for the building of this new
rocket and that rocket to be evolvable, in other words, larger,
and that's what Artemis 4 is going to be because the SLS or the
rocket, the Space Launch System has got to be bigger because
it's now carrying two big payloads, not only the capsule,
Orion, but it's carrying the first component of a lunar space
station, a mini-space station called Gateway. So the rocket has
got to be bigger, it's got to be taller, and it's got to have a
bigger mobile launch platform that rolls it out. But the upper
stage built by the European Space Agency did not have enough
funding for this round, and it got delayed and other kinds of
delays in that upper stage that caused it to be kicked into one
additional year. Now, some additional funding could help remedy
part of that, but that's part of the problem.
Chairman Lucas. My time has expired, and before I recognize
the gentlelady, I would note, it sounds, Mr. Administrator,
like not only do you need to work the Committee hard, but
you're going to spend some quality time with the appropriators
and OMB (Office of Management and Budget), too, it sounds like.
Mr. Nelson. As a matter of fact, I already have, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. With that, I yield back and recognize the
Ranking Member for her questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Administrator Nelson. As you
described, the vision of where we're going, it's truly
inspiring. It reminds me, as a child, getting up at the crack
of dawn to see the space shots and being inspired in that way,
and a whole generation of young people is going to be inspired
again by what you are doing.
I do want to get from you the impact of the bill that we
passed yesterday. Now, it's only one House. It doesn't mean
that it's going to go into effect. But the across-the-board
reductions among civilian agencies, according to our
appropriators, would result in about a 22 percent reduction
that would essentially be locked in for the next decade. So I'm
wondering if that were to become the final word, what would
these funding levels mean for the United States' leadership in
space, and specifically, our competition with China?
Mr. Nelson. It would be disaster. We'd be delayed. You
can't take nearly a quarter of your budget away and suddenly
get to where you're getting, especially if we're in a space
race with China, which we are. China's very clear. They've
declared their intention, and when they declare their
intention, they usually carry it out, as we've seen in the
past. And they've said they're going to the Moon with their
taikonauts, their astronauts, and so that wouldn't be good.
But let me tell you something else that wouldn't be good.
If you all can't--and when I say you all, I'm talking about
both the House and the Senate. If you can't get to agreement
and you go into a continuing resolution (CR), and that makes it
go back to the '23 spending or appropriations level. That's not
going to be good either, and you're going to have the same kind
of outcome, less so than a 22 percent cut.
Ms. Lofgren. What would the impact be on--the Chairman has
very rightly explored the Artemis program and the delays, but
what would that kind of reduction, first, the 22 percent
reduction and then the CR level of reduction? What impact would
that have on Artemis specifically?
Mr. Nelson. Well, you would have--for example, I've been
trying to wrangle some additional funds somewhere so that we
could get Artemis 4 instead of '28, get it into '27. Now,
that's the one that has the bigger payload and, therefore, the
heavier, more powerful rocket. But Artemis 5, which could be
the second lander--and let me explain that. We don't want all
of our eggs in one basket. There was a competition. NASA had
only so much money. This is pre-me. The decision was made to
award it to the best bidder, which was SpaceX, who had underbid
everybody else by half. And--but we don't want to leave all of
our eggs in the one basket of a SpaceX lander. We want to have
another lander. So we have started the competition. That
competition will be determined this summer. We'll know who the
winner of that competition is, and they will have another
lander. I'd like to get that lander where that, on Artemis 5,
could land in '28. But the reality is, without any additional
funding, you're looking '29, '30, '31, and that's not good, I
can tell you, if we're in a space race.
Ms. Lofgren. We would fall behind in that case, do you
think, our competitors?
Mr. Nelson. With a 22 percent cut? My goodness, yes.
Ms. Lofgren. OK. Thank you very much, Administrator Nelson.
You know, I must say when I saw that rocket blow up, I thought,
thank God, there's no people on board. Sometimes the lowest
bidder is not always the best choice.
But with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair
recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
When I saw that thing explode, I was happy it wasn't at
KSC.
Mr. Administrator, I really, really am happy with the way
you are leading NASA. And to the best of your knowledge, I
would like to know how you feel NASA's budget for space
activities compares with China's, particularly when it comes to
lunar operations.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you, Congressman Posey. And you and I
feel pretty strongly about this the same way. China has overall
dollars in their space program, and their space program is
basically a military space program as well, but the human part.
They're less dollars compared to ours. But the Chinese
Government's budget has super opportunity of growing because
they are a much--their GNP (gross national product) has so much
opportunity for growth, and therefore, their space budget to
increase within their overall government budget.
They have had extraordinary successes in the last decade.
And, by the way, a number of their spacecraft, interestingly,
look a lot like what you see in the free world spacecraft, so I
think we have to be mindful of that.
Mr. Posey. Well, yes, it's an undeniable fact that, through
economic dominance, which they're clearly leading right now,
they hope to achieve military superiority, and we can't let
that happen. Their first mission to the Moon will be about
studying rocks, you know, and the heritage of the Earth, and
they militarize everything that they do. Everything that they
do, they are a real threat, and I thank you for that good
analysis.
Mr. Nelson. May I show you a picture, Congressman?
Mr. Posey. You may. Show me all the pictures you want.
Mr. Nelson. This is a picture of the crater pot, South Pole
of the Moon. This is where we're going, and this is where
China's going. Why? Because if this is the Moon, and the Sun is
coming in at an angle, there are constantly shadowed parts, as
you can see in that picture. In those constant dark parts of
the Moon, we know, is water ice. So we are sending a probe
later this year to dig to see if there's water underneath the
surface. If there, is you got hydrogen and oxygen, and that's
why we want to go to the South Pole.
Now, that picture also tells you, with so many craters,
it's a dangerous place to land. We got to be right on the
money, and there's precious few parts where you can land. And
my concern is, as I have stated publicly many times, if China
were to get there first, they say this is our territory, you
stay out. And of course, we go as an international mission, and
that is for scientific research purposes, peaceful purposes.
Mr. Posey. You mentioned the DART mission. Do we know yet
if it was able to deflect the orbit of the asteroid? They said
it would take a while before we'd find out, and I've been
watching the news for it, so----
Mr. Nelson. You're talking about the DART mission where we
hit the asteroid?
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. Oh, yes, sir. We knew that fairly quickly
afterwards with telescopes that it saw--and the reason we knew
so quickly, it was that 350-foot-wide asteroid that revolved
around an asteroid that was about a half-mile wide, so we could
determine that it moved in its orbit around the bigger asteroid
by going closer to the asteroid. And that impact at 16,000
miles an hour by that spacecraft that is probably from here to
the end of the table wide, it did its job.
Mr. Posey. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time has
expired.
Chairman Lucas. The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady
from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much.
Administrator Nelson, very nice to see you. Welcome back.
Thank you for your leadership. I'm going to focus on the
Science Mission Directorate, particularly Earth science, but
also want to talk a bit about workforce and education issues.
The recent report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change made clear once again that we must take bold action to
address the climate crisis. And I know NASA's Earth science
programs have a strong record of equipping scientists,
policymakers, and first responders with critical data to make
climate-smart decisions, so I'm going to talk about that.
But I also want to mention on the education workforce
piece, it's really critical that our future scientists who are
helping to develop solutions, that they reflect the diversity
of our country. I'm grateful that this budget proposes to
increase funding for the Office of STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) Engagement. I'm excited about the
Next Gen STEM program, for example.
But I want to align myself with the comments of Ranking
Member Lofgren about the concerns, deep concerns about the harm
that will be caused if the bill that passed the House yesterday
goes forward, really concerned about whether NASA will be able
to fulfill its mission.
So, Mr. Administrator, in my home State of Oregon,
wildfires have increased in frequency and severity. Last year,
Oregon State University released a study confirming that
climate change played a role in increasing the likelihood of
severe wildfires in Oregon and northern California by about 40
percent increase, so I'm encouraged that your proposed budget
supports the development of Landsat Next system working with
USGS (United States Geological Survey), which will collect,
it's my understanding, about 20 times more data than its
predecessors, provide new imaging that's going to help
emergency responders protect communities from increasingly bad
wildfires, so your satellites are really important. I want to
emphasize that.
So the President's Council of Advisors on Science and
Technology affirmed that the risk of catastrophic wildfires is
growing at alarming rates--it's not just in the Pacific
Northwest--with disproportionate effects on low-income, rural
communities, and communities of color. So how will Landsat Next
improve our preparedness and response to these wildfires?
Mr. Nelson. Enormously, but Landsat is not the only one,
and the future Landsats are not the only one. We have a lot of
assets up there, in other words, satellites, that can give
incredible detail now to help firefighters and to prevent
fires. So, for example, we can tell from orbit if a forest is
diseased, and therefore, more subject to wildfire, same thing
with regard to the moisture content of the soil. Now, that not
only applies to forests, but think what that can do for the
farmer. We can tell the farmer that this cornfield has such-
and-such moisture content, and so they can plan accordingly on
what they're going to plant and how much they have to water.
These are tools that we have on orbit.
But as you go on down in the development of new
technologies, as was the last Landsat that launched a few
months ago----
Ms. Bonamici. Right.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. More capable than the previous,
it'll get even greater. As a matter of fact, if I may, we're
putting out four great observatories in the next decade, and
along with existing satellites and those four, we're going to
be able to tell the population of planet Earth, and we're going
to share this information with everybody.
Ms. Bonamici. Yes, Administrator, I want to get in another
question. I very much appreciate--I want to emphasize that I
think oftentimes people think of the work of NASA is in space,
but what you do for the planet Earth is really critical as
well.
Mr. Nelson. We are a climate agency as well.
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely. So you're proposing--it's about a
5.7 increase in the Minority University Research Education
program to increase engagement with community colleges. I'm a
graduate of a community college myself, and I appreciate the
opportunities that they provide. So how does NASA currently
engage with community colleges? How will this investment
improve these programs?
Mr. Nelson. We engage all the time, and we engage not only
through the STEM program, but the grant programs that we have.
And just to make sure any of you from rural congressional
districts, we're--we've got a specific program that looks to
the areas that otherwise might be overlooked from the big
science research universities to get it into the rural
colleges, universities, and so we are trying to do that.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate it. My time has expired. But
even in K-12 system, I know you're working there, so thank you
for your leadership. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady----
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman, may I correct a misstatement that
I made earlier? I was talking about the big new rocket, the
heavier one, and I said the European Space Agency. They have
the European Service Module that is attached to the Orion
vehicle. The upper stage that has to be larger and more
powerful, that is behind schedule, and that has been made by
Boeing, and there is a delay there in its production.
Chairman Lucas. Duly noted for the record.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Administrator.
And with that, I turn to the gentleman from the Republic of
Texas, Mr. Weber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Administrator, thank you for being here. We're glad
you're here.
We--I know I'm not alone in this, but we always want to
ensure that NASA has a capability in LEO, low-Earth orbit. And
recent anomalies about the Russian segment have caused concern
about the safety of their crew. Last December, for example,
Soyuz vehicle attached to ISS began leaking coolant, causing
the crew to stay longer, anticipated problems and repair. And
of course, you've already noted that Chinese are intent on
getting up to the Moon before we--we would like to see
commercial companies incentivized to get the capability up
there the soonest--you see where I'm going here--so we can
defeat--beat the Russians, I guess is a better word--I mean,
the Chinese. So how do we do that, your opinion, your thoughts,
please, sir.
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, are you talking about going to the
Moon, or are you talking about--you said low-Earth orbit?
Mr. Weber. Actually, low-Earth orbit and beating them to
the Moon because the things that are happening right now don't
bode well for low-Earth orbit, for example.
Mr. Nelson. Well, if the question is specifically the
Chinese--now, if you want to discuss the Russians, I'm happy to
do that, too.
Mr. Weber. Well, I want to discuss both as they apply to
low-Earth orbit. We have to be preeminent. We need commercial
companies to be able to take that lead with the best technology
and competition to do that. How does NASA foster that?
Mr. Nelson. OK, for LEO, first of all, one of the great
ironies is that we can be at such odds with the Russian
Government and President Putin over the inexcusable things that
are going on in Ukraine and have a cooperative space program
with the Russians just like we've had since 1975 when, in the
Soviet Union in the middle of the cold war, an American
spacecraft rendezvous and docked with a Soviet spacecraft, and
the crews lived together. And ever since, we've had that
cooperation in the civilian space program with the Russians.
They had the first station. It was Mir. They asked us to come,
and the space shuttle docked with Mir. We then built the
International Space Station, which is long as a football field
from goalpost to goalpost. We built it together, and we have to
operate it together, and that goes on today without a hitch.
And that's the irony I'm talking about.
However, it's a totally different story with the Chinese in
low-Earth orbit. They have not cooperated at all. They have
their own space station. That's part of the progress they've
made in the last 10 years. And they are good, but they are very
secretive and nontransparent. So when they got one of their big
rockets that put up a component to the station is tumbling back
to Earth, they won't even give coordinates of where they think
it's going to be. That's the problem with the Chinese
Government.
Mr. Weber. But extrapolate that to how we can be assured
that commercialization, that commercial companies can be
involved at that level to make sure that we maintain priority,
superiority, call it whatever you want in LEO? How do we do
that in spite of the Chinese? And the Russians could turn on us
at any given moment. How do we plan for that?
Mr. Nelson. OK. And that is a decision that emanates from
that law that I just gave you a copy of because we are going to
get out of the business of an International Space Station.
We're going to deorbit it. It's aging. We're going to deorbit
it in 2030, '31, and we are going to turn it over to
commercial. And so we are now getting contracts to several
commercial companies to create commercial space stations.
Indeed, one of those commercial companies is going to attach
their commercial first module to the International Space
Station as a precursor to them then using it as the core to
start their own commercial, larger space station. That is
underway right now.
Mr. Weber. So I think we can all agree that it is a very
noble goal for us to make sure that our commercial companies
stay first and foremost in supporting this effort and getting
it done?
Mr. Nelson. We're spending quite a bit of money, giving
them the financial incentive to do just that.
Mr. Weber. Glad to hear that. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady, from Michigan, Ms.
Stevens, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you so much. And it's so wonderful
to see you again, Mr. Administrator. Thanks for your great
testimony and your presentation and phenomenal leadership of
NASA.
I had a couple questions for you. I represent southeastern
Michigan, and it's home to a robust supply chain of primarily
automotive suppliers who have diversified into the defense and
aerospace sector, companies like Futuramic are a great example
of this, as well as Detroit Flex, who for years was doing the
tubes that went into the auto engine and are now doing the
tubes that go in to the space engine. And we know that the NASA
collaborations with the private sector, and in particular the
suppliers, have brought out some of the best in commercial
industry to accelerate development, improve safety, and,
frankly, save us some money.
So these partnerships are creating lasting, strong, good
jobs that, you know, pay a high wage. I see it in my district.
Obviously, we know what is happening across the country. Could
you just speak to why this approach has been so successful?
Mr. Nelson. First of all, walk into any classroom in
America and start talking about space, particularly if you're
wearing a blue suit, a blue jumpsuit, walking into a classroom,
and just see what the fascination of this generation that's
coming on. And I mentioned the fascination of our international
partners, that there's this genuine desire in all of us to want
to be explorers, adventurers. You take that subject matter and
marry it up with the intent of your question, with the
corporate community, with the commercial partners, and then you
have the ability to tap the genius of America and share the
expenses so that NASA is not paying the whole freight in order
to get the best product at the cheapest price, with NASA,
complete oversight because of the necessity of safety.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, and the last time I checked, the Federal
Government isn't a manufacturer, right? And so in some
respects, the partnerships and the way in which you can work
with suppliers gets the best results. And also, right, it does
compel a mission for these companies. And I saw it Detroit Flex
headquartered in Troy. I saw the smile on these guys faces.
They had the same thing you're talking about, the picture of
outer space. It totally transformed their company.
And speaking of transformative figures, sir, we are
delighted to hear about Artemis 2 in Michigan because the pride
and joy of Grand Rapids, Ms. Christina Koch, is going to be
going on that lunar Moon landing trip. Are we still targeted
for November 2024? What else do we need to know about Artemis
2?
Mr. Nelson. Well, first of all----
Ms. Stevens. And the first woman who's going to go to the
Moon.
Mr. Nelson. That's correct. And when we land, by the way,
on Artemis 3, two of the four will go down to the surface, and
it will be the first woman and the next man that will walk on
the surface of the Moon in a half a century.
Well, look at the crew. The commander, an F-18 test pilot;
the pilot, African American, F-18 test pilot; Christina Koch,
the only engineer on the crew; the fourth is our partner,
Canada, a Canadian Royal Air Force F-18 test pilot. And the
four of them are a smattering of North America. They are
representative of North America, and this is just the first
crew. So we're going to see----
Ms. Stevens. We're going to see the best of America going
in outer space, which is great, in November 2024, and thank you
for the leadership. And might we just reflect that a lot has
happened in 50 years to be able to send Christina on that
mission.
Thank you, sir, and I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. Artemis 2 will orbit the Moon, right,
Director?
Mr. Nelson. Artemis 2 will orbit the Moon, check out all
the life support systems, the spacecraft. Then Artemis 3 goes
into lunar orbit, and the crew transfers into the SpaceX
lander.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Director.
With that, I yield to the gentleman from Indiana, Dr.
Baird, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, and
thank you, Mr. Administrator, for being here. It's--I can
remember the first time we went to the Moon, and that was quite
an experience and very, very important in our community.
Anyway, I'm involved in agriculture, as many of you know.
And so you mentioned agriculture and knowing what the soil
moisture was, and so I guess I would just ask you, what other
areas--and give you an opportunity to explain how what we're
doing in NASA can be a benefit to agriculture because you know,
we got to feed 9 billion people in--by 1950 or so--or by 2050,
so any thoughts in that regard?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. Congressman, where's your district?
Mr. Baird. West central Indiana, corn----
Mr. Nelson. OK.
Mr. Baird [continuing]. Soybeans, cantaloupe.
Mr. Nelson. All right. So I went to Kansas for Senator
Jerry Moran, and we went out into one of his farmer's fields.
And we can literally tell from space where he's going to have a
drought problem because of the moisture content of the soil. We
can tell him if he's going to have--and this is not secret
information. This is available. We can tell him if he's got
disease in his crops.
I mentioned with regard to forest fires, same thing. We
have the ability in the middle of the desert to tell if there
is deposits of water and where you ought to drill for water in
the desert. That is what is incredible. And as we ran out of
time with a question over here, we're going to have such a 3D
composite of everything that's happening to the Earth so that
you're going to know in the next decade exactly what is
happening to the water, the land, the ice, and the atmosphere.
And it will be available to everyone, and it will be available
virtually as well.
Mr. Baird. You know, that's really amazing, and it'll be a
real asset to agriculture. But as I was listening to you talk,
just how good are your cameras? I've been known to go to the
woods occasionally on the back end of the farm, and I'd just
like to know how good your cameras really are, but----
Mr. Nelson. Well----
Mr. Baird. Anyway----
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. I suspect you ought to ask another
agency that question.
Mr. Baird. You got me to thinking about it. I'll tell you
that.
You know, the other question I have, I'm really interested
in research and university, and I thought maybe you could tie
together the work you do with universities and the significance
of the universities and their work as it contributes to NASA.
Purdue University is my alma mater, so if you don't mind.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. And by the way, a tribute to Purdue,
next to Annapolis, Purdue produces the most astronauts.
Universities are critical because we're a science research
organization. And so where do we get that science? We get it
from industry, we get it from universities, colleges, technical
schools. We get that information often in the incentive of a
NASA contract with financial incentives for that university,
corporation, and so forth to do it. Yes, sir.
Mr. Baird. So that really ends up being a two-way street,
doesn't it? I mean, what you find out at NASA in space
contributes to what universities can do. So anyway, I
appreciate that, and I appreciate you being here today. Thank
you.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Sorensen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. Hello there, everyone. I'd like to thank
Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member Lofgren for convening this
hearing and Administrator Nelson for appearing before us today.
I'm proud to serve as the Ranking Member on the Committee's
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, and I'm the proud son of
an aerospace engineer. The work that NASA does is tremendously
important for humanity, for implications far beyond what we can
scientifically think of today. I often say that without the
technology to put the human on the Moon, we wouldn't have these
in our hands today.
Now we're going back to the Moon to find where that water
ice is, to learn more. I'm excited for this new age of space
exploration, as are the folks in my district in northwestern
Illinois. Scientists across the country were making these
impacts since the 1960's. Now, Artemis 3 will send humans to
new and exciting places on the Moon, including polar caps,
where we will hopefully find that ice. What new research do you
anticipate the scientific community will undertake with these
samples as we bring them back from the Moon in 2025?
Mr. Nelson. Before I answer that, Congressman, I want to
say, aren't you a former weatherman?
Mr. Sorensen. I am a meteorologist by trade, correct.
Mr. Nelson. It is true that NASA is a climate agency, as
well as a space and aviation, aeronautics agency.
Mr. Sorensen. I would not have been able to do my job for
22 years without the investment in science that NASA has
provided.
Mr. Nelson. Well, you're the best walking advertisement for
what NASA does right there. And when you held up your cell
phone, in that cell phone is an amazing camera, and that is a
camera on a chip. And that was developed by NASA in our Earth
observations, so thank you. And I got so excited about saying
that I forgot your question.
Mr. Sorensen. What do you----
Mr. Nelson. Oh, the Moon----
Mr. Sorensen [continuing]. Expect to get from our----
Mr. Nelson. The samples from Mars. OK. So the likelihood,
if there was life, was where that lake was, and what better
place than the mouth of the river where the river spilled into
the lake. And so we are drilling in different places with the
rover Perseverance, and by bringing back these titanium-filled
tubes of samples of those cores in different locations that the
scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory have decided are
the likelihood, then we ought to be able to determine, was
there life there, is there still life there, what kind of life
was there in just a small sampling of the surface of Mars
before we send humans there in about 2040 in order to explore
further. And that's the purpose of these samples.
Mr. Sorensen. I'm glad you mentioned 2040 because just a
couple of weeks ago, was probably the greatest part about being
a Congressman so far in my short tenure. I was able to bring
Dr. Kate Rubins, a NASA astronaut, to a first grader, to first
grade elementary school in my district, having the
understanding that it is my job as a Congressman to make sure
that these kids can grow up and be whomever they want to be
when they grow up. And then Dr. Rubins was able to inspire
them, understanding that the kids that we were talking to may
be about the same age as the first person to stand on Mars. How
do we continue to inspire them?
Mr. Nelson. Well, you said it already. You saw what
happened to the faces of those kids when Astronaut Dr. Rubins
walked in to the classroom. They're fascinated with space, as
are most people, but especially this next generation because
they've grown up with technologies that we never grew up with
when I was growing up, and so this is just normal fair for
them. And they have some distant memory that we are out there
in space going to the Moon, but they almost nightly can see
it--that something's happening out in space today. And so this
is what--the Artemis generation. It was the Apollo generation,
and from that became an educational revolution of scientists
and engineers and technicians and mathematicians. And you can
imagine what is going to come out of the Artemis generation as
a result of us going back to the Moon and then going to Mars
and further.
Mr. Sorensen. Everything we do is for them.
My time is expired. I yield. But thank you so much. It's an
honor.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Williams, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, Administrator, I have a serious matter to bring
before you. My mother-in-law was a home economics teacher at
Melbourne High School in 1960 and '61, and I can bet you didn't
see this question coming, but your reputation even then
actually was one of a stellar leader, and she has recounted
that many times to me over the years, but interesting
connection there.
But I'd like to, if I may draw your attention, sir, to a
piece of legislation that Representative Sorensen and I
introduced just this morning, which is to bring the DOE
(Department of Energy) and NASA together in an Interagency
Research Act, and that will allow the agencies to collaborate
research that is obvious of mutual interest and hopefully
streamline and advance and accelerate your goals and the goals
of the DOE. Can you speak about the partnership between DOE and
NASA and how their partnership may help advance science and
your mission at NASA, sir?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman--and it's not only the Department
of Energy, it's other agencies as well because what it is in
particular is we know if we're going to be on the Moon and
spend any appreciable time, we're going to have to produce
electricity on the Moon and the nuclear production of
electricity. You can't--at the South Pole with limited--as I
showed that example of this is the Moon and this is the Sun and
the Sun's rays are coming in here, it's constant on the equator
of the Moon but not at the South Pole because you've got the
Sun coming in at angles. So you're going to have to have a
power source of electricity other than sunlight there, so, too,
in missions going all the way to Mars. And therefore, in going
to Mars, you need to get to Mars faster than we go with
hydrogen and oxygen, conventional chemical propulsion. We got
to get there faster. Otherwise, it's such a long mission that
you have to stay on the surface until the planets realign in
order to get back.
And so we are doing nucleolar thermal research for
propulsion and nuclear electric propulsion. Now, some of that
is with the Department of Energy, but some of that is with
other agencies as well.
Mr. Williams. If your staff would inform us about that--
you're exceptionally well-informed, and you may know that I'm
the first nuclear submarine officer to serve in Congress in 50
years. I've often thought of service on submarines was good
preparation for being in space. The tradeoffs are the view is a
lot better in space, but the food's a lot better on a
submarine. So, you know, you got to pick your poison.
You've mentioned this many times about the space race with
China and in general about public-private sector partnerships
in your Administration. The--you know, as NASA collaborates
with private industry, as well as international partners, what
advantage--how can you quantify or give color to the advantage
that that partnership provides in the context of the space race
with China? What--why is that an advantage? What would you
point to, sir?
Mr. Nelson. You're talking about the international
partnership?
Mr. Williams. Well, I'm talking specifically about public-
private, specifically working with private industry.
Mr. Nelson. Yes----
Mr. Williams. And international may be second, but----
Mr. Nelson. Well, that's the difference. We go back to the
Moon this time with international partners, as well as
corporate partners, and why not tap the genius of American
ingenuity in its enterprise? That's the whole theory. Great
example is the commercial crew and commercial cargo to the
International Space Station. That came out of that law that I
just gave you a copy of that went to the Moon and back, and
what it provides for is that NASA forms these partnerships.
This particular one, example SpaceX, created their own rocket,
created their own spacecraft Dragon with substantial NASA help
and financial incentive, and look at the success. The Falcon 9
has become the workhorse of the United States commercially and
government getting to space, and look what it did for
commercial cargo and crew.
So NASA contracts with SpaceX to send our cargo and crew.
Now, when it's a NASA mission, we're all over it to make sure
that the astronauts are safe. But look at the phenomenal record
that SpaceX has had. We want that same kind of record for
SpaceX on the lander on the Moon but the other winner of the
other competition for the second lander as well. And so, I
mean, the proof is in the pudding, Congressman.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, sir. My time has expired. Thank
you. There's a submariner in the space station right now, and
please hire more submariners for space.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Oregon, Ms.
Salinas, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you and the
Ranking Member for this really quite inspirational hearing
today.
Administrator Nelson, I hear all the time from folks back
home and business leaders that they need more skilled technical
workers, and in many cases, these folks wouldn't necessarily
need advanced or even 4-year degrees, but they do need a solid
K-12 STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and
mathematics) foundation and opportunities for career and
technical training. And my district is home to a number of
advanced manufacturers that produce components for some of
NASA's most ambitious programs. A company called Machine
Sciences Corporation, for example, just contributed sensor
chassis to a SpaceX Dragon spacecraft that recently returned
from the International Space Station.
I'm worried, though, that we're not doing enough to prepare
our youth to participate in this exciting advanced
manufacturing and innovation economy that Congress has really
been quite focused on the last couple of years. And I'm
particularly concerned that we're not taking full advantage of
some of the public-private partnerships between our major
research university and industry partners but also bringing in
existing resources like our community and technical colleges,
which already have a presence in some of our rural communities.
So my question is, can you tell me more about how NASA
fosters those partnerships between academia and industry,
particularly our community and technical colleges, to support
STEM and STEAM education and grow that skilled and technical
workforce pipeline?
Mr. Nelson. A good example would be NASA has about 17,000
civil servants, but NASA has about 47,000 contractors, and they
all wear the NASA badge. Now, those contractors have to have
suppliers, and many times just exactly what you said already,
an eloquent presentation, you don't have to have the college
degree. But if you've had training at a community college or a
technical college, technicians, as part of the supply chain of
everything that goes in to the rocket, the spacecraft, the
preparations, all the things to keep humans alive in space or
our machines alive in space that do such wondrous things for
us, it's all a part. And so you need flexibility. You need that
ability to tap whatever it is that supplies it, and therefore,
it gets you to the STEM education. You want to inspire these
kids at early ages to get interested in these fields so that we
have an abundant supply of people, whatever their chosen
occupation is, to feed the space program everything that it
needs.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Miller, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. And
thank you to Administrator Nelson for joining this afternoon.
And I just want to say one thing, and then I'll digress. To
be clear, it's nobody's intention to cut the funding for NASA,
but this is what happens when we as a full body of the House
can't come together for the betterment of our country and every
single American with--inside of it.
But thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Ranking Member
again.
Administrator Nelson, as you may know, I have the privilege
of representing the NASA Glenn Research Center in Ohio's 7th
Congressional District. I visited the facility just a few short
weeks ago, and I'm grateful to the center Director, Dr. Jimmy
Kenyon, and the rest of the facility staff for pulling together
such an informative visit. It really was amazing.
I enjoyed the opportunity to tour the facility, learn more
about Glenn's cutting-edge work, and to see for myself some of
the projects that we've discussed right here at this Committee,
including Glenn's research on fission surface power.
As part of my visit, we also held a roundtable with NASA
officials, local elected officials, and other members of the
local aerospace industry where we discussed a strong desire to
grow NASA Glenn's footprint in Ohio. You may be aware that
while total NASA spending is up 60 percent in recent years,
Glenn's budget has grown closer to 10 to 20 percent, which some
have interpreted as a reflection of Glenn's status in NASA's
constellation of facilities.
Administrator Nelson, can you explain the importance of
NASA Glenn and Ohio to NASA and its mission and provide
reassurance to Glenn's workforce and the surrounding
communities that rely on Glenn's presence, that Glenn continues
to be and will continue to be an integral part of NASA's
mission moving forward?
Mr. Nelson. Not only in our space research does Glenn do
just incredible things, a lot of which we've already discussed
here, for example, you said the nuclear production of
electricity, but also nuclear propulsion that we've already
discussed here. But also, Glenn has a major component in
aeronautics research and is involved in its wind tunnels, in
other experimentation on producing, for example, what we're
going to fly at the end of this year, the needle-nosed radical
design future transport to go supersonic but create a low sonic
boom so that it can go supersonic over populated areas that----
Mr. Miller. Right.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Otherwise you can't because the
boom is just too jarring for the population, or for what will
be--for example, we got a program going with Boeing right now
on what will ultimately be the replacement for the Boeing 737,
the workhorse of commercial aviation----
Mr. Miller. Right.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. For medium haul, single aisle
passenger aircraft. This one's going to have a 25 percent
greater efficiency, and therefore, 25 percent less fuel by the
design of the wing and the design of the engines. That is going
on at Glenn right now.
Mr. Miller. It is. And during my visit, we went over that,
and it's absolutely fascinating and exciting to see. Given
Glenn's expertise in a number of fields, including propulsion
and communications, I'd love to see the facility designated as
a program lead in electrical aircraft propulsion, the
communication services program, and more. Can you walk us
through NASA Glenn's plans for the future of these programs and
NASA Glenn, and maybe even, Administrator, commit to
designating them as program leads?
Mr. Nelson. NASA always helps create the research that we
happily share with the private sector. This is an area--
specifically you ask for electric propulsion. This is an area
that the private sector has exceeded our expectations because
the private sector is producing electric-powered aircraft that
not only are going to change the way of getting around in the
urban setting, but on short haul aircraft are likely to become
electric-powered aircraft. And a lot of that is being done at
Glenn.
Mr. Miller. Well, I appreciate that, Administrator. And
just again, maybe just consider, even to commit to designating
them as program leads would make us very happy and a lot of
production going on in northeast Ohio.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North
Carolina, Mrs. Foushee, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Administrator Nelson, for appearing before
this Committee and for your testimony here today.
NASA has a significant footprint in my home State of North
Carolina, supporting more than 1,100 jobs and generating more
than $175 million in State economic output. And through NASA's
National Space Grant College and Fellowship Project
administered by North Carolina State University, the North
Carolina Space Grant Program has been at the forefront of
supporting STEM research and facilitating aerospace workforce
development and outreach efforts across the State for decades.
Additionally, North Carolina Space Grant's longstanding
partnership with the North Carolina community college system
attracts community colleges across the State to participate in
its North Carolina Community College Research Pathways and High
Altitude Ballooning Challenge programs. In my home district
alone, the North Carolina Space Grant program supports nine
graduate research fellows, a faculty research grant at UNC
(University of North Carolina) Chapel Hill, and two community
college research grant initiatives at Alamance Community
College and Durham Tech.
And I must say I was thrilled at the recent announcement
naming Christina Koch as one of Artemis 2 mission crew members.
Ms. Koch attended high school in my district at the North
Carolina School of Math and Science, and notably, the North
Carolina Space Grant supplied funding for her NASA internship
while she was a student at North Carolina State University. She
would then go on to become an astronaut and set a record for
the longest single spaceflight by a woman with a total of 328
days in space, and also to participate in the first all-women
spacewalks. So I had to get that in there.
I am interested in hearing your thoughts on a report issued
by the NASA Inspector General (IG) last week that found that--
and I'm quoting from the report--despite support from agency
leaders and multiple initiatives to increase diversity, we
found NASA has made little progress in increasing the
representation of women and minorities in its civilian
workforce or leadership ranks. So my question is how will NASA
work to address the causes identified in the IG's report of the
lack of discernible progress to advancing diversity, equity,
and inclusion and accessibility at NASA, such as the need to
move from a compliance-driven siloed approach to one integrated
across agency functions and embedded into agency culture?
Mr. Nelson. That IG report just came out. We accept all
seven recommendations. Those are being implemented, but they
have been implemented starting 2 years ago because that report
gives you their conclusion on the basis of 10 years of data,
but that data stopped in the 10 years ending 2021. So as soon
as we got in, we take this thing on diversity very seriously,
and I welcome that IG report, and I agree. But that isn't
something that--since we just got the IG report last week--that
we're starting. We've been working on this for the last 2
years.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. I'm glad to hear that.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield the rest of my time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Strong, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Lucas.
And congratulations, Administrator Nelson, on the
successful flight of Artemis 1. I had the pleasure of watching
the splashdown at Toyota Field in Huntsville, Alabama with many
of the engineers from Marshall Space Flight Center and our
contractors that are so able in what they do. The success of
this mission would not be possible without the 7,000 employees
in my district who make--who work at NASA's Marshall Space
Flight Center who continue to work, and the refinement of the
Space Launch System is vital to the success of the upcoming
Artemis 2 crew flight. NASA's work ensures that the United
States remains a beacon of science, discovery, and exploration.
Administrator Nelson, as you had mentioned, NASA
collaborates with a variety of research centers and government
agencies. The Marshall Space Flight Center works closely with
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) on nuclear
thermal rocket engines, which make it possible for--to power a
spacecraft to the Moon, Mars, and beyond. Administrator, I'm
glad you mentioned nuclear thermal research. The Fiscal Year
2024 President's budget allocates $15.8 million for nuclear
thermal propulsion research. NTP research, development, and
testing are just the fundamental of spaceflight. Do you feel
that the $15.8 million adequately reflects the importance of
this research?
Mr. Nelson. I remind you that the President proposes and
the Congress disposes.
Mr. Strong. I get it.
Mr. Nelson. And you have consistently, as the Congress, in
your wisdom, determined for nuclear thermal $110 million each
appropriation cycle for nuclear thermal. What I want to urge
you to do is don't leave out nuclear electric propulsion
because that's even a faster way of getting to Mars. But there
are uses for each, and so I thank you for bringing that to the
attention of the Committee.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. If this turns out this research is
unfunded, should we expect further delays in rocket propulsion
test programs?
Mr. Nelson. Are you talking about nuclear thermal or
nuclear----
Mr. Strong. Yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Electric?
Mr. Strong. No, not electric propulsion.
Mr. Nelson. Nuclear thermal?
Mr. Strong. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. As a matter of fact, I think we have just
announced a program called DRACO (Demonstration Rocket for
Agile Cislunar Operations) that will be partially funded by us
and by DARPA on nuclear thermal propulsion, and I'll have to
get you the details of that project. But I'm pretty sure that's
already underway.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. There's more to Artemis than just a
rocket or capsule. NASA needs much more landers, surface
habitats, power. The list goes long and the activity takes time
to develop. At the same time, NASA's budget is not immune from
inflation, and, as previously mentioned, has already
experienced delays in schedule for the future of Artemis
missions. What is NASA doing to ensure the right programs and
offices are being established now at the center with the
expertise to guide these efforts so that NASA can successfully
execute its exploration goals?
Mr. Nelson. For the first time in a long time, we have set
up a program office for the Moon-to-Mars initiative, and that
has already named the head of--as the program manager that
operates under the Exploration Mission Directorate, which is
headed by Jim Free, and so that is underway.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Nelson.
Mr. Chairman Lucas, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman North Carolina, Mr.
Jackson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jackson. Thank you.
Sir, in a moment, I'm going to ask you about Europa because
it's a mission I'm really excited about. I don't think enough
Americans know about it, and I want to give you the opportunity
to tell people about why it's such an exciting mission. Before
I do, I just want to make a couple of observations. I think one
of the themes that we're hearing today is spend less but go
faster, and I think you're probably familiar with those twin
requests, and I know that it's a difficult balance, but it does
feel Like there's just broad enthusiasm for your mission and
for recent accomplishments and for things that are just beyond
the horizon.
I also want to thank your Administration for being very
intentional about reaching out to Members of this Committee.
I'm a new Member, and your Administration has really been
intentional about sitting down with me and educating me about
some of the missions that are coming up. Dr. Jessica Watkins
came to my office, and I just asked her every question under
the Sun, including what is the first step of becoming an
astronaut, and she told me that it's you go online and apply at
USAJobs.gov, which I couldn't believe. I asked her to send me
the link, and we're going to keep the dream alive.
I also wasn't aware of the footprint in my district for
manufacturing. I was just under the assumption that NASA didn't
have anything to do with my district, and I represent
Charlotte, North Carolina. And they showed me the map that
showed me a lot of manufacturing partners there in the
district, which is something that I talked to my constituents
now in town halls, something that we can be proud of, that we
didn't even know about.
And now, with those general observations, Europa, why is
this such a special mission?
Mr. Nelson. It is in law that NASA has a mission to
determine if there is life out in the universe. Things like the
James Webb Space Telescope are helping us understand more and
more about how big this universe is.
But here in our own solar system, we're going to Mars,
we're digging right now those titanium-filled tubes. We're
going to bring them back. We're going to see was there life
there. We want to go to other parts of the universe, of the
solar system, where we have a chance of getting to within a
reasonable amount of time, and Europa is a moon of one of the
planets that it's very cold on the outside, but underneath,
because of the heat of the core of the moon, there is a sea.
And if there's a sea of water, is there life there? And so we
want to find that out.
We're doing the same thing over on another planet. We're
going to go there. It's got a thick cloud. This is--which one
is this that's hotter? Venus, we're going to Venus. It has a
shroud--a cloud, that--cloud cover that is so thick--we're
going to first characterize that cloud cover, and then later
with another mission, we're going to go down through that cloud
cover, down and see what's underneath and see if there's any
life there. And so we have these kinds of probes going out. And
Europa is thought, if there's life out there, it may well be in
that sea of Europa.
Mr. Jackson. And from what I understand, the remarkable
part of this mission is it doesn't even require landing on
Europa. We're going to send a probe through a spray into space
of liquid vapor to intercept the liquid vapor on pass. Am I
right about that?
Mr. Nelson. Yes. And this, by the way, is a mission that's
going pretty soon. It's going next year, 2024, going to--they
call it the Europa Clipper.
Mr. Jackson. It's fantastic. And I'll just leave you with
one more general observation. I have a theory that every time
you see a bunch of NASA employees cheering, it means that
something undeniably good has happened, and I struggle to come
up with another group of people for whom that is true. Knowing
nothing else other than a certain group of people is cheering,
that something good for the world has occurred, it's really
hard to think of another group for which that's true. Thank
you.
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, around the space program,
interestingly, people can unite. It's a unifying factor, and
that, indeed, for me, who spent most of my adult life in
service to our country, that to me is a very gratifying fact.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman in California, Mr.
Garcia, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Administrator, good to see you, and very proud of your
tact and not informing the Army guy that Army guys can't go to
space, so that was very, very gentlemanly of you. Thank you for
your service, Mr. Jackson. Just kidding.
I, first of all, want to thank you for your service and
everything you've done. I feel like we've seen each other more
probably than our respective families in the last 3 weeks.
Thanks again for coming out to the 27th District in California
for your NASA town hall. We talked about it there briefly, but
I want to try to help as much as I can even from the
authorizing or appropriations perspective on helping Armstrong
and Edwards get the better aircraft, the blue and white air
chase aircraft out there. I know that the team out there has
been bending over backward to try to get, you know, the new
longerons on the F-15 to get--keep these things basically
through service life extension, fatigue life extension
programs.
But as I--as we look at all those bills sort of pile up and
then we look long for lineup, right, on the long-term
sustainment side of these aircraft, I keep coming back to if we
can just work with the DOD (Department of Defense) to get NASA
at some point to get, you know, not front-of-line privileges
but pretty close. The fact that we have Blue Angels flying with
F-18 Super Hornets right now and not classic Hornets tells me
that there are jets out there that we should be able to get,
two-seat F-18s or two-seat F-15EXs.
And I know that NASA, I think, in the last bill has a
requirement to report to CJS (Commerce, Justice, Science) on
the discussions that you're having with DOD to get those chase
aircraft. I guess, sir, what is the status of those
discussions, and what can we do to help facilitate? Do we need
to just get NASA, DOD, and Congress in the same room at the
same time and do a wire diagram that find you two aircraft? I'm
worried, frankly, that the--you know, some of these planes had
real risk of the wings falling off of them and landing in
civilian populations doing very important missions out there.
What can we do to help you, and how are those conversations
going thus far?
Mr. Nelson. After I saw you, Congressman, at Edwards, I am
told that they have identified the used military aircraft that
we need and that that's in the pipeline. So I was encouraged on
the two that we need. Now, if I find that there's a hiccup
there, I'm going to call you----
Mr. Garcia. OK.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Because we desperately need--we
need three of them.
Mr. Garcia. Right. That's right.
Mr. Nelson. We need one old one for parts that we can
scavenge to put on the other two.
Mr. Garcia. And we're coming up on the end of production
lines for some of these four-gen two-seaters that fit the
mission out there, so I'm concerned that the DOD is going to
stiff arm you or keep giving, you know, the ugly birds instead
of the golden birds, and you're going to be left holding the
bag of parts and planes that don't need those parts and need
other parts in--10 years from now.
So maybe we can work with your staff to see which aircraft
they're talking about, and then we go beat the drum with DOD
partners to make sure that we're keeping that dialog going
because I do think it's a safety-of-flight issue, and once we
lose those, we don't just lose the chase aircraft, we lose the
mission basically because the test aircraft can no longer get
up there. So if you're OK with it, I'd love to keep this
conversation going offline, staff level especially, and find
that wire diagram to those aircraft and figure out if that's
the right answer or if there's a longer-term solution that we
can get newer aircraft for you.
Mr. Nelson. We can also use some G5, so if you got--help us
identify those, too.
Mr. Garcia. All right. Well, we'll deal with that one as
well, but thank you, Mr. Administrator, again, for your
service. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Sykes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you so much, Chair.
And, Administrator Nelson, it's been a pleasure to be in
your presence today as we're talking about something that has
certainly piqued a lot of interest and conversation in the work
that you do, so thank you for that.
I--in--a couple Committees ago, I declared that the road to
Mars goes through Ohio, and no one challenged me on that, so
we'll assume that's true here. And I heard you talk about some
of the work that you're planning to do, and we're looking
forward to that work. But the challenge with doing that work
with a budget put forth from the majority here that would
significantly stymie that progress, I know, is challenging
here.
And as we all are communicating how our constituencies and
our congressional districts are connected to NASA, I am not
going to be excluded from that. I am fortunate to represent
Ohio's 13th Congressional District, which is the hometown of
Judy Resnick. We know that the road to Mars started with Neil
Armstrong from Ohio, and obviously, you served in the Senate
with our good Ohioan John Glenn.
But I also want to talk to you about some of the--our
district's connection to the rubber industry and the fact that
Goodyear and its workers helped supply the tires for the Apollo
missions. And you continue to work with suppliers and
manufacturers across northeast Ohio, particularly in Ohio's 13.
I just want you to elaborate on that, talk about any other
partnerships that you know and how they can be and would be
inhibited by the Default on America Act that was passed out of
chambers yesterday.
Mr. Nelson. I have seen, Congresswoman, some of the
prototypes of the wheels of these Moon buggies, and then of
course, we get to Mars, they'll be all the more sophisticated.
Interestingly, they're not made of rubber. They're--but it's
coming from tire companies that are making the presentations.
And it's incredible. It's got to be highly durable. It's got to
have the right kind of traction so that it doesn't get stuck.
In some cases, it's got to be expandable into the proper size,
and in some cases, it's made of exquisite materials. All of
this is in research, and the tire companies such as Goodyear
are in fact doing the research for us.
It will be one component of a rover. One of the rovers
being worked on right now will be a habitable rover where the
astronauts can actually get in, take off their spacesuits that
they would have to have in the vacuum of the Moon with no
atmosphere, and then they'd be able to live more comfortably as
they roamed around the surface. So that is well underway.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Administrator. And I want to talk a
bit about the workforce and the people who are actually moving
this type of technology forward. You mentioned semiconductors
in another conversation. In yesterday's discussion, we talked
about how the--this budget we received that was passed out
yesterday would inhibit 280,000 semiconductor technicians from
our communities, and Ohio would be one of those places where we
would lose quite a bit. And I know that NASA has been
facilitating technology transfers with the private sector, and
the talent exchange programs we've discussed with NASA
employees and the industry helps you maintain your edge. Again,
keeping in mind and thinking about the budget that was passed
forth and losing the semiconductor employees, what does that
look like in NASA? And, of course, want you to discuss how--and
if you can commit to working with Congress and labor unions
that represent your employees to make sure that we're doing
right by them and they have all of the tools that they need in
order to work safely and get the funding that they need to live
comfortably in northeast Ohio and beyond.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you so much for bringing this up because
we don't have the statutory authority to do this talent
exchange program like--the Department of Defense has that. And
so we have made a proposal to the Congress, to this Committee
specifically, in order to have that statutory authority. So may
I send our staff to talk to you about this?
Mrs. Sykes. Absolutely.
Mr. Nelson. That would be very helpful if you all are
considering a NASA authorization bill.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Mr. Administrator. I would very much
welcome that conversation, and I very appreciate your time and
your expertise.
And, Mr. Chair, I yield back the remainder of my time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has--yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from the Republic of
Texas, Dr. Babin, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Administrator, great to see you. Thank you for
being here, as usual, very informative, entertaining. We
appreciate the good job, service you're doing.
Some of this has been asked a little bit, touched around by
my friend and colleague from Texas, Mr. Weber. Recent anomalies
aboard the Russian Segment have caused concern about the safety
of the crew. Last December, a Soyuz vehicle attached to the ISS
began leaking coolant, causing the crew to stay longer than
anticipated and new vehicles to launch to provide
transportation. A similar leak occurred on an uncrewed Progress
vehicle later on. In 2021, the Nauka module errantly fired its
thrusters, causing the ISS to spin 1 1/2 times until the
thrusters finally ran out of fuel. Additionally, Russian
segments of the ISS have experienced leaks going back several
years. We held a hearing on this topic in 2021.
Please take a moment to--very briefly because I have
several other questions--to discuss the state of the
International Space Station in partnership with Russia. I know
that you've reiterated the partnership remains strong and has
provided an important bridge between our two nations going back
to the cold war years and the Apollo Soyuz testing project. Are
supply chain challenges causing anomalies? Is Roscosmos'
workforce overworked or distracted, or is this just a funding
issue for them?
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman Babin, the Russians have been very
good at everything, and with regard to this anomaly that got
everybody's attention, we think that they are on top of it. I
can't tell you if that's a design issue or if it was a
production issue. We pretty well ruled out with a consultation
with the Russians that it was a meteorite that had come in.
Mr. Babin. OK.
Mr. Nelson. However, that, you know, is still being
explored.
Mr. Babin. All right.
Mr. Nelson. But there has not been a problem of
transparency between the two of us.
Mr. Babin. All right.
Mr. Nelson. We built the station together, we operate it
together, and both the cosmonauts and the astronauts know that
we have to continue to work together----
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. For the safety of the crew.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. The United States is
prohibited from sending money to Russia under the Iran-North
Korea-Syria Nonproliferation Act, or INKSNA. A waiver exists
for payments for the ISS, but it expires in 2025. NASA asked
for an extension of the waiver in its yearly legislative
request package. The ISS was recently extended to 2030 under
the CHIPS and Science Act, and the Russians announced their own
extension to 2028 just yesterday. Given the current
geopolitical climate, please take a moment to explain why it is
necessary to once again waive INKSNA for ISS payments now that
we provide our own transportation to the ISS under the
Commercial Crew Program, and this budget request proposes to
deorbit the ISS using U.S. capabilities?
Mr. Nelson. Deorbit the ISS with the Russians. But in the
case that something happened to the geopolitics between now and
2030, the funding request of some $200 million in next year
2024 is in order to start to build that capability if we had to
deorbit it safely ourselves.
Mr. Babin. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. Now, the basic operation of the station is we
do it together. We don't send our astronauts just on American
vehicles. We integrate the crews----
Mr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. For exactly the reason that we
always need both nations on the station in case something went
wrong with one of the vehicles having access to get us up
there, that we'd have the crew up there of both nations to
operate the station.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. OK. Thank you.
Really quick. I represent Johnson Space Center (JSC), home
of the Astromaterials Acquisition and Curation Facility with
nearly a 50-year history and the expertise to go along with it.
Can you commit that the Mars sample curation and storage will
be managed by JSC? But--not only that, but also located at JSC
because they have decades of experience with not only lunar
samples, but with comet samples, meteorite samples, solar wind
samples, as well as asteroid samples.
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman, as you know, on that office,
that's going to be at Johnson, and what I can commit to is that
it will be the program office at Johnson that will decide what
will be done with that sample.
Mr. Babin. OK.
Mr. Nelson. And I think we better leave it to the experts,
and that expertise is residing at Johnson.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. I'm out of time, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
Chairman Lucas. I think the gentleman has accomplished a
lot and has yielded back the remainder of his time.
With that, the Chair turns to the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So my constituents in western Pennsylvania don't
immediately think of NASA when considering the impact of
Federal funding on our community. NASA programs are funding--
NASA programs and funding are critical to our local economy,
technological development, and educational opportunities.
Yesterday, I had the privilege of meeting with Deputy
Administrator Melroy, and she talked to us about not just her
passion for STEM education, for equity and diversity in STEM
education, which is a huge initiative in Pittsburgh, which is
becoming an innovation hub. Also, what most people don't know,
we're also an area that is looking into space exploration. It
was a shock to me also. And we--and I've talked about it here
before, and we talked about it yesterday. We have an employee-
owned robotics and space company called Astrobotic, and they're
building one of the rovers that we are hoping will be one of
the first-ever private company to make it to the Moon.
And we just talked about how NASA has been able to support
that. We talked about the risk, and we talked about how that
risk is worth it, and how not only will that have benefits and
payout for Astrobotic, but for our entire region, and obviously
our country. Even without a physical facility in my district,
the agency has a strong presence, as I've said, in the region
through these partnerships, also with our local universities
and businesses and organizations, partnerships with Carnegie
Mellon University and the University of Pittsburgh that support
research and educational programs in robotics, artificial
intelligence, space--and space exploration.
NASA's Office of STEM Engagement provides grants and
scholarships and internships to students pursuing careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. These
opportunities help to prepare our local students for high-tech
careers and provide a pathway to success in growing industries.
To inspire the next generation of innovators, we must continue
to fully fund agencies like this.
Space and science and technology are admittedly not my area
of expertise, but how does NASA funding for space research and
exploration improve living standards here on Earth? And how do
we highlight this to people in communities who have never
envisioned themselves as contributors to the work your agency
does?
Mr. Nelson. Well, Congresswoman, you just made an eloquent
statement about NASA and about your district that the
Congressman from North Carolina said he didn't think that any
NASA stuff was going on in his district until he checked. And
aren't you surprised?
Ms. Lee. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. And it's in every one of your districts when
you actually see how many suppliers there might be.
Your question about STEM education is absolutely critical
to every congressional district because it's our future. It's
the future of the Artemis generation, science, technology,
engineering, mathematics, the spinoffs from the space
technology that are occurring that you don't think of, the
cancer research that's going on onboard the International Space
Station right now, the camera in your pocket in your cell phone
is a NASA invention of a camera on a chip. And it goes on and
on. So I could keep going on and on.
Ms. Lee. That's--I think you made an excellent point. And I
just think it's important that we use these opportunities. You
know, we think oftentimes that, you know, space exploration and
the work of NASA is otherworldly. It's not something that
impacts our day-to-day lives, and we just want to make sure
that we're using opportunities to lift up the ways that it
impacts us from GPS (Global Positioning System) to our
cameras----
Mr. Nelson. To good jobs.
Ms. Lee [continuing]. And--exactly, to good jobs. To that
end, how is NASA funding being used to create more
opportunities to attract, train, and retrain talent from
diverse geographic and socioeconomic backgrounds?
Mr. Nelson. NASA directly puts into the national economy
over $75 billion. That equates to about 400,000 jobs directly.
But indirectly, just think what would be the advantages of a
community such as yours, the fact that we have GPS, advance
warnings on weather that's coming--that are coming from a lot
of the assets that we have up there in space, of the STEM
education that the space program excite people in all
communities into those fields that provide not necessarily in
space but the STEM subjects, very robust and good-paying jobs
and stable jobs, by the way.
So here we are, this little bitty agency called NASA, $27
billion in our budget, compared to the budget of the United
States, and look what influence it's had on the economy and the
well-being and the quality of life of our people here on the
Earth.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady----
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Ms. Lee. Thank you so much. I yield.
Chairman Lucas. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Collins, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Nelson, I've been very focused on ensuring
that the United States continues to lead the world in space
exploration, and that means American astronauts getting to the
Moon before China. And I've heard you say before NASA has
partnerships with the private industry. And the other side of
me, I'm also interested in making sure that we get the most
bang for our buck when it comes to investing in our space
exploration. Can you tell me about fixed-price contracts with
commercial space companies and how they've impacted cost to
taxpayers?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, there are all kind of contracts
that we use, and increasingly, we're trying to use fixed-price
contracts. For example, the commercial crew to the space
station, OK, there were two. There was Boeing, and there was
SpaceX. And an agreement was entered into that each launch NASA
would pay X number of dollars to take a crew of four to the
International Space Station. That's a fixed price. That fixed
price means that if the company overruns those costs, they
don't get the cost-plus contract. That has been the case with
Boeing. As you know, Space X, has now for 3 years been sending
astronauts to the International Space Station, and Boeing has
had a series of problems. We are very thankful and hopeful that
the first Boeing mission with astronauts is going to occur
later this year, but that didn't cost NASA any more money. That
was a fixed-price contract. So that's a pretty good example.
Mr. Collins. Yes. Can you quantify the savings on that
between the two or----
Mr. Nelson. Well, I can tell you that Boeing--this is off
the top of my head--has spent millions of dollars more over and
above what was the price that NASA paid, and the cost of delays
after 3 years of delays and having to do extra test flights, it
has been substantial. It's a matter of public record. We can
get it for.
Mr. Collins. All right. So you think you'll be doing more
of the fixed-price contracts?
Mr. Nelson. As much as we can. Now, a lot of the contracts
that we have, you can't shoehorn it into a fixed price because
it's a development. It's an exquisite kind of development of a
new kind of thing or rocket or spacecraft, that you can't----
Mr. Collins. Right.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. All fit into the parameters of a
fixed-price contract.
Mr. Collins. OK. All right. As a small businessman, I've
been sitting over here. I think I got a way to put you in the
black permanently. I've got a wife and a daughter at home. The
backyard, it looks like Swiss cheese because I can't find water
to save my life. Now, you got a satellite that'll find it in
the desert.
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. Collins. I think we could work something out there. You
got a business there.
Mr. Nelson. Well, as a matter of fact, that technology is
there, and it can be used.
Mr. Collins. Yes. That's all Mr. Chairman, thank you. I
yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Virginia,
Congresswoman McClellan.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you.
Mr. Nelson. And, by the way, Congressman, we employ lots of
trucking also on our assets.
Mr. Collins. Well, that's good to hear. Yes, sir. You're
actually in the trucking business in a way.
Mr. Nelson. A different kind of truck.
Mr. Collins. That's it.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired on both
ends.
The gentlelady is recognized.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Administrator Nelson.
I am the only Member of this Committee from Virginia. And I
will remind the Committee that manned spaceflight actually
started in Virginia at Langley, the birthplace of the Mercury
mission that--most of the leadership for Mercury, Gemini, and
Apollo were Langley engineers. That's where Katherine Johnson
did the calculations to allow the Mercury astronauts to land
safely.
And this is probably the hearing that I've been looking
forward to the most. I was born, unfortunately, 20-some days
after the last Apollo flight, but I grew up watching the space
shuttle flights, and I'm very excited that soon my son and
daughter will be able to watch us return manned spaceflight.
But Langley Research Center leads hypersonic research for
NASA, developing the technology for flight over five times the
speed of sound, and this is an area of national importance
where NASA has valuable expertise and facilities to contribute.
And, Administrator Nelson, can you discuss NASA's role in
hypersonics research and development and how the budget request
supports your goals?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am. We are a science research
organization, and as such, we are also an aeronautics
organization. That's the first A in NASA. And, as a result, we
are interested in things going faster in the air, and
hypersonics is that. The biggest part of the contracts on
hypersonics are in the Department of Defense, but NASA
contributes with regard to science research and aeronautics
research. So that's how we're involved.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you. I was also excited to see that
NASA recently launched the Tropospheric Emission Monitoring of
Pollution (TEMPO) Instrument, which Langley Research Center was
involved in developing. This instrument will provide new
insight into air quality in North America with neighborhood-
level accuracy. What program does NASA have or need to fully
utilize this valuable data, including for climate and
environmental justice screening applications?
Mr. Nelson. And this is the one about the particulates in
the air?
Mrs. McClellan. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. OK. Well, that's particularly a sensitive topic
for me right now with all the pollen in the air and my raspy
voice, you can hear part of the result. This mission is going
to help us better understand exactly what is happening as we
are getting all of these particulates in the air that degrade
the quality of our air. We've done that before with some of our
instruments, but it is designed to better enhance the quality
of the data, and that's what it's going to do.
Mrs. McClellan. Thank you.
Mr. Nelson. It's called TEMPO.
Mrs. McClellan. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. And NOAA will be a partner with us on this.
Mrs. McClellan. Great, great. We know that K-12 teachers
play an integral role in inspiring students to pursue STEM
fields. Can you talk about some of NASA's initiatives to
support educators in developing an engaging STEM curriculum for
their students?
Mr. Nelson. We have $158 million in the budget request to
the Congress for STEM education. It's one of the best tools
that we can have, and it's--as we say in the South, it's like--
it's as easy as falling off a log because how can you get kids
involved in STEM subjects through the subject matter of space?
Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, it is a
natural fit. And we utilize our astronauts in their off time to
go into schools and talk to kids about this. Needless to say,
as you would expect, they're pretty well-received when they go
in.
Mrs. McClellan. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would say if I could
get an astronaut to come with me to my son's school, I would
get a lot of cool points. So with that, I will yield back my
time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back her time.
And with that, the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. McCormick, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCormick. And thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'm really excited to have you here today, Mr.
Administrator, and it's an honor. You've lived truly the
American dream life. As a naval aviator, as an ER doc, as a
logistician, which is kind of like a payload specialist, I was
just wondering if you had any guidance on how a Congressman
might get into outer space? I've heard it's been done before,
and I was wondering if basically, could you help a brother out?
Mr. Nelson. Today, we have a specific kind of astronaut.
They have to be all able to go out and do a spacewalk, which
was not the case in the past. They have to have technical and
scientific training, which you certainly have, and they have to
go through a rigorous evaluation. And then once you get through
all that, you have to go through the physical and psychological
examination. I've had one psychiatric exam in my life, and that
was the astronaut psychiatric exam. I used to tell my
colleagues over in the Senate, at least I was certifiably sane.
So if you're interested in it, let me tell you about an
astronaut from Georgia, Sonny Collins, he was terribly--his
life was taken from him in a commercial airliner. But Sonny
Collins was a medical doctor, he was a professional soccer
player, he was a jet pilot, and on top of all that, he became
one of the most beloved astronauts in the Corps, and he was
taken way too early from us, and he was from Georgia.
Mr. McCormick. What a great tribute. Thank you for that.
I'm sure the psych part might be my problem. I still eat
crayons from the Marine Corps experience, so I'm not sure how
that's going to go.
With that said, I wanted to address a more serious topic,
which is space debris. We've seen it building over and over,
over the years. We've seen that some nations have actually
decided to blow up some things in space and see how it goes,
and we've had to actually had avoidance for our own satellites
because of that, and it's going to become a bigger and bigger
issue.
I know there's a lot of different things out there. We've
talked about lasers, we've talked about magnets, we've talked
about all kinds of things. What do you think the most
important--what do you think--do we have a consensus on where
we're going with this? Are there new technologies on the
horizon? What do you think the best way to handle this is.
Mr. Nelson. We have a consensus in the United States. That
doesn't always help the problem when others on the planet go
and do ASAT (anti-satellite weapons) test and put up tens of
thousands of pieces of space junk that we have to move the
space station, interestingly. Both the Russians and the Chinese
militaries have conducted those and put up a lot of junk. And
yet, we have to do something about it. Now, we're doing the
science research on what to do about it, but another way of
doing about it is don't do it in the future, anybody. And so
design your rockets such that you can deorbit them in a
controlled manner. Design your spacecraft so when it's useless
that you can send it higher into a graveyard orbit and not have
it come down in pieces. But everybody's got to do it, and it's
a next major problem.
Mr. McCormick. Hopefully, we can come to a consensus
internationally on that.
My final question is basically who do you think should be
in charge--do we have an organization that we have or do we
need to come up with a new organization to be able to manage
kind of like the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration) does for
the space or for the aeronautics what we're doing in the
interspace and even the larger orbital system? Who do you think
should manage that in the future?
Mr. Nelson. I'm not sure I understand, to manage what----
Mr. McCormick. The traffic. In other words, just like we
have air traffic controllers. Who's going to manage the
conflict of satellites and other space stations and so forth
that are--that need to be deconflicted into the future?
Mr. Nelson. If it involves astronauts in space, we're going
to be involved. If it is the launching of rockets, the FAA is
involved. If it is the managing of space junk, which was your
last question, to be determined by the Congress, where do you
want that to be organized and regulated by?
Mr. McCormick. Do you think there should be a central
agency that does all that together, or do you think it needs to
remain separate? And that's my final question. I apologize for
going over.
Mr. Nelson. Separate from what?
Mr. McCormick. Separate from each other, or should there be
one organization that deconflicts all three of them?
Mr. Nelson. Eventually, you're going to have to put it
together in something that can manage this totality of all that
junk up there.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. With that, the gentleman's time has
expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Frost, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Hello, Administrator. Great to see another central
Floridian here.
I grew up with the joy of watching rockets and shuttles fly
to the sky over my backyard, saw the renaissance of our space
coast, thanks to NASA's visionary new missions and public-
private partnerships. What role did funding from Congress play
in NASA's work in fostering exploration and also the climate-
centered work that they all do?
Mr. Nelson. Everything, Congressman. Without the budgets,
we wouldn't have been able to do what we've done.
Mr. Frost. Yes. How might your proposed 2024 budget add to
that growth of the work that you're doing?
Mr. Nelson. It's essential if we're going back to the Moon
and on to Mars, and it's essential in our scientific research,
our science program, the planetary exploration program, the
STEM program. It's essential in everything that we do.
Mr. Frost. You know, the Artemis program is truly a
national effort, the work on its SLS rocket system alone being
done in 45 States, while supporting over 28,000 jobs. Artemis
aims to return Americans to the Moon for the first time in over
50 years, develop a sustainable Moon base, and prepare for
human spaceflight to Mars. It's a very exciting time to be
alive. I was just over at Kennedy for the TEMPO launch that
happened, which was an amazing experience, and I encourage
Members to make their way down to Florida to catch one of
those. What are some of the scientific and practical
achievements NASA is hoping for with the Artemis program?
Mr. Nelson. To find out is there life out there in the
universe. So if we get the return samples from Mars, we're
going to examine that. We're going to learn how we can go to
Mars with humans by going back to the Moon, and then we can do
our exploration there and beyond. With our telescopes, we're
learning all new things about the universe and how big it is
and where is there life. As a matter of fact, I asked our
scientists, what's the mathematical probability in this
universe that is so big, the mathematical probability that
there's another middle-sized sun with a middle-sized Earth
revolving around it with the right chemical composition? They
said at least a trillion opportunities that there's another sun
and Earth just like ours that would have a habitable
atmosphere, at least a trillion. I mean, it's limitless in this
huge, huge universe that we have. This is the exciting stuff
that we've been involved in.
Mr. Frost. Yes. We--and we can thank our space program for
technologies from Velcro to MRIs, and I just want people to
remember that this isn't about science for science sake, but
about a government agency that has created much of our modern
way of life.
In your March letter to the Appropriations Committee, you
wrote that if the budget that was passed yesterday, the
Republican budget, if they were to get what they want, it would
reduce NASA's budget to the 2019 numbers, and it would
essentially halt the Artemis program. That would be a massive
step back on these important missions. The University of
Central Florida in my district has several projects connected
to Artemis. They include far out like developing machinery for
mining Moon ice and a rocket that can create its own landing
pad, and others just as creative with obvious use at home like
a new fabric inspired by origami, which can repel fine dust.
What would such a significant reduction in NASA's budget mean
to our research institutions like the University of Central
Florida?
Mr. Nelson. It would be devastating. But not only that, if
you can't get agreement and the only agreement that you can get
is a continuing resolution at the level of the '23
appropriations, that would have a serious curtailment of a
number of our missions.
Mr. Frost. And--you know, and there's already been funds
obviously used for this program, and so if we were to dial back
what y'all are asking for, in a sense, would you say that the
funds that were given would essentially almost be wasted
because of the work that you've put into this already?
Mr. Nelson. Not only that, but the hopes and dreams of a
lot of people, not only in America, but all over the world that
are our partners.
Mr. Frost. Yes. NASA started off as the stuff of dreams,
and now Florida has over 16,000 aerospace companies and over
150,000 aerospace jobs. And I support the Administrator's full
budget request because I want to see our country get the full
economic, scientific, and defense benefits of this amazing
agency next year and for years to come.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Lucas.
Administrator Nelson, lovely to see you again here. You
know, the SpaceX explosion is in the news, and I don't mean to
in any way sound in any way, you know, not serious about it,
but I must say, when I first read that, I was getting a chuckle
seeing the engineers saying this is so exciting how much data
we can get out of this explosion. And it was like once an
engineer, always an engineer. There's an opportunity to learn
that comes from that, and I'm sure you work with a lot of those
folks.
It raises the question, though, that I'd love to sort of
get your thoughts on. There was--Wayne Hale, I'm sure you saw
the quote, Chairman of NASA Advisory Committee, recently said
that NASA should not get tied up in proprietary contracts where
they can't release all the details because the taxpayers have a
stake and need to know. And, you know, I know a lot of my
colleagues have talked about the private companies in their
districts--I've certainly got some in mine--who make these
things and we want a vibrant private sector. But it feels to me
like, as NASA outsources not just the private manufacturing of
the components, but the whole system design and the integration
to a company that ultimately would like to profit from that,
there's got to be this tension on how you manage the IP
(intellectual property).
And so, I guess, the first question is, just, you know, do
you agree with Mr. Hale's statement? How do you think about
that?
Mr. Nelson. I'm not sure what his statement means, but let
me tell you what I believe. In tapping into the ingenuity of
the private sector, you want them to be able--since we transfer
the technology that we develop to the private sector free and
we want them to have the flexibility of being able to use their
creativity, and if it gives them some advantage over a
competitor, so be it if it produces a better product. But when
it comes to the safety of astronauts, I guarantee you, we're
all over it, and we know the details.
And by the way, the comment about SpaceX, that is SpaceX's
modus operandi. They test something, it blows up, it doesn't
work, they go figure it out what went wrong, they fix it, and
they test it again.
Mr. Casten. Yes, and I guess--and I--this is genuine
inquiry. I don't mean--if it sounds like a leading question, I
don't mean it that way. We--as you mentioned, we do give all
this technology we've developed to the private sector, and
they're partners. We want to work with them. We're then giving
them the taxpayer dollars, and if we were doing that in an in-
house operation, there would be no question but that the
taxpayer-funded research, whatever that leads to is, owned by
the taxpayer, right? And so, you know, as you think about these
contracts, of course, they're providing expertise and all the
rest of that as well----
Mr. Nelson. And saving the government money because it's a
partnership.
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. It's a public-private partnership.
Mr. Casten. Yes. But there is some trade on the other side
there if we don't have access to that IP, right? So in other
words, if they were to do that all on their own nickel, that's
a different conversation to me. If--you know, if they're doing
it on our nickel, and--you know, then at some point in the
future, they have something to monetize.
Mr. Nelson. Well----
Mr. Casten. How do you structure that, and what can we do--
what should we be doing to think about that problem? Because
you've sat on both sides of this dais, right?
Mr. Nelson. Well, let's see what the IP is, and let's see
what is the benefit since we, as the government, represent the
people. And if the goal is space exploration and it helps us
get there faster and cheaper, then is that not in--the
advantage? So we'll have to talk specifics, and I'm happy to
respond to a specific about an IP.
Mr. Casten. OK. Well, I--we're getting near the end of the
time, but I sort of--I think of all the technologies that we
talked about of having come out of our space program, and an
awful lot of those were not just sending--you know, sending a
monkey up into space, you know, microwaves and all these sorts
of things and how do we conceptualize of that because we know
that we have created a tremendous amount of value for the
private sector in America because of that stuff, but we made it
publicly available. And if it is taxpayer-funded research, we
don't know what the IP is yet, but we know there is
intellectual property there. And I think the more--from where I
sit, the more that we can make that information publicly
available when it is publicly funded, the more we have the
opportunity to let thousands of flowers bloom, not just the one
we happen to contract with.
Mr. Nelson. So an example would be, I wouldn't have to come
begging you all for money if the camera that we developed on a
chip that is in every one of your cell phones, if we were
getting a certain percent on the sale of that----
Mr. Casten. OK.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. All over the world, we'd have an
unlimited Federal NASA budget.
Mr. Casten. And if we could do mark-to-market accounting on
our purchase of Manhattan, just imagine how wealthy we would
be----
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. But I would note, my colleague makes some
very pressing points, and there's actually a caucus in the--
sub-caucus in the Republican group that they want to talk to
you about that.
Chairman Lucas. With that, the gentleman yields back, and I
recognize the gentleman of New Jersey, Mr. Kean, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witness, Administrator Nelson.
NASA's cooperation with organizations and institutions in
the New Jersey--has helped promote STEM education and inspire
the next generation of scientists and of engineers. By
providing access to cutting-edge technologies and programs,
these partnerships have prepared students for the careers of
tomorrow and help America keep its leading edge.
In my own district, 7th Congressional District in New
Jersey, we're proud to have what's now known as Nokia Bell Labs
headquartered here in mine--with amazing innovations and
breakthrough technologies are happening to this day. One of
these breakthroughs is a partnership between Nokia and NASA to
test the first LTE link on the Moon. Can you talk to us more
about this project and others that will lay the groundwork for
Project Artemis and a lunar base in a little bit more detail?
Mr. Nelson. I don't know the specific name of the project,
but if you're talking about communications to the Moon----
Mr. Kean. And on the Moon and----
Mr. Nelson. Say again?
Mr. Kean. Links on the Moon and to the Moon, yes.
Mr. Nelson. Well, here's an interesting thing that has
happened to us. We're having such a phenomenal success with
this James Webb Space Telescope and other things out there that
need the Deep Space Network, and so there was actually
competing demands on our deep space communication network when
we sent Artemis 1 up. And the James Webb had to actually
concede some time to us. We need that much more robust
communication for all the activities that are going to go in
and around the Moon. Off the top of my head, I don't know if
this is one of them, but if it's communication to the Moon,
it's generally the area--it's going to need a lot more robust
communication. And by the way, part of that we're looking at
with laser communication as the way of communicating instead of
radiofrequency.
Mr. Kean. Right. Right. China and Russia have announced
initial plans to establish an international lunar research
station in the mid-2030's. Do you believe China and Russia can
successfully cooperate in space?
Mr. Nelson. I think what you better do is get the Chairman
to get you in a skiff and get you briefed from an intel
standpoint on that subject.
Mr. Kean. OK. And can you talk a little bit more--
therefore, moving on to a little bit more local issue on NASA
Space Grant Consortium, talking about how it contributes to
various States' STEM education efforts, what you think is the
perceived value of the program in terms of advancing NASA's
overall goal of inspiring and preparing the next generation of
space explorers and innovators?
Mr. Nelson. You just said it better than I could say it,
inspiring and preparing the next generation not only of space
explorers, but as productive American citizens in a high
technology society in the fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. And what better than the space
program to inspire kids to go into those fields?
Mr. Kean. That's great. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now enthusiastically turns the gentleman from New
York to perhaps be the final batter in this game.
Mr. Tonko. Thanks----
Chairman Lucas. Mr. Tonko is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, Chairman, for the enthusiasm, and
thank you and Ranking Member Lofgren for this important
hearing.
And thank you, Administrator Nelson, for your service to
our country and in this latest assignment to ensure that the
United States provides the leadership in space and scientific
discovery.
And as my colleagues have highlighted, NASA is indeed
critical not just as a global leader in space exploration, but
also for its role in expanding access to education and igniting
scientific research and discovery benefits that are felt right
here in our communities and across numerous sectors of our
economy. NASA recently announced the next step in its
Sustainable Flight Demonstrator Project. So, Administrator
Nelson, when it comes to sustainable aviation, can you speak
briefly about the progress NASA is making in just the--has made
in just the past year or so in that space?
Mr. Nelson. By sustainable, we are talking about using less
resources, making it more environmentally acceptable, using
less carbon-based fuels. And so I give you two examples. One is
electric propulsion, of which, in large part, the private
sector has already exceeded the research that we had started on
an electric airplane because the private sector is starting to
produce electric airplanes that will be short haul, usually in
an urban area and short haul so that you'll have many
opportunities other than taxis and trains to get around in
basically an urban area. So it could be, you know, electric
vehicles that pick you up and fly you to a different part of
town or pick you up and fly you to the next suburb city as a
means of transportation. That's one kind of sustainable flight.
Another kind of sustainable flight--and we just signed a
contract with Boeing as our partner on researching the next
major transport to replace the Boeing 737, which is the single-
aisle, medium-distance transport, which is by far the heaviest-
used kind of transport, the equivalent of Airbus and the 737.
And what we are experimenting on is a high wing, very thin
wing, that gives much greater efficiency of the airplane, as
well as the improvement to the engine so that, in effect, the
airliner would save 25 percent of the fuel, be 25 percent more
efficient. Those things are going on right now.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And so what are the implications of
this NASA-led innovation in sustainable aviation on our
economy, on our domestic jobs, global competitiveness, in
commercial aviation?
Mr. Nelson. It's going to be profound. It could be the most
prolific airliner of the future with this kind of design and
the ability to get around without burning fossil fuels,
particularly on short-haul flights. And inner city transfer
could be just amazing.
Mr. Tonko. Earlier, I heard some concerns expressed by some
of my colleagues that have highlighted the impacts of proposed
budget cuts to NASA in Fiscal Year '24, in some estimates,
moving backward to Fiscal Year '22 funding levels rather than
moving forward on a path of discovery and innovation. Is there
anything that you would add to earlier discussion in terms of a
robust 2024 budget requests to enable NASA to accomplish what
it needs to accomplish in that aviation sector?
Mr. Nelson. We have a request to the Congress for aviation
for our aeronautics research of right at $1 billion. That is
the most robust request, and if you all deem it--that you are
going to grant that request, we're going to have the research
that we need.
Mr. Tonko. I thank you.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. I want to
thank Administrator Nelson for his valuable testimony and
Members for their questions. It is always a pleasure having you
for this budget hearing, missed it last year, but this will be
an ongoing process. And we look forward to working with you in
the House and amongst your old colleagues in the Senate and
those folks at CBO (Congressional Budget Office) as we address
the real needs of NASA, which is addressing the needs of the
country and the future.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and written questions from the Members. This hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:29 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by the Honorable Bill Nelson

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
