- ISS AND BEYOND: THE PRESENT AND FUTURE OF AMERICAN LOW-EARTH ORBIT ACTIVITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ISS AND BEYOND: THE PRESENT AND FUTURE
OF AMERICAN LOW-EARTH ORBIT ACTIVITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON SPACE AND AERONAUTICS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

FEBRUARY 14, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-33
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-732PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                     Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              GABE AMO, Rhode Island
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics

HON. BRIAN BABIN, Texas, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois,
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida                Ranking Member
MIKE GARCIA, California              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

February 14, 2024

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Brian Babin, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     9
Written Statement............................................    10

Statement by Representative Eric Sorensen, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives...........    11
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

Mr. Kenneth Bowersox, Associate Administrator, Space Operations
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar, Chief Government and External Relations
Officer, Axiom Space
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

Dr. Robert J. Ferl, Co-Chair, Committee on Biological and
Physical Sciences in Space, The National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine
Oral Statement...............................................    34
Written Statement............................................    36

Mr. Dylan Taylor, Chairman and CEO, Voyager Space
Oral Statement...............................................    50
Written Statement............................................    52

Discussion.......................................................    65

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Kenneth Bowersox, Associate Administrator, Space Operations
Mission Directorate, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration.................................................    84

Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar, Chief Government and External Relations
Officer, Axiom Space...........................................    96
``Ethically cleared to launch?,'' Vasiliki Rahimzadeh, et
al., Science...............................................   104

Dr. Robert J. Ferl, Co-Chair, Committee on Biological and
Physical Sciences in Space, The National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine......................................   108

Mr. Dylan Taylor, Chairman and CEO, Voyager Space................   113

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Article submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
``The `Wild West' of space research,'' Jonathan O'Callaghan,
Aerospace America..........................................   118

ISS AND BEYOND:
THE PRESENT AND FUTURE
OF AMERICAN LOW-EARTH ORBIT ACTIVITIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14, 2024

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m.,
2318 Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brian Babin, [Chairman
of the Subcommittee] presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics
will now come to order. Without objection, the Chair is
authorized to declare recesses of the Subcommittee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled ``ISS (International
Space Station) and Beyond: The Present and Future of American
Low-Earth Orbit (LEO) Activities.
And now I would like to recognize myself for five minutes
for an opening statement.
Today's Subcommittee hearing will address the ongoing
activities of the United States in low-Earth orbit--excuse me--
and as well as the path to a future low-Earth orbit that is
occupied by a range of government, private, and international
actors. Last month, this Subcommittee considered the role of
NASA's (National Aeronautics and Space Administration's)
Artemis program in establishing America as a leader in human
space exploration on the Moon. Our hearing today will focus on
human space exploration activities that are a bit closer to
home, but no less important.
Over 20 years ago, the United States established a
continuous human presence in space through the International
Space Station, which we all know as the ISS. Weighing over
900,000 pounds and spanning the distance of a football field,
the International Space Station is the largest single human-
built structure in space. This one-of-a-kind research platform
orbits 250 miles above Earth at 17,500 miles per hour and
offers researchers several unique scientific opportunities,
including access to a consistent microgravity environment and
the extreme conditions of outer space.
Not only is the ISS a technological wonder, but it also
represents impressive achievements in international cooperation
and foreign policy. The ISS partnership involves five space
agencies from 15 countries, and researchers from over 100
countries have conducted science tied to the ISS. Congress has
extended the lifespan of the ISS program multiple times, most
recently directing NASA to continue operations until 2030.
While ISS continues to yield several impressive scientific
discoveries, the station is showing signs of aging. NASA has
solicited industry input for a U.S. Deorbit Vehicle (USDV)
capable of safely deorbiting the station by burning it up on
reentry. And I hope to learn more today from NASA about the
process that they use to determine that this vehicle is the
best approach for deorbiting and about how they calculated the
proposed cost.
Congress must consider the United States' objectives for
low-Earth orbit, also known as LEO, and plan for a future that
does not rely on the ISS. Selecting the correct approach will
depend upon a range of factors, many of which we will explore
in today's hearing.
First, we must assess how LEO activities promote the
national interest. What does the United States seek to
accomplish in LEO? What are the consequences of a gap in the
United States' LEO presence? How will we maintain the
international relationships that we've grown through--that have
grown through the ISS? And how are other nations, friendly or
otherwise, moving forward with LEO activities?
And then we must understand NASA's role in these
objectives. What research priorities must NASA complete before
ISS retirement or transition? How do NASA's LEO activities
facilitate other human space exploration activities?
Finally, we must understand the developing commercial
marketplace for LEO activities and services. How can commercial
providers facilitate NASA goals? Will these commercial
capabilities be available before retirement of ISS? We have
asked for answers to these questions in previous legislative
efforts, and we continue to stress the importance of obtaining
clarity on these points to inform future LEO activities in a
post-ISS world.
We also cannot forget that America already faces
international competition in LEO. When ISS was constructed, it
was the only facility of its kind. Today, the Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) operates a space station that has hosted taikonauts
in LEO since 2021. The CCP has also solicited international
partnerships to conduct research activities on this station. If
another station is not operable by the time ISS retires, the
Chinese station may be the only human-occupied station
available to scientists for LEO research.
The Committee must consider how to address all of these
factors as it drafts a NASA authorization bill. Today's
discussion will inform those legislative efforts and allow us
to provide NASA with a clear direction at this critical moment
in space innovation.
Of course, I have a very strong interest in this effort.
For years, Houston has been the leader in LEO activities. Not
only does Houston host the Johnson Space Center, which manages
the ISS program, but Houston also is home to an array of space
companies with innovative ideas for commercial use of LEO. But
this is an issue bigger than just Houston. It impacts
scientists, companies, and governments all around the world.
How we respond to this challenge will have far-reaching
effects, so it's very important that we get this right.
So I want to thank our panel of witnesses--I really
appreciate our impressive witnesses here this morning--for
coming and sharing your experience and your expertise on this
matter, and I look forward to our discussion and questions and
answers.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Babin follows:]

Today's subcommittee hearing will address the ongoing
activities of the United States in Low Earth Orbit, and as well
as the path to a future Low Earth Orbit that is occupied by a
range of government, private, and international actors.
Last month, this subcommittee considered the role of NASA's
Artemis program in establishing America as a leader in human
space exploration on the Moon. Our hearing today will focus on
human space exploration activities that are a bit closer to
home, but no less important.
Over 20 years ago, the United States established a
continuous human presence in space through the International
Space Station, which we all know as the ISS. Weighing over
900,000 pounds and spanning the distance of a football field,
the International Space Station is the largest single human-
built structure in space.
This one-of-a-kind research platform orbits 250 miles above
Earth at 17,500 miles per hour, and offers researchers several
unique scientific opportunities, including access to a
consistent microgravity environment and the extreme conditions
of outer space.
Not only is the ISS a technological wonder, but it also
represents impressive achievements in international cooperation
and foreign policy. The ISS partnership involves five space
agencies from 15 countries, and researchers from over 100
countries have conducted science tied to the ISS.
Congress has extended the lifespan of the ISS program
multiple times, most recently directing NASA to continue
operations until 2030. While ISS continues to yield several
impressive scientific discoveries, the station shows signs of
aging.
NASA has solicited industry input for a U.S. Deorbit
Vehicle capable of safely deorbiting the station by burning it
up on reentry. I hope to learn more today from NASA about the
process they used to determine that this vehicle is the best
approach for deorbiting and about how they calculated the
proposed cost.
Congress must consider the United States' objectives for
Low Earth Orbit (also known as LEO) and plan for a future that
does not rely on the ISS. Selecting the correct approach will
depend on a range of factors, many of which we will explore in
today's hearing.
First, we must assess how LEO activities promote the
national interest. What does the United States seek to
accomplish in LEO? What are the consequences of a gap in the
United States' LEO presence? How will we maintain the
international relationships we have grown through ISS? How are
other nations, friendly or otherwise, moving forward with LEO
activities?
Then, we must understand NASA's role in these objectives.
What research priorities must NASA complete before ISS
retirement or transition? How do NASA's LEO activities
facilitate other human space exploration activities?
Finally, we must understand the developing commercial
marketplace for LEO activities and services. How can commercial
providers facilitate NASA goals? Will these commercial
capabilities be available before retirement of ISS?
We have asked for answers to these questions in previous
legislative efforts and continue to stress the importance of
obtaining clarity on these points to inform future LEO
activities in a post-ISS world.
We also cannot forget that America already faces
international competition in LEO. When ISS was constructed, it
was the only facility of its kind. Today, the Chinese Communist
Party operates a space station that has hosted Taikonauts in
LEO since 2021. The CCP has also solicited international
partnerships to conduct research activities on this station. If
another station is not operable by the time ISS retires, the
Chinese station may be the only human-occupied station
available to scientists for LEO research.
The Committee must consider how to address all of these
factors as it drafts a NASA Authorization bill. Today's
discussion will inform those legislative efforts and allow us
to provide NASA with clear direction at this critical moment in
space innovation.
Of course, I have a strong interest in this effort. For
years, Houston has been a leader in LEO activities. Not only
does Houston host the Johnson Space Center, which manages the
ISS program, but Houston also is home to an array of space
companies with innovative ideas for commercial use of LEO. But
this is an issue bigger than just Houston; it impacts
scientists, companies, and governments around the world. How we
respond to this challenge will have far-reaching effects, so
it's important we get this right.
I want to thank our panel of witnesses for sharing their
experience and expertise on this matter, and I look forward to
our discussion.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his statement.

Chairman Babin. So I now recognize the Ranking Member for
his statement.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you, Chairman Babin, for holding
today's hearing, ``The Present and Future of American Low-Earth
Orbit activities, the ISS and Beyond.''
I want to extend a warm welcome to our expert witnesses.
Thank you all for your time and sharing everything that you
have for us today.
This year will mark 24 years of continuous crew occupation
on the International Space Station, a long and cohesive
international partnership with 15 countries, over 3,000
experiments carried out to date.
Last year, I was proud to welcome NASA astronaut Dr. Kate
Rubins to my district. During her visit, Dr. Rubins spoke about
her excitement for the upcoming generation. She and I both
believe that the first explorers to Mars are in first grade
today. What an exciting opportunity that this is for our
Nation's kids. The scientific research currently done on the
ISS is critical to our explorers getting to the surface of
Mars.
I want to recognize the talented and dedicated NASA
workforce and the NASA astronauts Jasmin Moghbeli, Loral
O'Hara, as well as European astronaut Andreas Mogensen and
Japanese astronaut Satoshi Furukawa. They're orbiting 250 miles
above us right now. These brave astronauts make our present and
our future in low-Earth orbit possible.
The International Space Station is an international success
story that the world can be proud of, and I believe that
there's so much more to come. In Congress' most recent NASA
authorization, ISS operations were extended through the year
2030 with planned deorbiting to follow that. This hearing is
intended to examine how close we are to maintaining this
critical timeline.
Continuing to benefit from this incredible laboratory
requires that NASA take prompt action. We must replace the
aging ISS spacesuits that could pose serious risks to our
astronauts. And we must develop a deorbit vehicle in time to
safely control the station's return to Earth over the Pacific
Ocean without risking any lives.
According to the congressionally chartered Aerospace Safety
Advisory Panel, the safety of deorbiting the ISS is not
completely in NASA's hands. This is because a catastrophic
failure could occur with little or no warning. Furthermore,
NASA is planning to transition from being owner and operator of
the ISS to user and customer of one or more commercial space
stations.
As we nurture the success of ISS today, we must vigilantly
prepare for the future of low-Earth orbit. It's a consequential
shift, and we need to make sure we get it right. Many questions
remain at this time. What will be the roles for government and
nongovernment in this changing low-Earth orbit model? What are
the geopolitical implications of ending an International Space
Station? Who will be responsible for safety of NASA's
astronauts on commercial space stations? Is there a market to
support a commercial low-Earth orbit enterprise? How will the
science currently done aboard the ISS continue during this
change? And should there be a national laboratory in low-Earth
orbit?
The year 2030, it's not that far off. I hope today's
hearing provides fulsome answers as the Committee looks to
continue its important role to make sure that we're doing
what's right. A new decade of science that both inspires and
enables our continued leadership, it awaits us today. The
United States must seize this moment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sorensen follows:]

Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Babin, for holding
today's hearing, ``ISS and Beyond: The Present and Future of
American Low-Earth Orbit Activities.'' I want to extend a warm
welcome to our expert witnesses. Thank you for being here.
This year will mark 24 years of continuous crew occupation
on the International Space Station, a long and cohesive
international partnership of 15 countries, with over 3000
experiments carried out to date.
Last year, I was proud to host NASA astronaut, Dr. Kate
Rubins, in my district. During her visit, Dr. Rubins spoke
about her excitement for the upcoming generation. She believes
that first graders are the perfect age to one day go to Mars.
What an exciting possibility for our nation's children! The
scientific research currently done on the ISS is critical to
getting to Mars.
I want to recognize the talented and dedicated NASA
workforce and the NASA astronauts Jasmin Moghbeli, and Loral
O'Hara, as well as European astronaut Andreas Mogensen, and
Japanese astronaut Furukawa Satoshi who are orbiting 250 miles
above us today. These brave astronauts make our present and
future in low Earth orbit (LEO) possible. The ISS is an
international success story the world can be proud of. And I
believe there is much more to come.
In Congress' most recent NASA Authorization, ISS operations
were extended through the end of 2030 with planned deorbiting
to follow. This hearing is intended to examine how close we are
to maintaining this timeline. Continuing to benefit from this
incredible laboratory requires that NASA take prompt action. We
must replace aging ISS space suits that could pose risks to
astronauts, and we must develop a deorbit vehicle in time to
safely control the station's return to earth over the Pacific
Ocean without risking lives on the ground. According to the
Congressionally chartered Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel the
safety of deorbiting the ISS ``is not completely in [NASA's]
hands.'' This is because ``a catastrophic failure could occur
with little or no warning.'' Furthermore, NASA is planning to
transition from being owner and operator of the ISS to user and
customer of one or more commercial space stations.
As we nurture the success of ISS today, we must vigilantly
prepare for the future of Low Earth Orbit. It is a
consequential shift, and we need to get it right. Many
questions remain at this time:
What will be the roles for government and nongovernment in
this changing Low Earth Orbit model? What are the geopolitical
implications of ending an ``International'' space station?
Who will be responsible for the safety of NASA's astronauts
on commercial space stations? Is there a market to support a
commercial low Earth orbit enterprise? How will the science
currently done aboard the ISS continue during the change?
Should there be a national laboratory in low Earth orbit?
The year 2030 is not far off. I hope today's hearing
provides fulsome answers as this Committee looks to continue
its important role in providing clear direction to guide
America's future in low Earth orbit. A new decade of science
that both inspires and enables our continued leadership awaits
us. The United States must seize this moment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.

Chairman Babin. Thank you, Mr. Sorensen, appreciate that.
And now I'd like to recognize the Ranking Member of the
Full Committee for a statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
The Science Committee is often referred to as the Committee
of the future, and the future of low-Earth orbit is a fitting
topic to be considered by this Committee. I recall on the
Committee there was some division when the Committee was
looking at authorizing the ISS, and we were building it and
talking about it. But I think time has proven the proponents of
ISS to be correct.
The ISS laid the foundation for America's future in low-
Earth orbit and beyond, and it demonstrates our increasingly
important leadership of a 15-nation partnership. Now, this is a
strategic and soft-power capability for the United States, and
it's as important today as it was in 1998 when the ISS
Intergovernmental Agreement was signed.
The ISS has also allowed for the growth of the U.S.
commercial launch industry. NASA's investment in ISS commercial
crew and cargo capabilities have reinvigorated our U.S.
commercial launch industry, bringing us positive economic
impact and competitiveness. And in addition, the ISS has served
as a long-term orbiting microgravity laboratory. It enables
basic and applied research such as the work of the Space
Biosciences Division at NASA Ames that's just outside my
district, and it provides a platform for other Federal
Government agencies, as well as commercial entities to carry
out R&D (research and development). However, as has been
mentioned, it won't last forever. It's aging and currently only
authorized through 2030.
Now, NASA wants to continue to use low-Earth orbit for
research, technology risk reduction, and other activities. And
NASA plans to transition those efforts to commercial space
stations, for which NASA plans to be one of many customers.
Now, there are lots of questions about this transition. In many
ways, this hearing is a convergence of two major space policy
areas the Committee has and will be considering over the rest
of this Congress. Commercial space regulatory frameworks and
NASA reorganization--reauthorization. The Committee has to
balance the public interest in NASA with the commercial space
industry, as well as ensure that U.S. taxpayer investments are
protected.
I want to give a little bit of thought to the risk of
transitioning national and government activities to
nongovernmental entities. It could include a potential gap in
U.S. presence in low-Earth orbit or the safety of NASA
astronauts, the financial risk to the U.S. Government should
NASA end up representing the only sustainable market for
commercial space stations, and potential liability risks to the
U.S. Government, which is responsible for all U.S.
nongovernmental activities in space. This Committee has to sort
out who's going to be responsible and how those risks are
evaluated.
The Committee also has to consider the nature of
government-funded research and development in a post-ISS
environment. It's critical that NASA ensure a seamless
transition from the ISS to commercial platforms. But the
essential role of government-sponsored microgravity research
and development can't get lost in the shuffle. The U.S.
Government and this Committee have a responsibility to ensure
such an outcome does not occur.
The United States isn't alone in this domain, as has been
mentioned by the Chairman. China established its crewed
Tiangong space station in low-Earth orbit and is investing in
much of the same cutting-edge science that we'll hear more
about today from our expert witnesses. Space, biological, and
physical sciences directly enable human exploration, so we need
to lead in science to lead on our efforts to go to the Moon and
Mars.
And finally, I want to voice my concern about the budgetary
challenges and really the dysfunctional appropriations process
that we have that's threatening our Nation's plans in space. If
we in Congress aren't prepared to appropriate the required
resources, we will not be successful. Continuing to operate the
ISS while also procuring a deorbit vehicle and providing
support to Commercial LEO Destinations (CLDs) really does
require sustained investments if we're going to make sure that
America stays first in low-Earth orbit.
So I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to
hearing from this panel of really very distinguished witnesses,
and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning, and thank you Chairman Babin and Ranking
Member Sorensen for holding today's hearing. The Science
Committee is often referred to as the committee of the future,
and so the future of low Earth orbit is a fitting topic to be
considering today.
The International Space Station-the ISS-has laid the
foundation for America's future in low Earth orbit and beyond.
It demonstrates our increasingly important leadership of a 15-
nation partnership. This is a strategic and soft-power
capability for the U.S. that is as important today as it was in
1998 when the ISS Intergovernmental Agreement was signed.
The ISS has also enabled the growth of our U.S. commercial
launch industry. NASA's investments in ISS commercial crew and
cargo capabilities have reinvigorated our U.S. commercial
launch industry brining us positive economic impact and
competitiveness.
In addition, the ISS has served as a long-term, orbiting
microgravity laboratory.
It enables basic and applied research, such as the work of
the Space Biosciences Division at NASA Ames just outside my
District, and provides a platform for other Federal government
agencies and commercial entities to carry out R&D.
The ISS, however, won't last forever. It is aging and is
currently only authorized to operate through 2030. NASA wants
to continue to use low Earth orbit for research, technology
risk reduction, and other activities. NASA plans to transition
those efforts to commercial space stations for which NASA plans
to be one of many customers.
There are many questions on how this transition will be
implemented that I hope will be answered today. However, in
many ways, this hearing is a convergence of the two major space
policy areas the Committee has and will be considering over the
118th Congress-commercial space regulatory frameworks and NASA
reauthorization. Legislatively, this Committee must balance the
interests of both the U.S. government, including NASA, and the
commercial space industry, all while ensuring responsibility
over U.S. taxpayer investments.
I want to highlight a few areas important to that balance.
First, Congress must gain clarity on the risks of
transitioning national and government activities to
nongovernmental entities. These risks might include a potential
gap in U.S. presence in low Earth orbit; the safety of NASA's
astronauts; the financial risks to the U.S. government should
NASA end up representing the only sustainable market for
commercial space stations; and the liability risks to the U.S.
government, which is responsible for all U.S. nongovernmental
activities in space. This Committee must settle policy on who
will bear those risks.
Second, this Committee and Congress must also consider the
nature of government-funded research and development in a post-
ISS environment. While it is critical that NASA ensure a
seamless transition from the ISS to commercial platforms, I
don't want the essential role of government- sponsored
microgravity research and development to get lost in the
shuffle. The U.S. government and this Committee have a
responsibility to ensure that such an outcome does not occur.
The United States is no longer alone in this domain. China
established its crewed Tiangong space station in low Earth
orbit and is investing in much of the same cutting-edge science
that we'll hear more about today. Space biological and physical
research directly enables human exploration. We need to lead in
science to lead on the Moon and Mars.
Finally, I want to voice my concern about the budgetary
challenges and dysfunctional appropriations process that stand
to threaten our nation's plans in space, if we in Congress are
not prepared to appropriate the required resources. Continuing
to operate the ISS while also procuring a deorbit vehicle and
providing support to Commercial LEO Destinations requires
sustained investments if we are to ensure America's leadership
in low Earth orbit.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.

Chairman Babin. Thank you very much.
Well, let me introduce our witnesses. Our first witness
today is Mr. Kenneth Bowersox, who brings a unique perspective
to today's discussion. As a former NASA astronaut who spent
five-and-a-half months aboard the ISS, Mr. Bowersox currently
serves as the Associate Administrator for NASA's Space
Operations Mission Directorate. His responsibilities include
the management of NASA's human space exploration efforts,
including ISS operations and the development of future
commercial space stations. Prior to this, Mr. Bowersox served
as the Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Operations.
Our next witness is Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar, the Chief
Government and External Relations Officer at Axiom Space. Her
responsibilities include directing Axiom's work with the U.S.
Government. She also serves as the industry co-Chair of the
FAA's (Federal Aviation Administration's) Commercial Human
Spaceflight Occupant Safety Rulemaking Committee. Previously,
Dr. Dittmar served as the founding President and CEO (Chief
Executive Officer) of the Coalition for Deep Space Exploration.
Both of you are welcome.
Our third witness is Dr. Robert Ferl, who co-chairs the
National Academies' Decadal Survey on Biological and Physical
Sciences (BPS) Research in Space for 2023 to 2032. In this
role, he is overseeing the development of a guidance strategy
for NASA's next decade of biological and physical science
research.
[Audio missing.]
I now recognize Mr. Bowersox. You may not be on.

TESTIMONY OF MR. KENNETH BOWERSOX,
ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATOR,
SPACE OPERATIONS MISSION DIRECTORATE,
NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Bowersox. Yes, I'm not good with buttons. That was a
problem when I was flying, too.
So, Chairman Babin and Ranking Member Sorensen and other
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear today to discuss NASA's human spaceflight activities in
low-Earth orbit, which we call LEO.
Since 1998, NASA and our international [and] commercial
partners have used the International Space Station, ISS for
short, to expand scientific research, technology development,
and economic activities into the unique microgravity
environment beyond Earth. ISS astronauts have worked with many
highly skilled researchers on the ground to conduct scientific
experiments in areas such as medicine, plant and animal
biology, biotechnology, fundamental physics, crystal growth,
combustion science, and fluid physics. We look back at our home
planet, increasing our knowledge of the atmosphere, oceans, and
land as we work to understand the impacts of climate change.
We've increased our knowledge of the effects of space on the
human body, helping us to better understand disease and develop
new treatments to lengthen and improve lives on earth.
Through the ISS, we're learning critical lessons that will
enable humanity's next steps into deep space through the
Artemis campaign, deepening and broadening international
partnerships, as well as promoting the development of a
sustainable commercial market in LEO. ISS serves as a hub for
U.S. commercial cargo and crew transportation. The development
of domestic launch vehicles for these spacecraft has resulted
in the reemergence of the United States as the global leader in
space launch activities. SpaceX's Dragon and Northrop Grumman's
Cygnus cargo ships regularly supply research experiments and
consumables to the station. They will be joined this year by
Sierra Space's Dream Chaser, and we expect seven more flights
of or--we've flown seven flights of the Crew Dragon, and we've
got one more coming up here at the end of this month. In May of
2024, we expect to have flown the Starliner Boeing spacecraft.
And something that's really exciting to me is over the past
couple years we've flown three Private Astronaut Missions
(PAMs) with Axiom to the International Space Station.
While the last several years have seen enormous progress,
we did suffer a setback in May of 2023 when Typhoon Mawar
caused significant damage to a NASA ground station located on
the island of Guam, resulting in a loss of our ability to have
continuous communication with the ISS. NASA and our ISS
partners continue to conduct operations in a manner that
ensures crew safety as work to repair the damage continues.
At the conclusion of the ISS program scheduled for the end
of 2030, the station must be deorbited in a controlled manner
to ensure avoidance of populated areas on Earth. The station's
safe deorbit is the shared responsibility of the five space
agencies that have operated it since 1998. The station partners
have studied deorbit options, and a newer modified spacecraft
is necessary to provide high confidence deorbit capabilities.
NASA is engaged with U.S. industry and is proceeding with plans
to procure spacecraft, the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle, that will
perform the final safe deorbit maneuver of the space station.
The Administration has included requests for NASA Guam
recovery and the deorbit vehicle in a pending domestic
emergency supplemental appropriation request. NASA continues to
believe that funding for both of these is a pressing
requirement.
After the retirement of ISS, NASA will continue its
scientific research and technology work in LEO by transitioning
to services provided by one or more Commercial LEO
Destinations. It's NASA's goal to be one of many customers in a
robust commercial marketplace.
In order to maintain an uninterrupted human presence in
LEO, NASA is striving to have at least one operational
destination on orbit before ISS is ended. We partnered with
several industry teams, and we've got a hearty collaboration
for additional capabilities called the Collaboration for
Commercial Space Capabilities-2. Working with its international
and commercial partners, NASA is poised to continue
groundbreaking research and development on ISS, foster the
development of commercial capabilities, enabling continuity of
U.S. human presence in LEO, and to safely retire the ISS at the
end of its operations as we usher in a new era of commercial
space development that will transform LEO into an arena of
vibrant economic activity.
Thanks again for inviting me to talk with you today, and I
look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Bowersox follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Thank you very much, Mr. Bowersox.
I now recognize Dr. Dittmar for five minutes to present her
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. MARY LYNNE DITTMAR,
CHIEF GOVERNMENT AND
EXTERNAL RELATIONS OFFICER, AXIOM SPACE

Dr. Dittmar. Good morning, Ranking Member Lofgren, Chairman
Babin, Ranking Member Sorensen, and Members of the Committee. I
appreciate very much the invitation to appear before you today,
and it's especially an honor to do so with such esteemed
panelists as Ken Bowersox, Dylan Taylor, and Robert Ferl.
My name is Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar, and I lead both
Government and External Relations along with 850 outstanding
colleagues at Axiom Space in Houston, Texas. Axiom is organized
around three main business lines of business, each of which
support and advance U.S. national objectives in space.
First, in partnership with NASA, as mentioned by Ken, we
operate Private Astronaut Missions to the International Space
Station. These missions are expanding the number of countries
that can fly to space, demonstrating ongoing U.S. leadership by
promoting opportunities for international collaboration for
science and for commercial activity. Less than a week ago, in
fact, we successfully completed the Axiom 3 mission, which saw
astronauts from Italy, Turkey, and Sweden, and our own
commander Michael Lopez-Alegria conduct more than 150 hours of
science and outreach, including engagements directed to
educating and inspiring students around the world.
Our second line of business is focused on building the
lunar spacesuits, providing NASA astronauts with the lunar suit
they will wear on the surface of the Moon during the Artemis
III mission. We are also working on next-generation spacesuits
for low-Earth orbit.
Our flagship program is the construction of Axiom Station,
the world's first commercial space station. Our first module is
nearly complete and will be arriving in Houston later this year
to begin outfitting prior to launch into orbit, where it will
connect to the ISS in late 2026. An additional module will be
flown into orbit next, after which Axiom Station will become
free flight capable prior to the arrival of the ISS deorbit
vehicle. Additional modules will follow.
This is the fifth time I have had the honor to testify
before Congress in the last decade, and at no other time have I
felt the sense of urgency that I do now. I have written at
length in my published testimony regarding the budget pressures
and decisions that must be faced squarely and without delay or
obfuscation in order to ensure that the United States will not
surrender decades of American leadership in low-Earth orbit to
China. My testimony is on the record, and so I will keep the
rest of my remarks short.
First, the retirement of the International Space Station
and transition to commercial LEO is the fulfillment of long-
held policy in both Congress and executive branch agencies
across decades from both political parties. This transition
must be orderly and predictable.
Second, the Private Astronaut Missions are a critical part
of our transition to a commercial LEO economy. Axiom has
continued to invest in these missions and shoulders part of the
cost, demonstrating our commitment to developing a new economy
in space. NASA and Axiom Space are laying the groundwork for
successful transition in LEO these missions, and they must
continue unabated.
Third, while NASA's choice to encourage competition among
several potential providers of commercial stations to stimulate
innovation and drive cost down was and is laudable, it did not
take into full account the threat to U.S. leadership posed by
China, which has vastly accelerated its own space investments,
technology, and achievements in the last several years.
Finally, Federal funding for the transition to include
money for the ISS program, the Commercial LEO Destinations
Program, PAM missions, and the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle that will
be used to retire the ISS safely must all be in place, in
addition to adequately funding the ISS budget itself in order
to provide the resources necessary for a successful transition.
At present, there is no clear path to this outcome. Putting the
transition under threat and opening the door to losing U.S.
leadership in LEO to China in the event of a gap.
The stakes are extremely high for U.S. leadership in space.
The only beneficiary of an unsuccessful transition to
commercial platforms able to maintain continuous human
presence, conduct science and other research, and catalyze
commercial development will be China. We cannot accept that
future. If we have a gap of American presence in low-Earth
orbit, the only winner will be China. An immediate course
correction by Congress is needed.
We are making the following recommendations:
Include language in a new NASA Authorization Act that
reinforces and makes crystal clear that it is the policy of the
United States to maintain continuous American presence in low-
Earth orbit in perpetuity.
Reinforce that it is the policy of the United States to
encourage and enable the fullest commercial use of space, a
policy first put forth by Congress in 1990.
Ensure that the ISS program remains at capacity through the
end of life in 2030, supporting the fullest use of the ISS for
exploration, science, technology development, and commercial
activity. To enable that goal, authorize the ISS program
funding at the 2023 level at minimum in 2025 and authorize
funding for the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle in addition.
Authorize the flight of the ISS until 2030 with the
possibility of extension until one commercial station is
operational.
Proceed with the down-select to a maximum of two CLD
providers immediately.
Direct NASA to accelerate contracts to CLD providers.
Authorize funding of the CLD program at $295 million and
appropriate commensurate funding.
Thank you for your time and attention, and I look forward
to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Dr. Dittmar follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Yes, ma'am. Thank you very much.
And now I'd like to recognize Dr. Ferl for five minutes for
his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ROBERT J. FERL, CO-CHAIR,
COMMITTEE ON BIOLOGICAL AND PHYSICAL SCIENCES
IN SPACE, THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES
OF SCIENCES, ENGINEERING, AND MEDICINE

Dr. Ferl. Chairman Babin, Ranking Member Sorensen, and the
rest of the Committee, I appreciate and am honored to be a part
of this panel and present to you today the ideas about science
and the role of science in this particular discussion.
I represent my colleague Dr. Krystyn Van Vliet from Cornell
University as we co-chaired the Committee on Biological and
Physical Sciences in Space for the National Academies of
Science, Engineering, and medicine.
It is both a pleasure and an interest to note that science
has been a key part of many of the comments that have already
been made today. And my role today is to secure for you the
notion that that science is well-thought-out, that science is
well-directed, and that science is a result of the entire
scientific community in space putting together the decadal
survey that I'm going to talk to you a little bit about today.
I'm here to address the ``what'' and the ``why'' of going
to space, the reasons that we need to be there for science and
the reasons that we need to be there for discovery. Science is
both the driver and the enabler of our presence in space. And
our discoveries in space make possible not only the ability to
go to space, but the ability to understand our universe and to
better our life here on Earth. That is abundantly clear.
BPS science has been--and our part of science has been a
part of the space exploration community since the early Apollo
era, so this is, you know, a historical and well-represented
activity in space that feeds space and also derives the science
from space.
Our report is called ``Thriving in Space: Ensuring the
Future of Biological and Physical Sciences.'' It is a chosen
title for that very reason. We now wish to thrive in space. We
no longer wish to just visit. We wish to occupy, live, develop,
manufacture, and otherwise do what thriving means in space. And
that demands a continual presence in space, and it also
absolutely demands that the presence in space be enabled by the
government. It is a national need.
Biological and physical sciences is exactly the science
that deals with the physical forces, the biological changes
that occur in terrestrial organisms and terrestrial processes
as it moves off the surface of the Earth. We learn about how to
do things in space by understanding the forces and the
scientific processes behind being in space.
Biological and physical sciences is well-represented in the
International Space Station, as has already been mentioned,
with thousands of publications and experiments on the
international scale. And it is very clear that not only has the
International Space Station proven its value as a scientific
vehicle, but it's also proven that its limitations currently
exist. So we need not only the equivalent of the International
Space Station, we need its capabilities and more.
So as we transition to the commercial space Commercial LEO
Destination model, it is very clear that not only does there
not--not only do we need to have a continuous scientific
presence, that must be fully vested scientific presence that
allows these experiments to continue in the mode in which they
are currently working and an even better mode.
It's already been mentioned that we're at a critical moment
in this science and critical moment in the distribution of our
intellectual property (IP) and capabilities in space. And we
are, in our report, absolutely supporting the notion that the
science needs to both drive our presence in space and be
continued as we move further into space.
Science in the International Space Station in low-Earth
orbit is not substituted by the trip to the Moon. It enables
the trip to the Moon. And the more we do science in low-Earth
orbit, the more we enable our capabilities to move to the Moon
and Mars. And conducting science in space uniquely expands our
understanding of the natural universe in ways that we have yet
to imagine.
The International Space Station is a place where humans
created the coldest place in the universe. The entire universe
was created there. The coldest place was created there not to
go to space, but to understand what our universe is like and to
imagine products and capabilities that are beyond our current
imagination.
I look forward to your questions, and I thank you for being
here.
[Prepared statement of Dr. Ferl follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Thank you, Dr. Ferl.
I'd like to now recognize Mr. Taylor for five minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. DYLAN TAYLOR,

CHAIRMAN AND CEO, VOYAGER SPACE

Mr. Taylor. Chairman Babin, Ranking Member Lofgren, Ranking
Member Sorensen, and distinguished Members of the Committee,
thank you for inviting me to share my perspective on the U.S.
Commercial Space Station landscape.
At Voyager, we're dedicated to building a better future for
humanity, both in space and here on Earth. Voyager has nearly
50 years of spaceflight heritage and unmatched experience
working commercially on the ISS. The ISS transformed space
exploration, and Voyager is dedicated to continuing its legacy
of global diplomacy by developing a next-generation platform, a
commercially operated, continuously crewed, free-flying space
station called Starlab.
Starlab began in 2021 when Voyager was awarded $160 million
under NASA's CLD program. CLD is dedicated to providing the
United States with continuously crew platforms prior to ISS
decommissioning in 2030, preventing a space station gap.
Recently, Voyager formed a U.S.-majority-owned
transatlantic joint venture with Airbus known as Starlab Space.
We believe this joint venture provides the strongest foundation
to assure the continuation of ISS diplomacy, the strongest
foundation to assure the continuation of ISS diplomacy in
addition to tapping the growing international customer base and
demand for space-based science and commerce. Once built,
Starlab will launch on SpaceX's Starship as early as 2028.
Starlab will host four crew members continuously, provide 100
percent of the space station's current payload capacity, and
realize a steady pipeline of advanced research in part through
our ground-based George Washington Carver Science Park. We're
also proud to have both Hilton Hotels and Northrop Grumman as
part of our team.
Since CLD's inception, the Committee has provided excellent
bipartisan support for the program. As we continue to build the
next generation of space stations, we ask for your
consideration of certain commitments to ensure CLD's success.
Under CLD, NASA intends for most funding to come by private
investment, unlike previous commercial programs like commercial
crew and cargo resupply. These programs are successful.
However, the U.S. Government provided the majority of the
funding in those cases.
Voyager is committed to raising the majority of the needed
investment for Starlab. Even so, CLD must have U.S. Government
support in five key areas to assure investor confidence: First,
the U.S. Government is fully committed to utilizing
continuously crewed space stations; second, that the ISS will
be decommissioned in 2030; third, that Congress plans to
adequately fund CLDs; fourth, regulatory support for
indemnification and liability concerns; and lastly, that the
U.S. Government will transition critical research to CLD
platforms as they become available and not compete with
industry.
In hand with the 2030 commitment is also the need for
sufficient funding for the CLD program. A funding increase
authorized by Congress will bolster investor confidence and
accelerate early investment. Early investment helps address
design challenges sooner, foster a customer base, and avoids
costly late development changes. Lack of investment in 2024 and
2025 would jeopardize schedules for all providers and increase
the risk of a gap in U.S. human presence in low-Earth orbit.
Lastly, we know the ISS is the greatest feat of human
engineering in history. However, it will not last forever.
Consequently, a large percentage of the crew's time is now
dedicated to performing maintenance instead of science. This
will only get more dire as the station continues to age.
Additionally, the United States faces imminent political
threats in space. China and its brand-new space station
Tiangong is already operational, and many of our allies are
planned to be users. If commercial platforms are not available
ahead of decommissioning, our current partner nations will have
no choice but to gravitate toward China.
We are in a modern space race like the days of Apollo, and
the United States is the leader in space and human exploration.
But that leadership in the future is not assured. It is
critical we carry America's legacy forward.
Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Taylor follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Babin. Thank you very much. Excuse me.
And now I would like to question--if I can find my place
here. Sorry about that. Yes.
Mr. Bowersox, the spacesuits worn by NASA astronauts when
performing ISS extravehicular activities, or EVAs, as you're
well aware, are more than 40 years old and are in dire need of
replacement. In 2022 after several attempts to develop a new
spacesuit internally, NASA awarded a task order to Collins
Aerospace to develop a new suit for LEO EVAs. NASA also awarded
a task order to Axiom Space to develop a new suit for lunar
EVAs. In 2023, NASA awarded a second task order to Axiom Space
to develop a LEO version of Axiom's lunar spacesuit. How is
NASA prioritizing the development of the LEO spacesuits versus
the lunar spacesuits?
Mr. Bowersox. So our current spacesuits, I just want to
emphasize, they're working very well. And while the design may
be old, our team is really good at keeping those suits working,
and we're happy with how they're performing. We could always do
better, but we really understand that suit well, and our team
does a good job with it.
The new suits that we're working, there's a lot of overlap
between what you would need for a lunar suit and what you would
need for a suit in low-Earth orbit. That's why we have two
providers. That's why it's possible for either provider to
provide some part of--some aspect of service for either the
Moon or low-Earth orbit. And we're working hard with those
providers to try and get a capability on ISS for the last few
years of its life.
Chairman Babin. Thank you. And ISS astronauts have
experienced a range of issues with spacesuits in the past,
ranging from water intrusion, to complications from improper
sizing. How will NASA transition from the older spacesuits to
the newer models, and what are the agency's contingency plans
if a new problem occurs?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, one of the most important things for
the new suits is that it fits a wide range of astronauts and
that we can have a good suit that works for every member of the
Astronaut Corps, whether they're small or tall, that they'll be
able to work in that suit. Our current suit, it works a little
bit better if you're taller and you have longer arms, but our
smaller people like me do a pretty good job in it, too. But we
don't want to have that problem with the new suits, so we're
spending a lot of time thinking about that. And we're confident
that with new equipment, new hardware, great testing, that
they'll work well once they get to orbit or to the surface of
the Moon.
Chairman Babin. Great, thank you. I have a second question
and for you as well, Mr. Bowersox. Last October, President
Biden submitted a supplemental appropriations request asking
Congress to provide, among other items, initial funding for a
spacecraft capable of deorbiting the ISS. In October, Northrop
Grumman announced that it would no longer develop its own space
station under the Commercial LEO Destinations Program and
instead would join Voyager's Starlab project. This freed up $89
million in funding that NASA then distributed among the
remaining CLD candidates. If funding USDV is a high priority
and time-sensitive matter for NASA, can you explain why that
money was not instead used to fund the deorbit vehicle? And I
have a couple of additions to that if you would just answer
that one, please.
Mr. Bowersox. Yes, sir. You know, in order for us to manage
the pace of transition with ISS to the new commercial partners,
we need multiple things. We need to have those new stations, we
need to have the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle, and we need to have good
utilization on ISS so that we maintain our transportation and
utilization capability. We thought that the best use of that
money was to continue effort on the commercial LEO platforms,
but to try to get additional resources for the USDV.
Chairman Babin. OK. And what other options did NASA
consider during its analysis of alternatives?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, we looked at just about everything we
could think of. If you have other ideas, we're open to
listening.
Chairman Babin. OK.
Mr. Bowersox. But we looked at raising ISS to a higher
orbit. We looked at breaking it into smaller parts. We looked
at switching ISS to a commercial operator. We looked at
possibly bringing small elements of ISS home. And when we
analyzed all of those and considered the costs, doing one
return of the ISS into the ocean seemed like the best option to
us.
Chairman Babin. Thank you. And then, finally, how will NASA
ensure that the cost of deorbiting the ISS is shared
proportionately among our international partners?
Mr. Bowersox. Luckily, that's covered in our agreements
with our international partners. We share basically according
to the amount of mass that each partner has on the station, the
resources required to bring the ISS home.
Chairman Babin. OK. Thank you. And that completes my line
of questioning.
So I'd like to go to the Ranking Member, Mr. Sorensen, for
five minutes of questions.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you all for being here.
Mr. Bowersox, I'm not sure if you worked with someone who
helped me get to where I am today. Dr. Janice Voss was a NASA
astronaut who called my hometown of Rockford, Illinois, her
hometown. In the 1990's and the 2000's, she flew on numerous
shuttle missions and helped me inspire--helped inspire me as a
kid to learn and continue to look up. She flew on Space Shuttle
Discovery, as others as well, which makes it appropriate that
one of her flight suits is on display at the Discovery Center
in Rockford, Illinois, today.
So I do want to continue learning a little bit more about
spacesuits, given the safety concerns and the age. Are we on
target with respect to technology and time to meet the demands
as we look beyond the ISS mission?
Mr. Bowersox. First, I want to thank you for mentioning
Janice. I think the world of that person. I can remember when
she certified me to operate the arm on the space shuttle and
International Space Station, and I miss her.
But for our future astronauts, we want to make sure that
all of our people will be able to use the new suits, that
they'll fit everyone, that everybody will have good function.
We also want to make sure that they're affordable, so we're
looking at trying to increase the reliability and reduce the
cost of the technology that we use. And we're seeing great
progress with our partners.
Mr. Sorensen. Dr. Ferl, I'll turn to you. Your written
statement refers to the critical need for biological and
physical science research in space to better inform both life
in low-Earth orbit, but also during our exploration into deep
space. Can you elaborate on how your biological and physical
science research and those of your colleagues will help enable
human exploration to the Moon and then beyond to Mars?
Dr. Ferl. Thank you very much for the question. It's an
enjoyable thing to think about because how we get there, how we
enable ourselves to get there, and how we can do it in a way
that is both doable and sustainable is key to our ability to do
it and also a key point in our decadal survey. We've
recommended, in fact, two large-scale campaigns in this area of
science that deal with the following kinds of science. How do
we take an ecology with us--our microbes, our plants, and our
other organisms--to sustain ourselves over the long term on--
in--wherever it is we decide to go? How do we create a mini-
Earth, one that doesn't need resupply? That's a big body of
science that has to do with creating long-term sustainability
in space.
Another campaign that we've recommended is called Matrices,
but it's basically the same idea. How do we change our
manufacturing concepts and the science behind our manufacturing
so that we can reuse what we take with us the first time,
repurpose that into something else for the second time and the
third time and the fourth and the fifth? Moreover, when we
get--do get to the Moon, how do we manage the uptake of
resources there in a way that services us as humans inside the
habitats that we will build? So our science underpins all of
those concepts with regard to sustainability, in addition to
the plain biological questions of what happens when you take a
terrestrial organism off the surface of the Earth.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you for that.
NASA plans to be one of the many users of commercial space
stations. To Dr. Dittmar and Mr. Taylor, your companies will
presumably need nongovernmental customers to support your
stations. How have you begun developing a pipeline of groups
that are interested in using commercial space stations? And
I'll begin with you, Dr. Dittmar.
Thank you for the question. Well, as I mentioned in my oral
testimony and written testimony, one of the key approaches that
we've used to begin developing that market are the Private
Astronaut Missions in partnership with NASA. We began by flying
individuals in our first mission, Ax-1, that basically bought
the ticket to go to space. But as those missions have
progressed, they have increasingly revealed to all of us and to
NASA the interest of international entities to participate in
human spaceflight, including entities that have never gone
before.
In Ax-2, we flew Saudi Arabia, which although it had flown
representatives, flew the first Arab woman in space and did
tremendous outreach in that country.
In Ax-3, which we just flew--Turkey and Sweden flew for the
first time, and we had an Italian--although Italy has flown
before, the Air Force gave us Colonel Villadei, who had a long
history of training to fly. He was excited to go to space.
So what we're learning is that international--other
countries are very interested in our commercial platforms and
their use. We've signed a memorandum of agreement with ESA
(European Space Agency) to continue to explore opportunities
there. But we've signed other memoranda of agreement that--
they're all public, and I could direct you to the record, but
New Zealand and others. So we're finding global interest in
doing science, research, technology development, in-space
manufacturing, as well as flying humans into space.
Mr. Sorensen. Dr. Taylor--Mr. Taylor?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, thank you for the question. Similar to
what Mary Lynn just said, we're seeing huge international
demand for the station. One of the things that I think is
important to point out is in the case of low-Earth orbit, these
commercial stations coming online are not going to address
demand, they're going to create demand. What do I mean by that?
If you look at the constraints on the International Space
Station today to do science, a lot of that is constrained by
astronaut time. And astronaut time is spent in large degree to
performing maintenance. So imagine a brand-new commercial space
station with minimal maintenance, where 100 percent of the
astronaut time can be dedicated to research, and it's a less
frictional--it's a frictionless transaction to actually get
research done.
So a lot of the biopharma companies who would like to do
drug development on the ISS, I see this as a huge opportunity
to accelerate their plans. As Mary Lynne pointed out,
international partners, we've signed several MOUs (memorandums
of understanding) with countries as well. I believe the U.N.
shows 90 countries with space agencies now. That number used to
be around 20. So there's a huge appetite for international
space commerce. And this goes back to the point I made in my
oral testimony. We want those nations to gravitate toward a
Western-led platform and not a Chinese-led platform.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you for that.
Chairman Babin. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Posey, I recognize you for five minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Chairman Babin.
Mr. Bowersox, are the facilities at Kennedy Space Center
sufficient to meet NASA and contractor requirements for
commercial space station payload processing?
Mr. Bowersox. We would like to see improvement in those
facilities. We'd like to see improvement in the capacity for
all of the work at the Kennedy Space Center. One of the
challenges we have is how we get the resources to do that. And
something that I think has been talked about is potential
legislative changes that would allow us to take resource
investments from private partners, commercial partners, and
bring them in and use them at a place like the Kennedy Space
Center.
Mr. Posey. OK. Is there any current plan to use foreign
launch or payload processing facilities to service commercial
space contractors?
Mr. Bowersox. Right now, we're not thinking about using
commercial launch for that. We want to use our own activities.
We might do some sort of an exchange with commercial partners
in other countries where they provide a launch for us, we
provide a launch for them. We could see something like that in
the future. But right now, we don't have anything concrete.
Mr. Posey. How is the concept of letting the contractors
participate in the development of facilities, how is that--at
what stage is that now?
Mr. Bowersox. I think it's in the stage where we're seeing
a need, and I think we're talking about the potential for
legislative change. And for the record, I'll go back and see
exactly where we are with that proposal, but it would be very
helpful if we could get contributions like that.
Mr. Posey. Yes. I'm glad to hear that.
Dr. Dittmar, could you further explain your statement about
China partnering with the United Nations to select and operate
international payloads?
Dr. Dittmar. In 2019, China and U.N. COPUOS (Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space) announced an agreement to
select payloads to fly on Tiangong. They selected initially
nine payloads but had opportunity in that program to select
others. The stated goal of that was to essentially do global
outreach and involve payload developers and scientists who had
not previously had the opportunity to fly or who that China was
particularly interested in bringing on board to the--to
Tiangong.
Mr. Posey. OK. I'd like each of you on the panel to speak
to the risks such as intellectual property theft that companies
face with partnering with China. I want to start with Mr.
Taylor and go to----
Mr. Taylor. Yes, I share your concern. The intellectual
property risk is real. This is one of the arguments we're
making to nations who might see China as a good deal because
they're deeply discounting their access. And of course, that
comes at a price, and the price is they're not going to control
their IP. So with respect to Starlab, we take that extremely
seriously. There'll be no Chinese activity on our space
station. But I share your concern. I think there is a real risk
that conducting any kind of commerce or research on Tiangong
will necessarily have IP consequences.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Dr. Ferl?
Dr. Ferl. Academic scientists and commercial scientists
both do recognize the risk of intellectual property leakage
when dealing with countries that that don't respect the same
laws that we do. Nonetheless, we also recognize the extreme
value in international cooperation. But the simple answer is
that those risks exists and are recognized by the scientific
community.
Mr. Posey. Dr. Dittmar?
Dr. Dittmar. We have an expression which is check your IP
at the hatch.
Mr. Posey. Yes, very good. I like that.
Mr. Bowersox?
Mr. Bowersox. All I'd say is that here in the United
States, we try very hard to understand and protect the
intellectual property rights of our partners. We also try to
make sure that the government has a chance to use things that
are developed that are--where they've benefited from taxpayer
investment.
Mr. Posey. Got you covered. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Babin. OK. I now recognize the gentlewoman from
California, Ms. Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I read a very interesting article called ``The Wild West of
Space Research'' that was in Aerospace America. I'd like to ask
unanimous consent to put this article into the record, Mr.
Chairman.
But the CEO of SpaceBorn United that's in the Netherlands
has stated that he wants to enable human conception in space
and wants to grow human embryos off Earth. His quote is ``The
long-term goal is to enable the full cycle of nine months,
floating childbirth in space.'' Now, it's my understanding that
unless you have public funds in the research, pretty much there
aren't any regulations. You can do what you want. Now, the U.S.
Government-sponsored research, I believe--and you can correct
me if this is incorrect--operates under a common rule, a
Federal policy that is actually a collection of multiple rules
to ensure that the science is both fair to human subjects and
high standard but that those rules don't apply to commercial
space companies because they don't get Federal money. It seems
to me that the ethical framework that's based on terrestrial
research should apply in space.
So I have a couple questions. First, Dr. Dittmar and Mr.
Taylor, I'm wondering what your plans are on this issue with
commercial space stations. Mr. Bowersox, I'm wondering what
NASA has assessed on this issue and whether you are thinking
about what rules or standards could be applied and whether we
have jurisdiction to do that. And, Dr. Ferl, I'm very
interested in how the academic community is involved in
standard setting and ethically--the ethics of privately funded
research. Obviously, I'm for science, but there are ethical
questions here in some cases.
And I'm also interested if anybody can answer this, you
know, China has the capacity to host research. Should we be
worried about whether people who want to skirt ethical rules,
if we can establish them, might then go to that platform. So in
order, could you answer those questions?
Dr. Dittmar. Thank you for that question. I have the honor
to participate at the National Academies of Science on the
Executive Committee of the Space Studies Board for many years.
And the discussion about ethical constraint might be the right
word or consideration. I'm not sure exactly what the right word
is. I would use things like thoughtful consideration,
responsible behavior if they were my words, has certainly been
one that that's been inherent in scientific pursuits for
generations and generations, certainly no different on orbit.
I will say that what we've done at Axiom is our chief
scientist Lucie Lowe, who came to us from NIH (National
Institutes of Health), participated in a multi-author paper
recently that was published in Science that addressed exactly
these concerns.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you.
Mr. Taylor, I don't want to go over my time, but I would
like to hear from all the witnesses.
Mr. Taylor. Sure. I'll be brief. Thank you for the very
thoughtful question.
First of all, we're--as I mentioned earlier, we're doing
missions on the ISS today. We've run 1,300 missions, our
company has, on the ISS. So we anticipate in our business plan
essentially abiding by the guidelines that we've abided by thus
far. We're not anticipating any exotic research that we haven't
already experienced.
Second is we're going to be integrating our payloads, as I
mentioned earlier, in the George Washington Carver Science
Park, which we're putting in Ohio----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Mr. Taylor [continuing]. So it'll be subject to U.S. law
and regulation. And then last, we're going to follow all NASA
requirements.
Ms. Lofgren. So that goes to NASA and Dr. Ferl. What are we
going to put in place? What can we put in place? Because even
if these two private sector entities want to have ethics,
they're clearly going to be entities that is going to be the
``Wild West.''
Mr. Bowersox. I know for the research that we fund on the
government side, we would expect to follow----
Ms. Lofgren. No, I understand that, but what about----
Mr. Bowersox [continuing]. All of the ethics----
Ms. Lofgren. What about the private sector?
Mr. Bowersox. On the private sector, we want to give them
some freedom, right? I would expect the government to have a
large say in what they do, a large influence in what they do,
but we would try to give them freedom to do as much as they
can. But if something just really exceeded what we thought were
the boundaries of our ethical standards, then we would have a
long talk with them.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, Dr. Ferl, I mean, obviously, having--
grow an embryo for nine months in space does create and pose
some ethical questions. I mean, what are we going to do about
this?
Dr. Ferl. I think that the bigger--from my perspective, the
scientific question actually has been asked and answered. Can
terrestrial organisms develop in the way that they are normally
developing on Earth in space? Asked and answered, yes, we can.
Yes, they can. So the scientific basis for what you're
discussing wouldn't necessarily fall into our realm.
I will say that scientists are by and large excruciatingly
ethical with regard to----
Ms. Lofgren. No disagreement on that.
Dr. Ferl [continuing]. Choosing which questions are asked
and answered in space.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, and because scientists operate within an
ethical standard, so I'm not criticizing--I'm for the
scientists, but there are some ``Wild West'' actors who may not
want to live within those normal constraints. That's just why
I'm raising the issue. My time is----
Dr. Ferl. Scientists would agree.
Ms. Lofgren. My time is expired, Mr. Chairman, and
hopefully, we can delve into this a little bit more later.
Chairman Babin. Fascinating line of questioning. Thank you.
Now, I'd like to recognize the Chairman of the Full
Committee, Mr. Lucas.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And let's slide back into the landlord rental relationship
here for just a moment. Mr. Bowersox, as the Commercial low-
Earth Orbit Development Program, CLD, advances, how do you view
NASA's role in partnering with commercial space providers? And
along that line, what are you thinking, do you anticipate NASA
acting as an anchor tenant?
Mr. Bowersox. Yes, sir, I think that's a pretty good
description. We would be an anchor tenant, and we would be, I
think, very helpful in helping the commercial providers
understand what's important currently in space research.
They're probably the best to understand what commercial
companies want and in developing that market, and our goal
would be to become a smaller customer as time goes on.
Chairman Lucas. That's a very good segue. So to Dr. Dittmar
and Mr. Taylor, do you agree with NASA's assessments of their
role in CLD?
Dr. Dittmar. My quick answer is we absolutely look forward
to hosting NASA on our platform. We're developing our platform
with that in mind. As you know, our CEO is a former ISS program
manager for NASA, so we have a pretty deep legacy in our
program.
Insofar as the question about anchor tenant, though, I
think it depends on how you define it. And, you know, NASA's
total budget that they're anticipating with regard to CLD
services contract is such that the transportation costs, which
are continuing to grow, and the overall science and utilization
contract will not be sufficient to sustain a commercial
station. So I'm not trying to quibble. I'm just saying it
really depends on how you define that term.
Chairman Lucas. Mr. Taylor?
Mr. Taylor. Yes, I would agree with Mr. Bowersox. I think
anchor tenant is a good term, but I would expand it to not only
NASA. I would expand it to European Space Agency, JAXA (Japan
Aerospace Exploration Agency), and Canadian Space Agency. And I
think one of the benefits of the ISS that we can all agree on
is the international soft power, international diplomacy that
it has, and I think that commercial space stations can recreate
that dynamism.
Chairman Lucas. And I ask this next question to all three
of you, and I'm sure I'm following in the footsteps of my
colleagues in the hearing so far, but how can Congress ensure
that these partnerships are carried out in a responsible
fashion? In other words, how are commercial providers held
accountable for performance?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, I think the questions you're asking
here and that I expect in the future will be a big part of
holding everybody accountable. Watching our schedules, watching
how we perform on cost, I think that'll be very important in
keeping all of our partners accountable and responsible for the
investment we make and their developments.
Dr. Dittmar. Just quickly, Axiom's contract with NASA,
which is a little different than the other contracts, includes
data delivery, PDR (Preliminary Design Review), CDR (Critical
Design Review). We've completed our Preliminary Design Review
with NASA oversight, and we're underway with our CDR. So those
are standard engineering program management approaches, and
we're deeply engaged with NASA with regard to that.
Chairman Lucas. And along that line, I guess the
appropriate question in the eyes of our other panelists, how is
NASA held accountable for managing program costs, schedules,
and performance? Because what NASA does determines their
ability to utilize the asset. Any comment on that Dr.--or Mr.
Bowersox or anyone else?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, I'd say you guys do a pretty good job
of holding us accountable, and we appreciate that. It's
important. And we try to do our best----
Chairman Lucas. That's a good answer, by the way.
Mr. Bowersox. Right? But I'll also say that, you know, we
don't want to be driven completely by schedule. We want to
think about whether or not we're really ready, whether the
platforms are safe, and that we'll have a good platform to
operate. So we're also looking at that performance.
Chairman Lucas. Please.
Dr. Ferl. There's another aspect to consider here in terms
of anchor tenancy and responsibility. There is an entire body
of science that is the anchor tenant, not necessarily a
particular agency. The NIH, the NSF (National Science
Foundation), and others are now involved in ISS research, and I
suggest that the concept of anchor tenancy be viewed in that
way, in addition to NASA as a particular agency.
And in that regard, I'll just cycle back to responsibility
and who keeps them in line? The National Academies does have
committees that oversee these areas of science and does so on
an annual basis.
Chairman Lucas. Let me ask one other question, one other
observation, Mr. Bowersox. I want to follow up with a question
broached by Dr. Babin. Each international partner is
responsible for share of deorbit cost and it is proportionate
to the amount of mass the partner contributes to the space
station. Is NASA assuming the full cost of deorbiting the ISS?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, sir, we don't exchange funds usually in
those relationships. There's some offset between the partners,
some sort of a trade that we make, but that's proportional to
mass, and everybody will share that burden.
Chairman Lucas. With that my time has expired, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Congress recently authorized the ISS through 2030 as NASA
works to transition to commercial low-Earth orbit destinations.
At the same time, as our witnesses mentioned, China's
aggressively seeking partnerships for its space station, and
Russia's future on the ISS is uncertain after 2025. Unless
commercial stations are ready before 2030, NASA could face a
station gap that would set the United States back
significantly. Mr. Bowersox, how is NASA ensuring that CLDs
will be ready before 2030 to prevent this?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, the biggest thing we're doing is trying
to set up new contracts, new procurements, and trying to work
to get resources so that we can develop those new platforms
along with commercial partners. Of course, with the constrained
resource environment that we are expecting in the future, that
may be difficult. It may be difficult to maintain the
utilization on the ISS, prepare the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle, and
to prepare the commercial platforms with constraints that could
be ahead of us.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Dr. Dittmar, first of all, thank you
for your service to the University of Alabama in Huntsville.
You were an assistant professor when I was a student there, and
it's--we're honored to have you here today.
Dr. Dittmar and Mr. Taylor, if NASA keeps prolonging the
ISS decommissioning date beyond 2030, what impact will this
have on CLD investors in the market?
Dr. Dittmar. Uncertainty with regard to the end of life for
the station of course raises the specter for investors and
customers both that they will be on a platform that has to
compete with the government. So that's the critical issue. On
the other hand, this is threading a needle, and we certainly
recognize that. The stated end of life of the ISS at 2030 has
been very helpful, but we are concerned also that there'll be
no gap.
Mr. Strong. Yes, thank you.
Mr. Taylor. Yes, I would concur with Dr. Dittmar. It's
absolutely critical that we maintain consistency with that date
because investors are underwriting based upon a timeline. So
the timeline changes, the underwriting changes, the investment
thesis changes.
Mr. Strong. Totally agree. NASA recently updated its RFP
(request for proposals) for the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle, a
spacecraft meant to safely deorbit the ISS as part of its
planned retirement. With the RFP deadline just passing a couple
of days ago, how can NASA centers like Marshall with rich
expertise in advanced space transportation systems work with
commercial space companies to safely deorbit the ISS? And
that's to any of you that'd like to answer.
Mr. Bowersox. Well, I'd love to take that question. You
know, Marshall has a great history and a wonderful depth of
expertise there. We use them in all of our programs to advise
and monitor the work of commercial partners, all of our
commercial programs. And I would expect something similar in
the work with the U.S. Deorbit Vehicle provider.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Is there a plan to use FAA-approved
reentry sites like Huntsville International Airport in
Huntsville, Alabama, to help with the deorbit in future CLD
missions?
Mr. Bowersox. The one provider that we would have that
might be able to use a runway like that would be Sierra Space's
Dream Chaser. Whether or not the Sierra Space folks are looking
at Huntsville, I can't tell you for sure, sir.
Mr. Strong. They are. It's certified.
Mr. Bowersox. OK. Well, great.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. This is the second longest runway in
the Southeast United States, only second to Miami, and I think
that that is a great way to bring those reentry vehicles back
in, Dream Chaser for one, but we've got to look at other
options so that we can do that. The certification to be able to
get an airport certified, I went through that as the chairman
of the Madison County Commission where I've previously served
before here, and it's a painful process.
Mr. Bowersox----
Mr. Bowersox. I've landed there a lot. It's a great
airport.
Mr. Strong. That's great. Thank you. Mr. Bowersox, as you
know, Marshall Space Flight Center hosts the ISS Payload
Mission Control Center, which manages many research payloads
aboard the ISS. How does NASA plan to ensure that researchers
can seamlessly transition their experiments from the ISS to the
CLDs as they become available?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, working with our commercial partners, I
anticipate that some of the investigations that are currently
being conducted on ISS will move to the commercial platforms.
How we work with the Payload Operations Control Center there at
Huntsville is still something we need to work out, but I see a
role for those people in the future because of their skills.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I thank each of you for your
testimony today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you very much.
And I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Dr.
McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Dr. Chair.
This is a really important subject, and I think it's often
overlooked, often misunderstood what's at stake here,
especially in this new technological age where we have so many
vehicles in the low-Earth orbit and what that means to us going
forward. So I'm going to set the table for the one thing that
I'm focused on, and that's the International Space Station
that's decommissioning. And I'm not worried about the safety,
but I'm worried about the timeframe and our mission
accomplishment and what we want to achieve going forward. Just
kind of set the table as we look to the future of the
International Space Station and American low-Earth orbit
activities. It's obviously up to us as the elected officials in
Congress to take ownership of this U.S. space policy and
maintain leadership across the globe.
Last year, the Committee passed the Commercial Space Act of
2023, which will support America's budding and commercial space
economy as it streamlines the regulatory environment, ensures
compliance with international treaty obligations, reduces--
reduces--administrative burdens hopefully, and promotes the
best practices in orbit. At the same time, the Biden
Administration released their proposal after months of delay.
Their proposal would lead to increased multiagency bureaucracy
red tape, an opaque application process, and a ton of
uncertainty for our space industry partners as they're trying
to plan for the future. The Biden Administration proposal will
directly undermine the work of NASA and the United States
having been--pursuing over in the short and long term to
support commercial low-Earth orbit development.
This is my concern. Congress must continue to promote a
transparent, responsible environment here at home that will
strengthen our domestic industry and encourage innovation. The
International Space Station has served as a home to humans in
scientific research for more than 20 years. The International
Space Station is one of a kind, and it's great at advancing
technologies, innovation, and industry. As the commercial
industry aims to take the mantle, it is vital that our
government does all we can to ensure a smooth transition, both
for economic prosperity and national security interests,
meaning making it easier, not harder.
My concern is this. When we're talking about that
beneficial timeline, Dr. Dittmar, I wanted to say, in your
testimony you'd said how you discussed an American presence in
low-Earth orbit is under the threat and how the likelihood of a
gap--this is what I'm worried about--in LEO following the
decommissioning of the ISS has never been greater. What
concerns do you have with the proposed mission authorization
system by the Biden Administration specifically? And how could
it disrupt the plans by NASA to shift from the International
Space Station to commercial stations by the end of the decade?
Dr. Dittmar. Thank you for the question, Dr. McCormick. We
are very concerned about the proposal. We are concerned about
its bifurcated nature with some of the aspects of what would be
happening on orbit being handled by one Federal agency and then
other aspects being handled by another Federal agency. We think
that there is a great deal of room for communication difficulty
between the agencies. There's an interagency process that is
sort of called for by the proposal that would require
collaboration and discussion. We're concerned about delays that
might be imposed by that.
We think that there's basically a lot of questions to be
answered. The devil is in the details, so to speak. Regulatory
frameworks need to be streamlined as much as possible. Nobody
argues with the need for regulation. As was mentioned before,
I'm sitting here as the industry co-Chair of the FAA Space
Advisory Rulemaking Committee right now for commercial human
spaceflight occupant safety. I wouldn't be doing it if I didn't
think it was a worthwhile effort. However, I do--we do have a
great deal of concern with the structure of the proposal.
Mr. McCormick. So I think it is important to be safe, and I
think we're going to do a great job of decommissioning. We have
great scientists. Everybody wants to do this the right way. I'm
worried about the regulatory burdens that come from the Biden
Administration that will slow down our progress in a mission
accomplishment. When we talk about outpacing our enemy, I'm a
Marine first. And when we do an outpacing our enemy, we have to
make sure we don't have gaps, we don't have regulatory burden
that's going to slow us down, that it's not a whole bunch of
agencies weighing in on one thing.
And my concern is, specifically, do you think it would be
beneficial if the industry instead interacted with a one-stop-
shop government entity with technological expertise in order to
meet the stated objective of Congress--Congress--that there be
continuous American presence in the low-Earth orbit?
Dr. Dittmar. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. Pretty simple. That's my singular focus, and
I want to leave with that. Less regulation, be safe, let's get
the mission done first.
And with that, I yield.
Chairman Babin. Amen. Thank you very much, Doc. I
appreciate you.
And so I'll recognize my friend from Florida, Mr. Webster.
Mr. Webster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Dittmar, I guess most of the things have been explained
in the fact that we're headed toward this possible gap in
spending at some point in time, gap in presence in the lower
orbits. So is--would one of the options be to keep the ISS
afloat?
Dr. Dittmar. I'm inclined to defer to Mr. Bowersox, but let
me just give you a quick--actually, I will defer to Mr.
Bowersox, but I'll say something first. The thing I'm going to
say first is, as we previously discussed, having an uncertain
end date for the International Space Station is really
detrimental to commercial development of low-Earth orbit
because it creates a great deal of uncertainty with regard to
investors. Mr. Taylor did a wonderful job of capturing some of
the concerns there.
And so while there is an option to--a technical option to
continue ISS, and one of our recommendations is that it does
stay in orbit until there's a commercial platform that's there
or launching there, not one second longer, not one second
longer would be our perspective.
Mr. Bowersox. So I just want to emphasize that our approach
to avoiding any gap in low-Earth orbit is to do everything we
can to make the commercial LEO development, the Commercial LEO
Destinations available before 2030. We're committed to deorbit
ISS starting in 2030, and we're going to work with you to try
and get the resources to do that.
Mr. Webster. OK. So if that be the case--well, No. 1, the
uncertainty would go away if we were to plan for an extended
life. I guess you could do that or something else. But now I'm
hearing--I heard 2028 because the Russians have problems, so
forth, they want to do that. Now, they're down to 2025, could
be that date, so that's pretty uncertain in itself. So what are
the benefits and advantages of space stations that are
commercial space stations as part of this solution, OK? There--
we understand there'd be a scientific advantage to having
those, but what else would it be able--how would that benefit
us in sort of the decommissioning of the current ISS?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, so we've got commitment from our
Russian partners to go through 2028, and our--the rest of the
ISS partners are working toward 2030 as the last date for full
utilization. And then ISS deorbit would start after that point.
We expect that our Russian partners will work to see what they
can do after 2028. They have some technical concerns. They also
have some budget concerns. A lot of the reason that they
haven't extended past 2028 is just the way their budget system
works. And we have a really good technical relationship with
our Russian partners, and we're looking forward to hearing from
them that they're ready to stay with us through 2030. That's
very important.
Dr. Dittmar. Just to jump in really quickly here, I will
say Axiom and Voyager and--I'm sure are working very diligently
to make certain that we have capabilities on orbit prior to the
end of ISS decommissioning--I mean, prior to the end of life. I
would just point out that things happen. Between when we made
our proposal and were granted our award, OK, and then started
to actually bend metal on our station, there was a pandemic.
And then there were vendor and supplier issues, which the
entire aerospace and defense sector is still trying to deal
with.
So although we're working very diligently and believe that
we'll be able to do this, there is a tremendous budget crunch
coming, and Congress needs to step up, in my opinion, OK, and
basically make sure that we are on a path to ensure that there
is no gap in low-Earth orbit.
Mr. Bowersox. And I think we can set some criteria for the
transition, agree on some criteria for the transition, be bound
by those criteria perhaps rather than dates. But I want to
emphasize our commitment to switching to the commercial
destinations. That's our future in low-Earth orbit, and we're
committed to all our partners to work with them to get them to
low-Earth orbit.
Mr. Webster. So would moving that date forward for
commercialization of the program be better for the date for
decommissioning the ISS?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, just how much we could move it forward
now, I don't know. I think it could be pretty hard just because
space development is a tough business. But if our commercial
partners are ready earlier, then I think, again, in a criteria-
based approach, we could consider a transition earlier.
Mr. Webster. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairman Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd like to recognize gentlewoman from Colorado, Ms.
Caraveo.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to you and
Ranking Member Sorensen for holding this hearing, and thank you
to the witnesses for joining us today.
I am very grateful to be on this Subcommittee because I get
the chance to bring Colorado's voice to the table on space
issues. Colorado has been able to contribute a tremendous
amount to the ISS from research being conducted on board to its
astronauts and more. I will also continue to be involved as it
becomes--sorry, Colorado will also continue to be involved as
it becomes a development hub for the next generation of space
stations.
Today, I wanted to dig into a topic I'm curious about as a
physician, specifically, the research being done on the ISS
that has medical applications back here at home. It's my
understanding that there is currently research being done on
the ISS on cancer immunotherapy and a drug specifically that,
if applied back to Earth, would allow a patient to get a shot
in a doctor's office versus being attached to an IV in a
hospital. As you can imagine, this could prove to be a
gamechanger for patients like the ones I see in clinic, and
this really drives home how important it is for Americans that
we continue to do research at the ISS and beyond.
So for Mr. Bowersox, sometimes the importance of the
research that happens in space, I think, gets lost in
translation between the Federal Government and our
constituents. So what is NASA doing to help emphasize its
importance with the public, and how can Congress help?
Mr. Bowersox. Well, first of all, we try to talk about the
research and the work being done at ISS every chance we get.
But the one thing I would encourage you and the rest of the
Members of the panel and the folks listening is to go to the
ISS Benefits for Humanity, just do that on an internet search
engine, go to that website, and you'll be amazed at all the
information there and all that you can learn about the work
that's going on on International Space Station.
Ms. Caraveo. Perfect. I will definitely do that. And aside
from communicating this work to Americans, one of the questions
that always comes up is cost, right? Is the amount of money
that we're spending making a difference when it comes to
research in space? The decadal survey has identified
uncertainties with the cost of doing research that will be
shared in the future beyond the ISS.
So for Dr. Ferl, does the decadal survey make any
recommendations on how these costs should be shared in the
future?
Dr. Ferl. The decadal study makes some very clear
recommendations on the total costs that are anticipated for the
body of science needed over the next decade. How those costs
will be shared is something I'm--I might need a little more
guidance on with regard to answering. But very clearly, this
area of science is a small percentage of the NASA total budget
and a small percentage of the budget of Science Mission
Directorate, yet it both underpins all of the development and
engineering for our future exploration efforts, as well as
feedback, the very important biological and also physical
advances that are applied back on Earth. So we're very strong
in saying that there needs to be more budget clearly for the
very science that both embodies and enables this space in low-
Earth orbit.
Ms. Caraveo. And I think, importantly, saves time and money
for people if it changes the ability to treat certain diseases
back here at home.
Continuing with the cost, what can NASA do to provide
clarity on future costs of conducting biological and physical
sciences research from low-Earth orbit after ISS?
Dr. Ferl. Another thing that we address in the decadal
study is the absolute need for clarity with regard to costs. As
some of our--my fellow panelists have mentioned, the cost to go
to orbit, the costs for lifting, the cost of astronaut time,
these are all things that need to be addressed in a more
transparent way so that the fundamental cost of doing the
research you mentioned is understood from end to end, not just
for the time.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, thank you all so much for your time here
today and for the work that you do every day that translates
from space into directly even taking care of patients in
clinic, and so I appreciate the work. Thank you.
Chairman Babin. Thank you very much. And I think that's the
end of the first round of questions, but the Ranking Member and
I have put our heads together and thought that we might come
back with a few more questions if you will indulge us, you
great witnesses, appreciate it.
I'm going to continue a line of questioning on where we've
been talking about decommissioning and shared expenses on the
ISS. The ISS partners minimize the exchange of funds for
operation of the space station by operating through an in-kind
barter system. Can you explain to the Committee how NASA
negotiates these barter agreements with international partners?
How does NASA determine the value of bartered goods and
services? For instance, how can the taxpayer trace whether
certain components like Russian Progress vehicles have already
been accounted for in earlier--in an earlier deal? Who would
like to answer that? Mr. Bowersox?
Mr. Bowersox. And because that's a very detailed question,
it's probably best that I take it for the record and get
something, you know, substantial back to you. But our folks are
very careful in the ISS program trying to make sure that we get
very good value for what we invest and that we see similar
investments from our partners. You know, we're very careful
about it.
But it is one of those areas where sometimes there's give
and take, right? We know that if one of our partners needs
something, we'll make sure that they get that. They know we
need something, and they make sure that we get it, right? So
there is a little bit of fuzziness there. I don't want to say
it's always a perfect exchange.
Chairman Babin. Got you. Anybody else want to add to that?
OK. And then, again, Mr. Bowersox, in the last two years,
we have seen multiple mechanical issues on the ISS. These have
largely occurred on the Russian segment. Do you anticipate
these issues increasing between now and 2028, the date that the
Russians have given us? How do these technical issues impact
the cost of ISS operations and maintenance for the United
States? And how does NASA work with the Russians to ensure that
these issues are being adequately addressed?
Mr. Bowersox. So, first, we are working very well with our
Russian colleagues on these issues. They're sharing information
with us. We're sharing expertise with them with the goal of
addressing these issues and trying to make sure that we reduce
the chance of things happening in the future.
We're also getting valuable data. You know, some of the
things we're seeing as the Russian segment ages, its modules
are older than a lot of the other modules that are on station.
We're learning about how spacecraft age in space, so we're all
getting valuable data there.
And then something that we've learned with the recent
problems with the Progress and Soyuz vehicles and the radiator
that leaked is that we think the orbital debris environment is
something that's a big issue for all of us----
Chairman Babin. Right.
Mr. Bowersox [continuing]. Including our Russian
colleagues, so we're trying to understand that better.
Chairman Babin. OK. Thank you. And that completes my line
of questioning, so I will go ahead and let----
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Babin [continuing]. Counterpart--thank you.
Mr. Sorensen. So I want to go back to, there was an event
that happened this past Sunday. You may have heard of it. It
was a sports game that had a concert in the middle of it, OK? I
think people need to understand that what we're talking about
here with the International Space Station would barely fit
between the goalposts of a football field.
So, Mr. Bowersox, could you help us visualize in our head--
because this is something that's never happened before--how we
decommission the International Space Station? How do we make
sure that the people on Earth are safe? How do we keep
something so massive away from the things that are in low-Earth
orbit that we rely upon every day?
Mr. Bowersox. So our number-one strategy right now for
keeping the ISS flying and minimizing any chance of an
uncontrolled entry is to keep it in the best shape we can,
taking care of every maintenance item as it needs to be taken
care of, and maximizing the redundancy everywhere we can across
the station. If it were to come down in an uncontrolled
fashion, there would be large pieces of the International Space
Station coming down somewhere between its northern orbit limit
and its southern orbit limit in a part of the world we don't
know, and there would be a large risk to the population on the
surface of the Earth.
Mr. Sorensen. Could you explain to us how we need to
develop the piece of machinery that is going to help us bring
this down?
Mr. Bowersox. So what we've got in mind is the U.S. Deorbit
Vehicle. What it does is basically it'll go up there, it'll
wait six months to a year, and then gradually, the ISS will
start to come down lower toward the Earth just because of the
high levels of the atmosphere causing drag on the space
station. And then as it gets down to its final altitude, we'll
do an impulse from that deorbit vehicle, and that will cause
the ISS to come down in a much smaller area of the Indian Ocean
is likely where we would target it, out as far as we can from
landmass and as far away from people as we can get it. And that
greatly lowers the risk to people on the surface of the Earth
to our goal of 1 in 10,000, below 1 in 10,000 risk to anybody
on the surface.
Mr. Sorensen. But that only happens is if we are going to
budget to pay for that over time.
Mr. Bowersox. It requires investment in that U.S. Deorbit
Vehicle, yes, sir.
Mr. Sorensen. My last line of questioning, I'm so
optimistic seeing all of the young adults that are sitting here
in this Committee room today. The young adults, whether they're
in college or they're in high school or going back to--you
know, into elementary school, they're going to come up with
some major, major solutions to challenges we have.
And maybe we could go to Dr. Ferl for this. What are some
of the things that we don't yet know that we're going to need
to figure out as we transition from ISS to low-Earth orbit to
the Moon to Mars?
Dr. Ferl. There's actually a large number of things, and
that's what the decadal study is there to do is to prioritize
some of the things that we don't know as we make best use of
the ISS and our ability to do science in space. So what are--
among the things we don't know, for example, probably
represented behind me are a number of different what we would
call in the science world genotypes, people that come from
different backgrounds and carry different genes with them when
they go into space. I'm sure Mr. Bowersox will acknowledge that
the variability of people in space and their ability to adapt
to space is something that is inherent in our individual
genomes. We need to know that better as more and more people go
to space. So the diversity of genotype on the biological side
is something that is just absolutely key in the coming decades
as more and more people go to space.
I have to add one more thing. It's the young people that
were mentioned earlier, the grade school people that will be
going into space. They will be able to go to space to do
science. There will be scientists going to space more than
professional astronauts. And that is another thing where the
science community and the unknowns that will carry people into
space will be one of the drivers that takes people to space.
Mr. Sorensen. Well, one of my heroes from my hometown, Dr.
Janice Voss, she wasn't interested in science until she was six
years old. Her mother says she picked up a book, and it was
about a woman scientist. And so thank you all for your
testimony today, and thank you to the late Janice Voss for
inspiring us.
Chairman Babin. Thank you very much.
And I was going to mention them earlier, but most of them
have left. But we have had literally dozens of young--student-
age young adults that have been coming in and out during this
entire hearing. And when I was prepared to make that
announcement, right before I did, they all left, so--there's
still some young people in here. Mr. Stallmer, thank you for
being one of the young folks here, too, OK?
We really appreciate everybody that's come here today and
really want to say thank you to our witnesses here in a very
fascinating hearing, which has given us some valuable
information. So I want to thank you all.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and written questions from all the Members.
So with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:41 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by Mr. Kenneth Bowersox

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Mary Lynne Dittmar

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Robert J. Ferl

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Mr. Dylan Taylor

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Article submitted by Representative Zoe Lofgren

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
