- A BAR TOO HIGH: CONCERNS WITH CEQ'S PROPOSED REGULATORY HURDLE FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTING

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A BAR TOO HIGH: CONCERNS
WITH CEQ'S PROPOSED REGULATORY
HURDLE FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTING

=======================================================================
HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON INVESTIGATIONS
AND OVERSIGHT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

SEPTEMBER 20, 2023

----------

Serial No. 118-25

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-476                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight

HON. JAY OBERNOLTE, California, Chairman
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina,
MAX MILLER, Ohio                         Ranking Member
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              KEVIN MULLIN, California
VACANCY                              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 20, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..................     5
Written Statement............................................     6

Statement by Representative Valerie Foushee, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..     7
Written Statement............................................     8

Written statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................     9

Witnesses:

Mr. Eric Fanning, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Aerospace Industries Association
Oral Statement...............................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Mr. Chad Whiteman, Vice President, U.S. Chamber of Commerce
Oral Statement...............................................    18
Written Statement............................................    20

Mr. Steven M. Rothstein, Managing Director, Ceres Accelerator for
Sustainable Capital Markets
Oral Statement...............................................    24
Written Statement............................................    26

Ms. Victoria Killion, Legislative Attorney, Congressional
Research Service
Oral Statement...............................................    33
Written Statement............................................    35

Discussion.......................................................    53

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Mr. Eric Fanning, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Aerospace Industries Association...............................    66

Mr. Chad Whiteman, Vice President, U.S. Chamber of Commerce......    70

Mr. Steven M. Rothstein, Managing Director, Ceres Accelerator for
Sustainable Capital Markets....................................    76

Ms. Victoria Killion, Legislative Attorney, Congressional
Research Service...............................................    78

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Investigative
Portfolio, submitted by Representative Jay Obernolte, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
Letter to Mathew C. Blum, Chair, Federal Acquisition
Regulatory Council, Office of Management and Budget, from
Frank Lucas, Chairman, House Committee on Science, Space,
and Technology, et al......................................   108
Letter to Brenda Mallory, Chair, Council on Environmental
Quality, The White House, from Frank Lucas, Chairman, House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, et al.........   113
Letter to the Honorable Jay Obernolte, Chairman, Subcommittee
on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on Science,
Space, and Technology, from Wintta M. Woldemariam,
Associate Director, Office of Legislative Affair, Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget...   118
Letter to Shalanda Young, Director, Office of Management and
Budget, from Remy Nathan, Senior Vice President of Policy,
Aerospace Industries Association...........................   119
Letter to Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration, from Frank Lucas, Chairman, House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology................   122
Letter to the Honorable Frank D. Lucas, Chairwoman, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives, from Alicia Brown, Associate Administrator
for Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration.......................   127
Letter to Luiz Amaral, Chief Executive Officer, Science Based
Target Initiative, from Frank Lucas, Chairman, House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology................   128
Letter to the Honorable Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives, from Karen Elizabeth Christian, Raphael A.
Prober, Counsel for SBTi...................................   132
Letter to the Honorable Shalanda Young, Director, Office of
Management and Budget, from Frank Lucas, Chairman, House
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology................   137
Letter to the Honorable Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, from Wintta M. Woldemariam,
Associate Director, Office of Legislative Affairs,
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget.....................................................   142
Letter to Ms. Jennifer Hawes, Procurement Analyst, Regulatory
Secretariat Division, Government Services Administration,
from John Luddy, Vice President, National Security Policy,
David Silver, Vice President, Civil Aviation, the Aerospace
Industries Association.....................................   146
``Amazon's approach to setting Science-Based Targets,''
Amazon Staff, www.aboutamazon.com..........................   160
Letter to Representative Frank D Lucas, Chair, Representative
Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member, U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, from Bill
Baue, Senior Director, r3.0 (Redesign for Resilience &
Regeneration), Original Instigator, Science Based Targets
initiative.................................................   162
``Russia's Quiet War Against European Fracking,'' Keith
Johnson, Foreign Policy....................................   173
``Group judging corporate climate claims overhauls itself
after criticism,'' Tommy Wilkes and Ross Kerber, Reuters...   176
Letter to Lesley A. Field, Acting Administrator, Office of
Federal Procurement Policy, Office of Management and
Budget, et al., from Martin J. Durbin, President, Global
Energy Institute, and Senior Vice President, Policy, U.S.
Chamber of Commerce........................................   187

Report submitted by Representative Valerie Foushee, Ranking
Member, Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee
on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
``Ceres Comments on Proposed Federal Acquisition Regulation:
Disclosure of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Climate-Related
Financial Risk [FAR Case 2021-015]''.......................   224

Documents submitted by Representative Claudia Tenney,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Who We Are--The New Venture Fund works with change leaders
who share our purpose of creating positive impact in our
communities, our country, and our world,''
www.newventurefund.org.....................................   272
Science Based Targets Initiative LTD, Certificate of
Incorporation of a Private Limited Company, the Registrar
of Companies for England and Wales.........................   277
``Grants and Program Associate,'' We Mean Business...........   322

A BAR TOO HIGH: CONCERNS
WITH CEQ'S PROPOSED REGULATORY
HURDLE FOR FEDERAL CONTRACTING

----------

WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 20, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jay Obernolte
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Obernolte. Good morning, everyone. The hour of 10
o'clock having arrived, I will convene this hearing of the
Science, Space, and Technology Subcommittee on Investigations
and Oversight. Without objection, the Chair is authorized to
declare a recess of the Committee at any time. Hearing none, so
ordered.
I will begin by recognizing myself for five minutes for an
opening statement.
I'd like to thank all of our witnesses and our Committee
Members and Ranking Member Foushee for participating in our
hearing today. I'd like to begin by requesting unanimous
consent that the Subcommittee's investigative portfolio be
submitted for the record. Hearing none, so ordered.
Today's hearing will focus on a proposed regulation by the
Federal Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) Council that would require
Federal contractors to disclose greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and set reduction targets. The rule would further require that
a London-based company validate those targets. To be clear,
today's hearing is not about climate change or whether or not
companies should reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. In
fact, many companies have voluntarily chosen to reduce
emissions and are verifying those reductions in a variety of
ways already. Instead, today's hearing concerns government
overreach and questionable processes that result in the
Administration picking winners and losers in the marketplace.
Regardless of political affiliation, every Member of this
institution should be concerned by regulatory policies that
usurp Congress' legislative authority. And every Member of
Congress should be concerned with any regulatory action that
arbitrarily selects one company to do business with the Federal
Government without a meritorious selection process. The
government should not be in the business of picking winners and
losers when it comes to Federal contracting.
However, unfortunately, that is exactly the case in this
instance. This Administration published a proposed rule in
November which decreed that all major Federal contractors will
be required to set greenhouse gas emission reduction targets
and then hire a specified private foreign company to validate
those targets. The company anointed by the Administration to
perform this task is called the Science Based Targets
initiative or SBTi.
According to the information that this Committee has
gathered, SBTi did not go through a competitive selection
process before being chosen for this role. Documents provided
by the OMB (Office of Management and Budget) indicate that
representatives from SBTi met with the Council on Environmental
Quality (CEQ) to discuss this proposed regulation only twice.
There was no other email traffic, no formal vetting or
application. It appears SBTi did not even have to submit a
single piece of paper explaining why they were the company best
suited for this job.
The choice of SBTi is not only concerning this Committee
and the proposed rule, but because of the rule's poor drafting,
it raises multiple practical financial and national security
issues. For instance, ceding the authority to approve the
emissions targets of Federal contractors to a foreign entity
means that we have no way to verify that SBTi's processes are
based in sound science. In fact, both Congress and the Federal
Government have very little oversight of the decisions being
made here.
In addition, companies specializing in oil and gas
production may not even have the ability to submit proposals
that meet SBTi's science-based targets, which could have a
severe impact on our Nation's mission readiness in industries
such as space and national defense. Our hope is that this
hearing will surface these issues and help our Members consider
these concerns as we move forward.
The Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee has
investigated this issue since February of this year. It
reviewed many documents, sent multiple letters, and met with
numerous individuals, including representatives from government
agencies and stakeholders in order to get to this point. The
council has invited Chair Mallory of CEQ and the head of the
FAR Council to join us today to answer our remaining questions
regarding how this proposed rule came into being, questions
only they can answer. Unfortunately, they have declined to be
here this morning.
Therefore, the witnesses at this hearing are experts who
are here to help Congress understand the legal, practical,
financial, and national security concerns associated with this
proposed regulation. It's my hope that your testimonies today
will cover four main issue areas: first, the constitutionality
of this proposed regulation; second, the practical impacts that
the proposed regulation would have, specifically as it pertains
to industry and national security; third, the issues regarding
the delegation of a quasi-government regulatory authority to
SBTi and the conflict-of-interest concerns inherent in having a
single entity act as both standard setter and validator;
fourth, and finally, the impossibility of either the executive
or the legislative branches to conduct meaningful oversight of
SBTi, a foreign entity which answers to neither.
I look forward to a robust discussion on these topics. I'd
like to thank everyone for your willingness to be here and to
have a dialog on this important topic.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Obernolte follows:]

Today's hearing will focus on a proposed regulation by the
Federal Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) Council that would require
federal contractors to disclose greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and set reduction targets. Further, the rule would require that
a London-based company validate those targets.
Today's hearing is not about climate change or whether
companies should or should not reduce their greenhouse
emissions. In fact, many companies have voluntarily chosen to
reduce emissions and are verifying those reductions in a
variety of ways. Today's hearing is about government overreach
and questionable processes that result in the Administration
picking winners and losers.
Regardless of political affiliation, every member of this
institution should be bothered by regulatory policies that
usurp Congress' legislative authority.
And every member of Congress should be concerned with any
regulatory action that arbitrarily selects one company to do
business with the federal government without a meritorious
selection process. The federal government should not be in the
business of picking winners and losers.
However, that is exactly the case in this instance. This
Administration published a proposed rule in November, which
declared that all major contractors would have to set
greenhouse gas emission reduction targets, and then hire a
specific private foreign-based company to validate those
targets. The company anointed by the Administration to perform
this task is called the Science Based Target Initiative or
SBTi.
From what this Committee has gathered, SBTi did not go
through a competitive selection process before being chosen.
According to documents provided by OMB, representatives from
SBTi met with the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) to
discuss this proposed regulation TWICE. There was no other
email traffic, no formal vetting or application, and it appears
SBTi did not even have to submit a single piece of paper
explaining why they were the best for the job.
The choice of SBTi is not the only concern this Committee
has with this proposed rule. Because of its poor drafting, it
has multiple practical, financial, and national security
issues.
For instance, ceding this authority to a foreign entity
means that we cannot verify that SBTI's processes are based in
sound science. We will have very little oversight of the
decisions being made.
What's more, companies specializing in oil and gas may not
even be able to submit proposals to meet SBTi's science-based
targets and that could have a severe impact on our mission
readiness in industries like space and national defense.
Our hope is that this hearing will highlight these issues
and help our members consider these concerns as we move
forward.
The Investigations and Oversight Subcommittee has
investigated this issue since February of this year. It
reviewed many documents, sent multiple letters, and met with
quite a few individuals, including representatives from
government agencies and stakeholders, in order to get to this
point.
The Committee invited Chair Mallory of CEQ and the head of
the FAR Council to join us today to answer our remaining
questions regarding how this proposed rule came into being--
questions only they can answer.
Unfortunately, they are not here today.
Therefore, today's witnesses are experts who are here to
help Congress understand the legal, practical, financial, and
national security concerns associated with this proposed
regulation.
We hope your testimonies today will generally cover four
main issues. First, the Constitutionality of this proposed
regulation.
Second, the practical impacts that the proposed regulation
would have, specifically as it pertains to industry and
national security.
Third, the issues regarding the delegation of a quasi-
government regulatory authority to SBTi and the conflict of
interest concerns inherent in having a single entity act as
both standard setter and validator.
Fourth and finally, the inability of both the executive and
legislative branches to conduct oversight of SBTi.
Specifically, into the standards and scientific methods
implemented by SBTi when they provide these services. I look
forward to robust discussion.
Thank you all for your willingness to be here.

Chairman Obernolte. I now recognize Ranking Member Foushee
for her opening statement.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Chairman Obernolte, and thank you
to our witnesses for joining us here today to discuss this
proposed rulemaking.
As we on the Science Committee know, science-based
information is crucial in Federal decisionmaking. The Federal
Government has the responsibility of ensuring that taxpayer
money is properly stewarded and improves the lives of all
Americans and the functioning of our government. Procurement
policy is a significant part of this responsibility. The
Federal Government outlays enormous sums to contractors.
Therefore, agencies should gather as much information as
possible before selecting companies to receive massive
contracts.
When it comes to ensuring science-based decisionmaking in
this space, I can think of no more important issue than
combating climate change. The proposed rule we're here to
discuss has not yet been finalized. The Administration is
working through public comments, and today, we have an
opportunity for a productive conversation about how to ensure
this rule can best achieve its important goals.
In its current form, this rule would offer an unprecedented
level of transparency into the greenhouse gas emissions and
mitigation strategies of Federal contractors who the government
entrusts with hundreds of billions of taxpayer dollars. In the
private sector, it is well-accepted that a company's exposure
to climate risk and its contribution to climate change has a
direct impact on its bottom line. Shareholders demand to know
that they're investing in companies who understand this reality
and are working to reduce these risks. Financial institutions
increasingly consider their susceptibility to climate-related
disasters when making business decisions. Agencies and the
Americans who fund them deserve that same level of transparency
and forethought.
I applaud the Biden Administration for taking this step to
modernize the Federal procurement process. This rulemaking, if
finalized, would give agencies the opportunity to make
contracting decisions that incorporate an understanding of
vulnerability to climate-related risks. This would be a large
improvement across the government, but it is especially
critical when it comes to ensuring our defense preparedness.
Our national security depends on a clear-eyed assessment of the
risks posed to our country. The Department of Defense (DOD) has
committed to incorporating climate risks into its strategies.
If finalized, this rule will give them crucial information to
deliver on that promise.
I won't to exaggerate the impact of this rule. The FAR
Council has chosen to limit its reach to a small subset of
contractors. The full suite of requirements would apply only to
companies with over $50 million in contract obligations. Just
1.2 percent of prospective contractors would have any
additional reporting requirements at all. And for small
businesses and certain nonprofit entities, exemptions are
provided to help alleviate the burden of compliance, and
agencies can provide waivers for mission-essential purposes.
Despite this relatively limited scope, it truly is a
significant step forward in promoting contractor transparency
for their greenhouse gas emissions. I believe this is also an
excellent springboard for further action. I look forward to
hearing from our panel about how this rulemaking can be
improved before finalization and how we can further bolster our
Federal infrastructure against the risk of catastrophic climate
change.
Thank you, Chairman Obernolte. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mrs. Foushee follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Obernolte. And thank you to our
witnesses for joining us here today to discuss this proposed
rulemaking. As we on the Science Committee know, science-based
information is crucial in Federal decision making. The Federal
government has the responsibility of ensuring that taxpayer
money is properly stewarded and improves the lives of all
Americans and the functioning of our government. Procurement
policy is a significant part of this responsibility. The
Federal government outlays enormous sums to contractors.
Therefore, agencies should gather as much information as
possible before selecting companies to receive massive
contracts.
When it comes to ensuring science-based decision-making in
this space, I can think of no more important issue than
combatting climate change. The proposed rule we're here to
discuss has not yet been finalized. The Administration is
working through public comments, and today, we have an
opportunity for a productive conversation about how to ensure
this rule can best achieve its important goals.
In its current form, this rule would offer an unprecedented
level of transparency into the greenhouse gas emissions and
mitigation strategies of Federal contractors, who the
government entrusts with hundreds of billions of taxpayer
dollars. In the private sector, it is well accepted that a
company's exposure to climate risk--and its contribution to
climate change--has a direct impact on its bottom line.
Shareholders demand to know that they're investing in companies
who understand this reality and are working to reduce these
risks.
Financial institutions increasingly consider their
susceptibility to climate-related disasters when making
business decisions. Agencies, and the Americans who fund them,
deserve that same level of transparency and forethought. I
applaud the Biden Administration for taking this step to
modernize the Federal procurement process. This rulemaking, if
finalized, would give agencies the opportunity to make
contracting decisions that incorporate an understanding of
vulnerability to climate-related risk.
This would be a large improvement across the government,
but it is especially critical when it comes to ensuring our
defense preparedness. Our national security depends on a clear-
eyed assessment of the risks posed to our country. The
Department of Defense has committed to incorporating climate
risk into its strategies. If finalized, this rule will give
them crucial information to deliver on that promise. I won't
exaggerate the impact of this rule. The FAR Council has chosen
to limit its reach to a small subset of contractors.
The full suite of requirements would apply only to
companies with over $50 million in contract obligations. Just
1.2 percent of prospective contractors would have any
additional reporting requirements at all. For small businesses
and certain nonprofit entities, exemptions are provided to help
alleviate the burden of compliance, and agencies can provide
waivers for mission-essential purposes.
Despite this relatively limited scope, it truly is a
significant step forward in promoting contractor transparency
for their greenhouse gas emissions. I believe this is also an
excellent springboard for further action. I look forward to
hearing from our panel about how this rulemaking can be
improved before finalization and how we can further bolster our
Federal infrastructure against the risk of catastrophic climate
change.
Thank you, Chairman Obernolte, I yield back.

Chairman Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

The climate crisis is one of the most profound challenges
facing humanity. We are witnessing the devastating consequences
of climate change every day, in ways large and small, and we
are only beginning to grasp the enormity of the impact that it
will have on our society. If we want to avoid the worst-case
scenarios that loom ahead of us, we have no choice but to
deploy every tool in our arsenal to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions as much as we can, as fast as we can. And as the
world's largest economy, the United States has a unique
responsibility--and opportunity--to lead this effort.
Under the Biden Administration, the U.S. government has
been leading by example in the fight against climate change.
President Biden has overseen an unprecedented mobilization of
federal resources to reduce the federal government's own
emissions and strengthen the federal government's climate
resilience. That effort has been wide-ranging--spanning from
federal risk planning and infrastructure vulnerabilities to
federal supply chains and emission sources. I wholeheartedly
support the administration's emphasis on this issue, which is
long overdue.
Federal procurement is another critical way in which the
federal government can use its authority and influence to be a
force for good in the climate fight. The federal government is
an enormous purchaser of goods and services--indeed, the
largest single purchaser in the world. In 2021 alone, federal
procurement stood at $630 billion. Federal procurement
decisions can alter economic incentives across entire sectors
and send unmistakable market signals that the private sector is
hard-pressed to ignore. But until now, the federal government
has overlooked the greenhouse gas emissions of its contracting
sector and failed to consider how its contractors can work
towards reducing those emissions. This neglect increases the
potential costs of climate change across the federal supply
chain and exposes taxpayers to unnecessary risks.
The rulemaking at the center of today's hearing, Federal
Acquisition Regulation: Disclosure of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
and Climate-Related Financial Risk, is a first step to address
greenhouse gas emissions from the federal procurement sector.
Simply put, the rule seeks to shed light on the emissions of
the largest federal contractors and prod them to set science-
based targets for reducing those emissions.
I applaud the goals of this rulemaking. It operates by the
simple principle that more information leads to better
decisions and more effective oversight of taxpayer dollars.
More data is always better. Greater transparency is always
better. And the federal government, as the customer for its own
goods and services, has the right to demand more of its
contractors in order to properly safeguard public resources.
There have been criticisms of the proposed rule, and I'm
sure we'll hear more about those at today's hearing. I want to
note that this proposed rule has not been finalized. The public
comment period has closed, and I have no doubt that the
administration will seriously consider all such comments to
improve the rule before finalization.
The existential threat posed by climate change demands that
we do everything within our power to confront it. Federal
procurement is no exception. The federal contracting sector
must be prepared to step up, disclose its greenhouse gas
emissions in a transparent fashion, and start to think about
how to reduce those emissions in line with America's broader
emission reduction goals. This rulemaking is a step in the
right direction, and I hope that today's hearing allows for a
productive conversation about how best to improve the
transparency of federal procurement emissions.
I yield back.

Chairman Obernolte. We'll move next to our witness panel.
Our first witness is Eric Fanning, President and CEO (Chief
Executive Officer) of AIA (Aerospace Industries Association).
Mr. Fanning, you are recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. ERIC FANNING,

PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,

AEROSPACE INDUSTRIES ASSOCIATION

Mr. Fanning. Thank you, Chairman Obernolte and Ranking
Member Foushee. Thank you for inviting me to discuss the
serious challenges posed by this proposed rule.
First, let me begin by emphasizing our industry's deep
commitment to sustainability. U.S. aviation manufacturers
pledge to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050. Today,
manufacturers are building more efficient planes and more
sustainable propulsion. They are also minimizing the impact of
the manufacturing process and advancing the use of sustainable
aviation fuels.
Our companies are working daily to reduce their
environmental footprint, not just because it's the right thing
to do, but because the market and our customers demand it. We
strive to work closely with the Federal Government to achieve
these goals, including supporting appropriate disclosure of
climate-related information, including GHG and climate-related
financial risks, in accordance with the Executive order on
climate-related financial risk.
But the proposed FAR greenhouse gas emissions rule, while
well-intended, is not executable for the American aerospace and
defense (A&D) industry. Under this proposal, Federal
contractors would be required to disclose emissions and set
emission reduction targets based on the standards set by the
Science Based Targets initiative, or SBTi, an international
nongovernmental entity. This is applicable to direct and
indirect emissions or scope 1 and scope 2 emissions, which can
be challenging enough.
However, the greatest challenge comes from disclosing scope
3 emissions, the emissions created by suppliers and end users,
including the emissions generated by aircraft when the airlines
or the military fly them. For A&D companies, especially small
businesses, accurately assessing scope 3 emissions is a
complex, long-range problem that they do not have the capacity
or capability to execute.
Furthermore, SBTi does not have sector-based guidance for
all industries, including the A&D industry. As such, SBTi may
establish aggressive timelines and rigid standards that don't
factor in our unique circumstances. For instance, the equipment
we produce have much longer service lives than most consumer
products. Any science-based target must take this into account,
and it's not clear the rule or SBTi would do so.
Congress should be particularly concerned about the
national security implications of the rule. If the Pentagon
provides a total estimate of emissions, will the military then
be bound to operate within those parameters regardless of the
threats we encounter? Will disclosing this information publicly
provide sensitive information, including data about next-
generation platforms and use scenarios to our adversaries?
What is even more concerning from a security perspective is
that this rule opens the door for foreign influence over U.S.
Government procurement. SBTi is led by foreign nationals and
has no accountability to the U.S. Government. The proposed rule
taps into other international NGOs (non-governmental
organizations) to solicit information regarding companies'
environmental impacts and targets. If a contractor does not
provide this information, or if SBTi does not approve their
targets, then the contractor would be ruled ineligible for
Federal contracts. In other words, it gives a nongovernmental
international body the authority to determine which American
companies can and can't do business with the U.S. Government,
including our military, all without regard to cost, schedule,
and capability of what that company may offer.
This rule also places unusually burdensome requirements on
small- and mid-sized companies that are part of the supply
chain at a time when the Pentagon and the defense community are
concerned about the shrinking size of the defense industrial
base. Companies, especially these small and mid-sized
companies, increasingly cannot afford the costs of doing
business with the U.S. Government. This rule would become yet
another market barrier that could turn companies in the defense
industrial base to commercial work instead. A diverse defense
industrial base is critical to our military meeting its growing
mission set, and this rule would jeopardize that, even as a
land war continues in Europe and the threat of conflict in the
Indo-Pacific grows.
The American A&D industry shares our government's goal of
reducing carbon emissions. The proposed rule would place
enormous if even executable burdens on industry, set up a
regulatory-like process without the normal transparency and
oversight we have come to expect in the United States, and put
our national security at risk by making public highly sensitive
military data.
Thank you again for having me, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fanning follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Fanning.
Our second witness is Chad Whiteman, Vice President of the
U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Mr. Whiteman, you're recognized for
five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. CHAD WHITEMAN,

VICE PRESIDENT, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Whiteman. Thank you. Chairman Obernolte, Ranking Member
Foushee, and Members of the Committee--Subcommittee, I'm Chad
Whiteman, Vice President of Environment and Regulatory Affairs
for the Global Energy Institute at the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce. Thank you for the opportunity to present the U.S.
Chamber's views here to the Subcommittee on the FAR's climate
disclosure rulemaking.
Chamber members include Federal contractors large and small
that provide products and services across diverse industries
such as aerospace and defense, telecommunications, information
technology, engineering services, food and hospitality,
pharmaceuticals, healthcare, energy, and many more. American
companies are already playing a crucial role in developing
innovations and approaches to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
while also spurring the evolution of climate disclosures.
Companies are also increasingly reporting more information to
the public about their efforts to reduce their greenhouse
gases. Many have also made forward-looking statements and
commitments to reduce their emissions over time.
While the private sector is making significant progress,
regulatory decisions must always be informed by a careful
analysis of the available alternatives, outcomes, and cost-
benefit tradeoffs to ensure that optimal policies are
implemented. Such regulatory decisions also must be made within
the bounds of agencies' legal authorities.
We're concerned that the proposed rule fails to strike the
right balance and is an inappropriate and inefficient means of
mitigating the potential effects of global climate change. The
proposed rule would impose immense costs on government
contractors of all sizes, costs that would be passed on to the
government and ultimately to taxpayers. This would undermine
rather than advance the goal of economic and efficient system
of contracting that underpins the Federal Property and
Administrative Services Act.
Detailed disclosure of climate risk assessment processes
and risks, inventorying and disclosing scope 1, 2, and 3
greenhouse gas emissions, and developing and implementing
science-based emissions reduction targets would require
thousands of employee hours and saddle contractors with
billions of dollars in compliance costs. The government's
acquisition costs would rise as a consequence, and some
contractors and companies in the supply chain would likely drop
out of the market entirely, weakening the competitive forces
that keep prices down.
The council's pursuit of goals beyond economic and
efficient contracting exceeds its legal authority. While the
council can promulgate specific output-based related standards
to help ensure that the government acquires the goods and
services it needs at appropriate prices, the council lacks the
statutory authority to use government contracts as a vehicle
for furthering other policies like addressing climate change,
even if well-intended.
The proposal raises significant issues under the
Constitution, as it would force contractors to associate with
and likely follow the speech guidelines of certain private
organizations whom the council would deputize to do most of the
standard setting and verification. This unusual arrangement
would violate contractors' First Amendment rights and would
transgress longstanding legal limitations on delegating
legislative and rulemaking authority to private entities.
The proposed rule would violate the Administrative
Procedures Act in several respects. Most significantly, the
council's cost-benefit analysis is flawed and vastly
underestimates the costs. For example, the council alludes to
benefits from potential greenhouse gas emissions reductions but
fails to acknowledge or quantify the costs required to achieve
such reductions. The actual cost of the council's proposal
would exceed their estimate of $1 billion for the first year
and $3 billion over 10 years. The benefits side of the ledger
fares no better. The council also fails to grapple with the
duplicative and even conflicting requirements of the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC) is simultaneously proposing to
impose on public companies.
Other aspects of the proposal are equally troubling. The
council fails to account for the disproportionate burden that
the proposal imposes on small businesses, both directly as
Federal contractors and indirectly as suppliers of major
contractors. The role would outsource most of the standard
setting to private entities that the Federal Government does
not control, regulate, or monitor. It would undermine national
security interests. It would set compliance deadlines that are
impossible to meet. It would require contractors to set
science-based targets, even if they do not have a viable means
of meeting the targets in the short timeframe allowed, and it
would do all of this without the council having adequately
considered numerous less-restrictive alternatives. These and
other flaws counsel in favor of abandoning the proposal, as we
explained further in our detailed written comments submitted to
the council earlier this year.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whiteman follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Obernolte. Thank you very much, Mr. Whiteman.
Our third witness is Steven Rothstein, Managing Director of
the Ceres Accelerator for Sustainable Capital Markets. Mr.
Rothstein, you're recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MR. STEVEN M. ROTHSTEIN,

MANAGING DIRECTOR, CERES ACCELERATOR

FOR SUSTAINABLE CAPITAL MARKETS

Mr. Rothstein. Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Ranking Member,
Members of the Committee. Again, Steven Rothstein, Managing
Director of the Ceres Accelerator. Thank you for the invitation
to be here.
Ceres is a nonprofit organization, working with investors
and companies to transform the economy and build a just and
sustainable future. I'd like to briefly highlight five key
points in the rule that we're talking about.
No. 1, the rule will strengthen the ability of agencies to
deliver on their mission while reducing burden to taxpayers.
This rule will make the United States stronger. The Federal
Government spends over $630 billion a year on ranging from food
to cement to steel and so much more. It would allow the Federal
Government for the first time to really understand the common
business practice of measuring and managing climate risk
associated with that. According to a recent Deloitte survey of
2000 C-suite executives, 97 percent of those executives say the
climate will cause business interruptions in the next few
years. PwC did an annual survey of CEOs. Three quarters of
those CEOs say that in the next year, the supply chain could be
disrupted because of climate risk.
No. 2, by focusing on the Federal supply chain, the rule
addresses a major source of the climate risk. We've all known
about the brutal climate events that are happening, but to put
it in context, NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration) highlighted that in the 1980's, we had one
major a billion dollars or more climate event every four
months, every four months in the 1980's. In 2010 it was every
three weeks. This year, it's every two weeks. That is costing
State and Federal taxpayers today hundreds of billions of
dollars to prepare and repair for those. So those costs are
happening now. The--one of the fortunate things about the
proposed rule is that they only focus on the largest suppliers
to ease the burden. And as was said earlier, there is only 1.3
percent of the Federal suppliers that represent 86 percent of
the emission. So that's a way to ensure that. This is not just
the United States. Eighteen countries have come together and
say that they need to reduce emissions not just for emission
but to reduce business risk. Eighteen countries plus the United
States established the Net-Zero Government Alliance. Canada's
done something similar and so many other countries.
No. 3, climate risk disclosure is now mainstream among
major companies, including many large Federal contractors. In
fact, 71 percent, 71 percent of Fortune 500 companies are
already disclosing their greenhouse gas emissions. They've done
that even without requirements because it makes good business
sense. Major Federal contractors like General Dynamics,
Honeywell, IBM, Johnson Controls, and so many more are
disclosing their emission reduction targets. Why are they doing
this? Because they know it makes sense, and their investors
want it. If you look at the rule, the comments that were
submitted to the SEC, over 95 percent of investors representing
over $50 trillion of assets have said they need this
information because it is a business risk.
No. 4, this proposed rule has received support broader
than, to be honest, I would have thought. We did an analysis of
the elements, and looking at the core elements of the rule, not
every detail, but it got 19,000 individual supporters and 68
organizational supporters who generally support, including the
Council of Defense and Space Industries, BP America, Baker
Hughes, Global Electronics, National Workforce and Technology
Council, National Contract Management Association, and groups
like Taxpayers for Common Sense and Sustainable Purchasing
Council.
No. 5, the proposed rule properly leverages standards that
were developed by the private sector, but we do recommend
changes from what the FAR Council proposed. Among the steps the
proposed rule takes to minimize burdens is to leverage the
private sector standards. Leveraging those standards is exactly
what Congress sought when it enacted the National Technology
Transfer and Advancement Act in 1996, but we think to clarify
the rule and add flexibility Ceres recommends the FAR Council
not delegate but set minimum Federal standards for science-
based targets and allow major contractors to achieve those
standards with a widely market-accepted, market-based
methodology. That can be SBTi, if there is another one, let
them talk about that, too. We also recommend that there should
be a third-party process to validate using the same process.
In summary, this approach adheres to what we recommend as
guiding principle, leveraging the important work that private
sector leaders have already undertaken and adhering to best
science.
Thank you for the opportunity. I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rothstein follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Rothstein.
Our final witness is Victoria Killion, Legislative Attorney
for the Congressional Research Services (CRS). Ms. Killion,
you're recognized for five minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MS. VICTORIA KILLION,

LEGISLATIVE ATTORNEY,

CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE

Ms. Killion. Thank you. Chairman Obernolte, Ranking Member
Foushee, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Victoria
Killion, and I'm a Legislative Attorney at the Congressional
Research Service, or as you know us, CRS. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today about legal
considerations relevant to the proposed rule. My testimony
today will focus mainly on two legal areas, the major questions
doctrine and the private nondelegation doctrine. If these
topics sound vaguely familiar but terribly academic, I
completely understand. My objective today is to help explain
what these doctrines are, how courts have applied them, and how
they might affect the current rulemaking.
Both doctrines stem from constitutional principles designed
to safeguard Congress' legislative power and are starting to
become more prevalent in judicial opinions. The major questions
doctrine is about how courts decide whether Congress has
authorized an agency to take a particular action. Typically,
courts examine the statutory text to see if it provides
explicit or implicit authority for a particular agency
rulemaking. But there's another consideration as well. The
Supreme Court has ruled that when a regulation presents a
question of, quote, ``vast economic and political
significance'' that exceeds the history and breadth of
agencies' past assertions of authority, there must be, quote,
``clear congressional authorization'' for that action.
Essentially, the doctrine creates a higher bar for an agency to
show that its regulation falls within the scope of its
statutory authority.
If the proposed rule were to be finalized as written and
challenged in court, a reviewing court might examine the
anticipated effects of the rule on various industries in the
economy, the compliance costs for Federal contractors, and how
the promulgating agencies have exercised their authority in the
past. If, in the court's view, the rule raised a major
question, then the court would likely ask whether a Federal
statute clearly authorized its requirements. In the proposed
rule, the agencies cited Federal procurement statutes and
executive orders as authorities for the regulation.
Accordingly, one question that a reviewing court might consider
is whether Federal procurement laws clearly authorize the
rule's requirements.
Turning to the second legal question, private
nondelegation, this doctrine provides that Congress may not
delegate its legislative authority to unappointed private
entities, and likewise, Federal agencies generally can't assign
their regulatory authority, which comes from Congress, to
private entities. Courts have ruled that private organizations
can assist Federal agencies with implementing Federal law so
long as they function subordinately to a Federal agency, and
the government has authority and surveillance over their
activities.
One aspect of the rule that could implicate the private
nondelegation doctrine is the requirement that major
contractors bidding on a new contract have their emissions
targets validated by SBTi. As we said, that is a private
entity. If a prospective contractor subject to that requirement
does not obtain validation, the proposed rule would create a
presumption that the contractor is not responsible and thus
ineligible for the contract. So in evaluating any private
nondelegation argument, a reviewing court might consider the
nature of SBTi's role. Is it regulatory or does--or would SBTi
perform a ministerial or advisory function and whether a
Federal agency adequately supervises its activities?
The major questions doctrine and the private nondelegation
doctrine are evolving legal areas, and CRS looks forward to
helping the Subcommittee navigate these legal questions.
Thank you for inviting me to testify. I'm honored to be
here today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Killion follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Obernolte. Thank you very much, Ms. Killion.
I will now recognize myself for five minutes for questions.
And I want to just point out the fact that we can--
reasonable minds can disagree about the wisdom of implementing
a rule like this, and I know a lot of the testimony that we
heard this morning was arguments back and forth about whether
or not this rule is a good thing. But in my opinion, that's not
why we're here. We're here discussing whether or not the
Administration has the legal authority to impose that rule,
absent clear authorization from Congress. And I think everyone
in this institution should be concerned about that. Because if
it's not your Administration today, it might be your
Administration tomorrow. We should all be worried about the
legislative authority of Congress being usurped by the
executive branch.
I also am very concerned about the fact that this
decisionmaking authority was delegated apparently to a foreign
company with no competitive process involved in its selection.
To me, that raises some serious legal and national security
issues, and I think that, regardless of what your thoughts are
on the wisdom of the rule, everyone ought to be concerned about
that.
Ms. Killion, I enjoyed your testimony about the legalities
involved here. I wanted to ask you about the major questions
doctrine. You had testified that some of the difficulties when
an Administration takes actions that don't have clear
authorization from Congress, but I'd like your opinion, in this
case, does the DOD, the GSA (General Services Administration),
or NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) have a
clear grant of authority to require businesses to disclose and
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions?
Ms. Killion. Thank you for that question, Chairman
Obernolte. So under the major questions doctrine, the first
consideration would be whether this presents a major question.
So your question gets to the second part of the doctrine. If
there is a major question, would there be clear congressional
authorization? Now, unfortunately, the major questions doctrine
is in a state of flux right now, and it is still evolving, so
we don't know exactly the parameters of what constitutes clear
congressional authorization. How specific does the law have to
be? Can the court look at things other than the text of the
statute?
When it comes to the authorities cited here, the agencies
cite three statutes, four Executive orders and an OMB
memorandum as authority for the rule, so there's a lot to
unpack, and I'm happy to take specific questions on those.
Chairman Obernolte. All right. So is there specific
authorization language for those agencies to require the
disclosure of greenhouse gas emissions from companies who are
involved in procurement?
Ms. Killion. Unfortunately, Chairman, that is not something
that CRS can answer because of the open questions with the
major questions doctrine.
Chairman Obernolte. OK, well, I mean, it seems to me like
this is just a factual question about the regulations that have
actually been passed--I'm sorry, the legislation that's
actually been passed by Congress because in combing through
them, we can't find any authorization for these agencies to
take this action.
Ms. Killion. So what I can say is the statutes that I've
reviewed, which are the ones that the agency is relying on in
the authority citations in this proposed rule, do not appear to
specifically use the words in this regulation. That said, we
don't know whether--how much specificity is required under the
Supreme Court's major questions doctrine. So it is a question,
I think, of an open legal issue about how to apply that
doctrine.
Chairman Obernolte. Sure. I know other agencies have been
going through this as well in the courts, the EPA
(Environmental Protection Agency) in particular.
Ms. Killion. Yes.
Chairman Obernolte. All right. Mr. Whiteman, I wanted to
ask about scope 3 emissions because you brought that up in your
testimony. And having been in business for 30 years myself, I
was asking myself how on earth I would comply with the
requirement to disclose scope 3 emissions, which, as you said,
are not emissions that a procuring company would create but
instead emissions that the suppliers to that company and the
end users of that company's products would create. Can you talk
a little bit more about that? I mean, for example, what would
happen in the case where a supplier refused to disclose its own
emissions to someone who was bidding on a Federal procurement
contract?
Mr. Whiteman. It's a really good question, and it's an
important point to bring up. Scope 3 emissions are quite
challenging to estimate, and I think in this rulemaking what is
even more concerning is if you're able to identify the scope 3
emissions, then you have to go out and actually reduce your
emissions. You set the targets, and then you have to actually
reduce them. So you have to not only reduce them at your
company level, but you have to get your suppliers all through
the supply chain to make commitments to do the same. And I
think that's one of the unaccounted-for impacts of the
rulemaking. It doesn't just affect the 6,000 or so estimated
contractors. It affects a much broader number, all the way down
through the supply chain. And the council didn't adequately
analyze that.
Chairman Obernolte. All right. Thank you very much. I can
see I'm out of time. Maybe--hopefully, we'll have time for
another round of questions.
I now yield to the Ranking Member, Mrs. Foushee, for five
minutes for questions.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rothstein, this rule will provide unprecedented insight
into the climate risks contained without the Federal
procurement sector. As you said in your testimony, the Federal
Government is the world's largest purchaser of products and
services. Therefore, the government has a weight of
responsibility to ensure American taxpayer money is stewarded
responsibly. How will the proposed rule, if finalized, help the
government make informed decisions to protect taxpayer dollars
from climate-related risks? And further, are agencies required
to take any action based on the information disclosed to them
pursuant to this rule if finalized?
I would like to ask unanimous consent to enter Ceres'
public comment into the record.
Chairman Obernolte. Without objection.
Mrs. Foushee. In those comments and in your testimony, you
mentioned the enormous amount of money the Federal Government
spends as the world's largest purchaser of goods and services.
That's an incredible opportunity to move the ball forward on
crucial priorities like climate change. Can you please
elaborate on how this rule and thoughtful procurement policy in
general can move the market at large?
Mr. Rothstein. Thank you very much. I'm going to date
myself, but I--in the 1980's, I worked on a project looking at
the Federal Government exploring the idea of recycled paper,
and that moved the marketplace at the time. Clearly, climate
change is an enormous risk right now, but it's really a
financial risk. If you look at it, as I say, we are spending
hundreds of billions of dollars. NOAA projected that last year,
our country--just looking at the storms--a billion dollars and
above is $160 billion in direct costs. That doesn't count
healthcare costs and other costs for our country.
So the first question is, what are the costs today? The
costs are enormous, and they're growing exponentially. The one
thing that the scientists have taught us over the last decade
is, if anything, their estimates have been underreported in
terms of what those costs have been. So--and there isn't any
other issue that we wouldn't want a business leader or
government official to have good information about, so we think
this is critical.
The second question you asked about in terms of what would
be requirements, it's--that's really up to the senior people.
There is no requirement for a procurement officer to take
certain action except for just kind of filling out the box, and
it's up to the senior people in the agency to make a
determination, as it should be. And we would want someone--for
example, if the Department of Defense is relying on contractors
that are using, let's say, the Panama Canal or Mississippi
River and there's droughts and those ships are delayed, that
can affect national defense. In fact, the Defense Department
has stated that one of the national issues from a security
perspective is climate. So we think this would help taxpayers
reduce climate risk, reduce healthcare costs, as well as
improve national security without putting burdens. And just to
highlight, this is only for the largest, largest of suppliers.
One-point-three percent have to disclose, but in terms of their
emission reductions, that's less than one percent. So it's a
small handful of the Federal suppliers.
Mrs. Foushee. Some criticism of this rule has alleged that
requiring information on climate risks from prospective
contractors will undermine the government's ability to make
national defense the priority. What is your response to that?
Mr. Rothstein. First, just the opposite. Again, if you look
back at what the Department of Defense has said, that having
more information is important. It's also that there are
thousands of companies that will have to release this anyway
under European rules. There's a new law that was just passed in
California that includes scope 1, scope 2, scope 3. That's not
just California companies, but it's companies operating across
the country, both public and private so that this information
is out there. And again, 92 percent of Fortune 500 companies
today publicly release some climate information. They do that
because they understand that they want it, their investors want
it, their employees want it. It makes companies more secure and
our government more secure.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back the
balance of my time.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll go down to Congressman McCormick. Sir, you're
recognized for five minutes for your questions.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. By the way, Mr. Chair,
I appreciate you talking about the legal authority between the
executive and the legislative branches and who gets to delegate
what authority there is to begin with. That's what's really
concerning with me. As a matter of fact, in the last couple of
years what we've seen is the legislative branch being overrun
by the executive branch, being able to tell us where we invest
our IRA (individual retirement account) savings, where the DOD
gets to advertise, whether we have some modifications on our
weapons. I think it's interesting when we talk about this, I
realized that there's an alarming overreach by the executive
branch that's unchecked and unconstitutional. Matter of fact, I
would--I'd say that maybe the new moniker should be King Joe
based on the way he's acting without any authorization from the
balanced government system that we designed by our
Constitution.
For those of you who want to talk science, I heard what you
guys had to say. Somebody was talking about global warming.
Let's talk the science for a second. I'm a scientist, M.D.,
MBA. I've done some classes, probably just like you guys. One
of the things that I don't understand when it comes to carbon
emissions--because that's what we're talking about, right?
We're not producing methane. Now, animals are other--and land
waste and stuff like that.
We're going to talk about carbon emissions. What is the
atmosphere made of primarily? Overwhelmingly, nitrogen, right?
Then oxygen. And what's the percentage of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere? Anybody want to answer that? Nobody wants to answer
that? Scientifically, we--it's an easy question, five minutes
on Google, 78 percent nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen. Carbon
dioxide is .04 percent. Of that, what percentage comes from
manmade of that .04? Anybody want to answer that? Google will
tell you it's around 11 percent. So 11 percent of .04 percent
is produced by manmade, but that's what we're focused all of
our attention on. That's what's caused global warming, that
retention by that .04 percent of the carbon emissions that we
are 11 percent of is what we're debating here, the hundreds of
billions of dollars we want to put in to prevent that, and
that's going to prevent global warming and cooling? Because
we're talking about environmental change, which can be either.
And over the millennium--I just recently watched them say that
it's the hottest month in 100,000 years. Based on what
scientific evidence? What reporting did we have around the
world 100,000 years ago? I didn't see that Egyptian
hieroglyphic. Did you? No answers? When I ask scientists all
the time, no answers on how we are producing this climate
change.
I'm not saying there's not climate change. I'm not saying
there's not scientific things we can do to keep a clean
environment. I'm the son of a forest ranger. I believe in a
clean environment. I will be the first one to pick up trash in
the street when I walk by it. But let's not get carried away
and limit our ability to get things done, to keep our global
leadership instead of globalism.
Mr. Fanning, you made a great point. A foreign entity who
gets to tell the United States what's going on based on an
Executive order, would you consider that globalism?
Mr. Fanning. I don't know that I would try to label it
globalism or something else. I'm just concerned that it puts
other nations in the decision process in what our Pentagon
should buy to defend the country.
Mr. McCormick. I couldn't agree with you more. As matter of
fact, if you're going to be King Joe, I don't know why you'd
put the power back in somebody else's opinion.
Now you talk about, Mr. Rothstein, other people in the
world having the same criteria. When we put ourselves on par
with everybody else, are we putting ourselves in jeopardy of
actually being reined in by other countries?
Mr. Rothstein. Congressman, first, thank you for your
public service and for your question. We're not on par. We're
the greatest country in the world.
Mr. McCormick. Amen. We agree on that.
Mr. Rothstein. And I believe it's actually patriotic to
think about our taxpayers, to think about our national defense,
to think about our climate, which scientists agree across the
board that----
Mr. McCormick. OK. Let me interrupt you there, please.
Scientists agree across the board. I debate that science
because I read scientists from both sides, just like I do on
economic policy. Not everybody believes in modern monetary
theory. Not all scientists believe that we are the cause of
global warming. Now we like to pretend like that's the case,
and the President--sorry, King Joe likes to say that we have
scientists and universal agreement. That's simply not true.
I'm out of time, but I want to make a point that we have
silenced people who dissent from King Joe, and I think that's a
big problem today, and we need to address that first. Thank
you. With that, I yield.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from Mr. Casten. Congressman, you are
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you. And I am really troubled that we are
debating science on the Science Committee. I was a molecular
biology major. I would no more claim to be a doctor than a
doctor should claim to be a climate scientist. Do better. Fifty
percent of all the CO
2
we have ever emitted as a
species is since I graduated from college in 1993, and we're
going to sit here denying? My God.
Let's move on to some more serious conversations. Mr.
Rothstein, if I understand right that a lot of companies are
voluntarily reporting their climate disclosures, and there is
no consistent standard that they currently use to do that,
correct?
Mr. Rothstein. Correct.
Mr. Casten. Yes. OK. Mr. Whiteman, a number of my
Republican colleagues are talking about putting a carbon border
adjustment tax in order to protect U.S. steel manufacturing
because U.S. steel has less carbon impact than Chinese steel.
Do you agree that U.S. steel is cleaner than Chinese steel?
Mr. Whiteman. I'm not sure I know enough to opine on that,
but----
Mr. Casten. Well, let me give another question. The U.S.
gas industry often says that we should increase U.S. gas
exports because it's cleaner than the fuels we displace around
the world. Do you agree with those--that statement?
Mr. Whiteman. Industry has been--is some of the cleanest
industry in the world here in the United States----
Mr. Casten. OK. How do you possibly know that if we don't
have consistent climate reporting? That's my point, right? Like
we can talk a good game, but everybody's reporting wildly
different things because we don't have consistent standards.
Mr. Rothstein, is a U.S. multinational that does business
in Europe subject to European climate disclosure rules?
Mr. Rothstein. Yes, thousands of them.
Mr. Casten. OK. Does anybody on the panel think that it is
in the interest of the United States not to lead? Now, I ask
that question because I was in Madrid at the climate conference
after the prior President pulled us out of the Paris Climate
Accord. We were the only country in the world that had decided
not to be a part of that treaty. And I got pulled aside by some
of our European colleagues who said can you please take this
back to your country and let them know that we have direct
experience here in Europe that really bad things happen when
the United States chooses not to lead?
The question sitting before us here is not some completely
fabricated major questions doctrine. And let's be really clear.
This is not something with any robust legal precedent. This is
a question of do we think that we in the legislative branch are
going to completely cede our authority to the judicial branch
to decide what we meant? If anybody on the other side of the
street has a question about what Congress meant, they should
give us a call and we can tell them, but all of us know it is
insane for us to specify every little detail we want in a
proposal. We give the executive branch legal authority to
expand on these things, and if we're not going to push back, we
are basically saying that this article 1 branch is less worthy
of our coequal powers than the judicial branch is, the
unelected judicial branch, I might add.
So to sit here and say do we think that the U.S. Government
has the legal authority to lead? Do we think that the U.S.
Government has the legal authority to collect data necessary to
make decisions? Do we believe that the U.S. Government has the
legal authority to actually follow the laws of physics and
assume that they are immutable, even if you couldn't get a vote
on the floor today, that agrees that the laws of thermodynamics
are entirely nonnegotiable? And we're going to argue that
that's because of a major questions doctrine? That is insanity.
With due respect to my friends on the other side of the
aisle, what the hell are we talking about here? Get the data.
Disclose the data. There's $8.4 trillion of investors who want
to invest in ESG (environmental, social, and governance) funds,
who want clear disclosure rules. There's massive amounts of
capital that are flowing into cleaner energy, giving us access
to cheaper energy. If we want to win the future, if we want to
own the technologies, my God, get the hell out of the way.
I yield back.
Chairman Obernolte. OK. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from Congresswoman Tenney. Congresswoman,
you are recognized for five minutes for your questions.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member Foushee,
for holding this hearing. And thank you to the witnesses for
being here.
Mr. Chairman, I ask for unanimous consent to insert into
the record Science Based Targets--SBTi's articles of
incorporation, a document from ``We Mean Business'' in quotes
stating that we are--they are a project of the New Venture Fund
and the ``who we are'' page from New Venture Fund, which states
that they're managed by Arabella Advisors.
Chairman Obernolte. Without objection, so ordered.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
While my colleagues have focused on many highly concerning
aspects of the Biden Administration's proposed rulemaking
requiring companies to contract with SBTi, I want to focus on
the motivation for this decision. Why is the Biden
Administration forcing companies to use only SBTi as opposed to
any other climate group? The answer is surprisingly simple.
This is a left-wing dark money patronage scheme. Let's put
aside the fact that SBTi is registered in the United Kingdom
and was only formed on June 26th, 2023, eight months after this
proposed rule was issued.
SBTi's certificate of incorporation as a private limited
company states that their largest owner is the We Mean Business
Coalition, Inc., which is under the Arabella Advisors umbrella.
Who is the We Mean Business Coalition? According to documents
from We Mean Business, they are simply a project of the New
Venture Fund, again, going back to Arabella Advisors. And
according to the website, it is solely wholly owned by Arabella
Advisors.
And for those unfamiliar with who Arabella Advisors is,
InfluenceWatch describes them as--and I quote--``a
philanthropic consulting company that guides the strategy,
advocacy, impact investing, and management for high-dollar,
left-leaning nonprofits and individuals,'' close quote. The
financial supporters and donors of Arabella Advisors and its
subsidiaries include George Soros, the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation, Michael Bloomberg, and the American Federation of
Teachers just to name a few, although we don't know who the
rest are because it's a dark money fund.
Simply put, Arabella Advisors uses the New Venture Fund,
along with the Windward Fund, the Sixteen Thirty Fund, the
Hopewell Fund, and the North Fund to funnel money to Democrats
and left-wing causes. Through these funds, Arabella Advisors
finances other ventures such as the Demand Justice Initiative,
the Demand Progress Education Fund, Fix the Court,
Redistricting Reform Project, and the Climate and Clean Energy
Equity Fund. These radical groups advocate for everything from
expanding the Supreme Court, partisan gerrymandering, defunding
our military, abortion on demand, and much more. How does
this--deep this web of dark money go? Ceres, which Mr. Steven
Rothstein, one of the witnesses here represents, received $3.3
million from the New Venture Fund and is an original founder
and part of the We Mean Business Coalition, which owns SBTi.
This hearing is not about the existence of dark money. It's
about the Biden Administration's new, unconstitutional proposed
rule forcing companies to contract with a subsidiary of Biden's
donors left-wing money group. The forced contracting will
undoubtedly provide substantial profits for SBTi, creating new
capital which can be moved through this dark money web to fund
left-wing priorities and other left-wing politicians.
This is a network of corruption which undermines the trust
that the taxpayers put in us, and while I appreciate the
witnesses for being here, the only one who can ultimately give
us answers we need is the Council on Environmental Quality
Chair Brenda Mallory. While I understand that this Committee
invited Chair Mallory to testify, she unfortunately declined,
which is simply unacceptable. The American people deserve the
answers, and I urge this Committee to subpoena Chair Mallory
for another hearing on this matter. We must get to the bottom
of this.
I do have one question with the little bit of time that I
have left. I'd like to direct this to Ms. Killion. As I laid
out the direct link between SBTi and Arabella Advisors, which
means SBTi can be used to line the pockets of Democratic donors
and left-wing dark money groups, under this precedent, if this
rule were to become finalized, under the precedent established
by this Administration with this rule, you wouldn't object to a
Republican Administration amending a proposed rule to mandate
that validation services be provided by companies primarily
tied to the GOP donors, would you?
Ms. Killion. Thank you so much, Congresswoman, for that
question. I want to make sure I understood your question and
what--it is as to the issue of delegating authority to SBTi?
Ms. Tenney. Well, let me ask, would you--if this were the
Republicans asking for a proposed rule to use a dark money
donor to the Republican side, would you approve of that rule?
Ms. Killion. Well, I think as an attorney for the
Congressional Research----
Ms. Tenney. Yes--was that a yes, you would approve of it?
Ms. Killion. Oh, I didn't say yes or no. I think that's the
information that I can't verify.
Ms. Tenney. Well, if you're an attorney----
Ms. Killion. It's outside of my----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. I'm an attorney as well. Can you
just give me your opinion on it as an attorney? Would this be
something that would be good for the taxpayers to use a dark
money----
Ms. Killion. Well, here's the----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Subgroup to fund----
Ms. Killion. Here's what I can say----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Organizations----
Ms. Killion [continuing]. Because I want to be careful----
Ms. Tenney. Yes.
Ms. Killion [continuing]. Because I don't have any of the
information that you're talking about. I wasn't prepared on
that for this testimony. But here's what I can say about the
legal aspect of that. One of the considerations in the private
nondelegation doctrine is a question of whether the government
is delegating regulatory authority to a competitor in industry.
There have been----
Ms. Tenney. Well, let me stop you on that because I'm going
to reclaim my time. I'm out of time. Do you think it's fair
that we allow that to happen, that we only have one entity that
the government goes to, to confirm these contracts and not a
choice?
Ms. Killion. That is a policy question that I can't opine
on as an attorney for CRS.
Ms. Tenney. I'm afraid my time has expired. Thank you very
much. Appreciate it.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll hear next from Congressman Babin. Sir, you're
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much, and thank you, witnesses
for being here, appreciate it. Ranking Member Foushee and Mr.
Chairman, thank you.
I have a series of questions for you, Mr. Whiteman, if you
don't mind, on this rule. I want to ask, how is this rule
different from the SEC's climate disclosure rule?
Mr. Whiteman. Well, the SEC's climate disclosure rule was
set up to protect investors, whereas this rulemaking is set up
to disclose emissions and ultimately to try to reduce those
emissions. So it's a much different scheme. One is about public
disclosure, and this one is--the FAR rule is about public
disclosure by going further and actually requiring emissions
reductions.
Mr. Babin. OK. Is there any concern in the business
community of having to comply with several different greenhouse
gas reporting standards and, as an example, SEC, FAR, and EPA?
Mr. Whiteman. That's a really good question, and I think
there are a lot of concerns with that. One, there's concern of
the cost of redundant conflicting reporting requirements. I
think there are issues with the public trying to understand
which are the actual valid real emissions or emissions
reductions. And this eventually flows into issues of litigation
where companies could be sued under false claims acts for
actually saying they're going to reduce their emissions, but a
third party is accusing them of not actually doing what they
said. If you have three different standards, it makes it much
more difficult for companies to show, OK, here's actually what
my emissions are, and what I said I've done is actually true.
Mr. Babin. Got you. Are the compliance deadlines that are
set within this rule in your opinion reasonable and achievable?
Mr. Whiteman. I don't think they are. For the first part--
do you want me to elaborate? The first part----
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Whiteman [continuing]. Of the disclosure part is
disclosing scope 1 and scope 2 emissions. They're required to
be done within one year of finalizing the rulemaking. The
problem is you have to account for 12 continuous months of
emissions reporting to actually be able to report that. So
literally day one that the rulemaking is finalized, you would
actually have to start recording your emissions and--or
registering them, which is an impossible task, not knowing what
is actually in the final rulemaking.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you. And then a question for Mr.
Fanning if you don't mind. Certain businesses such as those in
space and aviation require extensive use of fossil fuels. What
are some of the challenges that those businesses will face in
setting emission reduction targets and then having to comply
with them?
Mr. Fanning. I think the issue for aerospace and defense,
sort of riffing on what my seatmate here had to say, is not
knowing what the requirements are going to be, not
understanding what this organization SBTi is thinking in terms
of aerospace and defense, is thinking in terms of sector
guidance, is thinking in terms of how they're going to define
what it is they want you to report and how to set these goals
and then how to achieve these goals. Most of the companies in
aerospace and defense are already trying to do that right now
because of market demand. And in fact, all of the major
companies in aerospace and defense is defined by the rule $50
million or more in government contracts are disclosing some
financial climate risk already.
For us, the bigger issue with this rule is scope 3. It does
sweep up the industrial base, the supply chain. The big defense
companies have thousands of companies in their supply chain,
and so it would go far beyond the number of companies defined
in the analysis of the rule and require us to understand how
the end user is going to use the product, which is most of what
falls into scope 3 when you're in an industry that's building
things that are meant to last for 30 years.
Mr. Babin. OK. One more I would ask Mr. Whiteman again.
What is the business community's perspective on the use of
these private entities to develop, revise, and enforce the
provisions of the rule? I mean, I know where you're going with
it, but just for the record.
Mr. Whiteman. There's a lot of concerns. I think one of the
main concerns is that these third parties could change the
standards at any time. They could do it outside of the notice
and comment process, which is established under the
Administrative Procedures Act, which allows the opportunity for
the public to take a look at the proposal, evaluate it, and
provide comment and requires the regulatory agency to then
respond to those comments. So there's accountability. There's
transparency issues that are built in there. And that's not
built into this regulation if you're relying upon third
parties.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. Thank you very much, and I'm out of
time so I yield back.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from Congressman Miller. Sir, you are
recognized for five minutes for your questions.
Mr. Miller. Thank you to the Chair, and thank you to the
Ranking Member and all the witnesses who are with us here
today. Thank you for your time and patience.
Mr. Whiteman, my first question is for you. Do you think
this rule will reduce the participation of small businesses and
diversity in Federal contracting and inhibit innovation?
Mr. Whiteman. I think it will. I think because of the
costs, I think because of the complexity of the rulemaking, the
timing of compliance, I think it's just going to put downward
pressure on the participation of small businesses, who
proportionally are going to have much higher costs than bigger
businesses to comply with something like this rulemaking.
Mr. Miller. And--thank you for that answer.
And second question for you, Mr. Whiteman. Are there any
outside factors that you believe may make it more difficult for
companies to comply with these standards?
Mr. Whiteman. Yes, certainly outside factors, I think there
are many factors that make it difficult for folks to comply.
Certainly, the third-party standards make it challenging.
Again, getting back to what I said to Representative Babin, if
you're looking at third parties changing the standards
constantly, how are you going to know what your standards are
going to be in the future? I think there's a lot of litigation
potential under the False Claims Act and not knowing where
these public policies are going to go. Some of the changes
recently at the SBTi have been significant, reducing the period
of time to set targets just due to outside global policy
reports that are driving their target setting.
Mr. Miller. Thank you for that answer.
Mr. Rothstein, my next question is for you. Do you see any
conflict of interest with SBTi being incorporated in a foreign
country and being able to set costly regulatory standards that
may favor foreign investors or nations, some of whom may not be
friendly? And I believe we've seen some of that.
Mr. Rothstein. First, thank you again for your public
service, Congressman, appreciate it.
Ceres believes that the FAR Council should adopt their own
rule. They should look at what's in the private sector,
including SBTi, but not delegated specifically to SBTi, but
it's important to use market-based and science-based approach,
and if there's something else out there, look at that, too.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. How can companies--and this is for
you as well, sir. How can companies meaningfully engage in the
standard-setting process if third parties can set or revise
standards without going through a public notice and comment
process that is normally required for Federal regulations?
Mr. Rothstein. Again, we believe that the FAR Council
should set regulations, utilize the best practices, as the act
I talked about earlier from 1996 is looked for, and just to
highlight that this would only be covering for the largest
companies, and then for them, their largest on the supply
chain. So we talked about scope 3 earlier. It is not every
company in the supply chain. It's really the largest ones that
have the most material impact. The others can be used for
averages, that there are thousands of companies around the
world using this now, and so it's--they found that it is a
practical way to work.
Mr. Miller. OK. Mr. Chairman, this is all the questions
that I have, and I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from Congressman Kean. Sir, you're
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Either Mr. Fanning or Mr. Whiteman, there is clear evidence
that Russia has in the past funneled millions of dollars
through nongovernmental organizations to influence U.S. energy
markets. Are there concerns among your membership that SBTi is
susceptible to such influence from Russia or other countries or
other entities?
Mr. Whiteman. I can take that question. Thank you. I think
there is some concern there in that SBTi does take funding from
outside parties. And certainly, with the United States
exporting larger volumes of LNG (liquefied natural gas) to
Europe to support our allies, you could see that certain
countries, Russia, may have an incentive to influence that
process to impose higher costs on the oil and gas industry here
in the United States to create a competitive advantage.
Mr. Kean. Ms. Killion, given this requirement--the
requirement of a clear grant of statutory authority and vast
economic and political significance under the major questions
doctrine, does the collaboration with CEQ change the authority
of DOD, GSA, and NASA are required to maintain in order to
promulgate this regulation?
Ms. Killion. Thank you for that question, Congressman Kean.
My understanding of CEQ's role here is that--and this is just
based on the Executive orders detailing CEQ's involvement here.
So Executive Order 14030, for example, requires consultation
with the Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality. So in a
consultative role, I don't think that CEQ's involvement would
affect the authority for the rule which is not promulgated by
CEQ. The rule is promulgated by the FAR Council, the DOD, GSA,
and NASA.
Mr. Kean. Mr. Fanning, do your members have concerns as it
pertains both meeting the scope 3 requirements outlined in the
proposal, as well as safeguarding sensitive information against
foreign actors?
Mr. Fanning. Thank you. Yes, we do. The difference in this
rule from what's taken place already is the addition of the
scope 3 reporting requirements. For an industry like aerospace
and defense, again, that builds platforms that last decades and
has a global supply chain and a global market, being able to
get accurate information to aggregate to roll into that report
seems unexecutable. But when you add in the national security
component because if you're talking about Federal contractors
in aerospace and defense, the Department of Defense is the
biggest customer, we're not even sure they would offer that
information, nor would we want them to for national security
reasons because part of the rule, if you read through all of it
and carry it out, is that this information is meant then to be
transparent and shared publicly, so all of our adversaries
would have access to it as well.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Obernolte. The gentleman yields back. That
concludes our questioning.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here and for
your valuable testimony today and all of our Members for their
questions. It's been an interesting and very emotional topic,
and I hope we have a further discussion on this. The record
will remain open for 10 days for additional comments and
written questions from our Members.
This hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:06 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Report submitted by Representative Valerie Foushee
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Documents submitted by Representative Claudia Tenney
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
