- ADVANCING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP IN QUANTUM TECHNOLOGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP
IN QUANTUM TECHNOLOGY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 7, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-16

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
52-451PDF          WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

June 7, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    15
Written Statement............................................    16

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    17
Written Statement............................................    18

Witnesses:

Dr. Charles Tahan, Director, National Quantum Coordination
Office, OSTP
Oral Statement...............................................    20
Written Statement............................................    23

The Honorable Paul Dabbar, Former Undersecretary for Science,
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    30
Written Statement............................................    32

Dr. Eleanor G. Rieffel, Chief Scientist, NASA Ames
Oral Statement...............................................    48
Written Statement............................................    50

Dr. Celia Merzbacher, Executive Director, Quantum Economic
Development Consortium
Oral Statement...............................................    56
Written Statement............................................    58

Dr. Emily Edwards, Executive Director, IQUIST, University of
Illinois
Oral Statement...............................................    71
Written Statement............................................    73

Discussion.......................................................    82

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Dr. Charles Tahan, Director, National Quantum Coordination
Office, OSTP...................................................   124

The Honorable Paul Dabbar, Former Undersecretary for Science,
Department of Energy...........................................   129

Dr. Eleanor G. Rieffel, Chief Scientist, NASA Ames...............   132

Dr. Celia Merzbacher, Executive Director, Quantum Economic
Development Consortium.........................................   139

Dr. Emily Edwards, Executive Director, IQUIST, University of
Illinois.......................................................   145

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives
Paul Stimers, Executive Director, Quantum Industry Coalition.   156

ADVANCING AMERICAN LEADERSHIP

IN QUANTUM TECHNOLOGY

----------

WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in room
2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank Lucas [Chairman
of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
And without objection, I would like to submit for the
written record testimony provided by the Quantum Industry
Coalition. Seeing no objection, so ordered.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Good morning, and welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's first hearing on quantum science and
technology this Congress. This hearing could not have come at a
more critical time. Quantum technologies, much like artificial
intelligence (AI) and high-powered computing, are changing our
Nation's economic, strategic, and scientific landscape.
Congress is navigating difficult policy questions on the
emerging technologies, and continued American leadership is
essential if we want to capture their many benefits.
I cannot overstate the importance of maintaining the U.S.
competitive advantage in quantum capacities. The global leader
in commercial and military quantum applications will have an
economic and strategic advantage not seen since the United
States ushered in the nuclear age in the 1940's. Quantum
sensors developed right here at home already enable many of the
functions we take for granted, like keeping time and enabling
global navigation and positioning. Further development,
miniaturization, and hardening of these quantum systems will
give Americans the advantage on the battlefield of tomorrow.
Quantum computers have vast untapped potential for both
good and evil, which is why it's so important that we stay
ahead of our adversaries on these technologies. On the one
hand, quantum computers could help us solve fundamental
problems in biology, chemistry, and physics. Quantum computers
could model the effects of new drugs at the molecular level,
saving time and money and delivering new healthcare treatments.
They can help us understand and develop advanced materials that
will revolutionize American manufacturing. They can help us
develop cleaner energy technologies, ensuring affordable prices
with lower emissions. They might even advance the development
of artificial intelligence. Imagine the widespread benefits
this could have for agriculture. Using the services enabled by
quantum technology, we could increase global food security,
lower the price of groceries for Americans, and increase
production and profits for American farmers.
In the wrong hands though, quantum computers could crack
modern encryptions that are the bedrock of global financial
systems, communications, and intelligence gathering. We cannot
afford to have adversaries like the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) use quantum technologies against us. Using a quantum
computer, the CCP could, in moments, crack current encryption
codes, breaking down our digital defenses and exposing
businesses and American citizens to gross violations of
privacy.
Recognizing the importance of staying ahead of the
competition, this Committee passed the National Quantum
Initiative Act in 2018. Thanks to this legislation, the United
States has maintained its position as the global leader in
quantum research, development, and technology, but our
adversaries are catching up. China and Russia are investing
heavily in the development of operational quantum systems.
China in particular is investing more than $15 billion in
quantum research and development.
If we want to maintain our leadership role in the quantum
field, Congress needs to make smart strategic investments, but
government cannot do this alone. A central tenet of the
National Quantum Initiative Act is empowering U.S. researchers
and businesses to innovate while the Federal Government plays a
supporting role, where appropriate. The model has worked well,
and U.S.-based businesses are leading the pack in quantum
applications. As this Committee works to reauthorize the
National Quantum Initiative for the next 5 years, we must build
on this working model, while also developing new international
partnerships with our allies.
That is not to say that there's not an active role for the
government to play. The quantum industry, like other emerging
technological industries, is in dire need of additional talent
to fill out the workforce. The National Science Foundation
(NSF), the Department of Energy (DOE) Quantum Centers,
established under the National Quantum Initiative Act, have
been hard at work to build out our educational curriculum,
training programs, and industry partnerships over the last 5
years. These activities have not--could not take place without
government support, and I look forward to hearing our witnesses
speak about the progress that has been made.
The government could also empower the quantum industry
through complementary research and technology development. The
National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) is
already recognized internationally for its quantum innovations.
Congress should enable NIST to further develop its expertise
and leadership in solving the many complex science and
engineering challenges that enable the quantum ecosystem to
succeed.
My staff and Ranking Member Lofgren's staff are hard at
work crafting bipartisan legislation to ensure we maintain our
leadership position in quantum science and technology, meet the
workforce needs of the quantum industry, and accelerate the
commercialization of quantum systems. The dialog we have--will
have in this hearing today will inform the development of that
legislation, and I look forward to hearing the recommendations
of our witnesses on how this Committee can improve quantum
programs to carry out the National Quantum Initiative into the
next 5 years.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Good morning, and welcome to the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee's first hearing on quantum science and
technology this Congress.
This hearing could not have come at a more critical time.
Quantum technologies, much like artificial intelligence and
high-powered computing, are changing our nation's economic,
strategic, and scientific landscape.
Congress is navigating difficult policy questions on
emerging technologies, and continued American leadership is
essential if we want to capture their many benefits.
I cannot overstate the importance of maintaining the U.S.
competitive advantage in quantum capabilities. The global
leader in commercial and military quantum applications will
have an economic and strategic advantage not seen since the
United States ushered in the nuclear era in the 1940s.
Quantum sensors developed right here at home already enable
many of the functions we take for granted--like keeping time
and enabling global navigation and positioning.
Further development, miniaturization, and hardening of
these quantum systems will give Americans the advantage on the
battlefield of tomorrow.
Quantum computers have vast, untapped potential for both
good and evil, which is why it's so important that we stay
ahead of our adversaries on these technologies.
On the one hand, quantum computers could help us solve
fundamental problems in biology, chemistry, and physics.
Quantum computers could model the effects of new drugs at
the molecular level, saving time and money in delivering new
healthcare treatments.
They could help us understand and develop advanced
materials that will revolutionize American manufacturing.
They can help us develop cleaner energy technologies,
ensuring affordable prices with lower emissions.
They might even advance the development of Artificial
Intelligence.
Imagine the widespread benefits this could have for
agriculture. Using the services enabled by quantum technology,
we could increase global food security, lower the price of
groceries for Americans, and increase production and profits
for American farmers.
In the wrong hands, though, quantum computers could crack
modern encryptions that are the bedrock of global financial
systems, communications, and intelligence gathering.
We cannot afford to have adversaries like the Chinese
Communist Party use quantum technologies against us. Using a
quantum computer, the CCP could, in moments, crack current
encryption codes, breaking down our digital defenses and
exposing businesses and American citizens to gross violations
of privacy.
Recognizing the importance of staying ahead of the
competition, this Committee passed the National Quantum
Initiative Act in 2018. Thanks to this legislation, the United
States has maintained its position as the global leader in
quantum research, development, and technology.
But our adversaries are catching up. China and Russia are
investing heavily in the development of operational quantum
systems. China, in particular, is investing more than $15
billion in quantum research and development.
If we want to maintain our leadership role in the quantum
field, Congress needs to make smart, strategic investments. But
government cannot do it alone.
A central tenant of the National Quantum Initiative Act is
empowering U.S. researchers and businesses to innovate while
the Federal Government plays a supporting role, where
appropriate. The model has worked well, and U.S.-based
businesses are leading the pack in quantum applications.
As this Committee works to reauthorize the National Quantum
Initiative for the next five years, we must build on this
working model while also developing new, international
partnerships with our allies.
That is not to say there is not an active role for the
government to play. The quantum industry, like other emerging
technology industries, is in dire need of additional talent to
fill out the workforce.
The National Science Foundation and Department of Energy
quantum centers established under the National Quantum
Initiative Act have been hard at work to build out educational
curriculum, training programs, and industry partnerships over
the last five years.

Chairman Lucas. And with that, I now recognize the Ranking
Member, the gentlewoman from California, for an opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding
today's hearing. And I'd also like to welcome our really quite
distinguished panel of witnesses.
You know, one of the joys of serving on the Science
Committee is that we truly are the Committee of the future, and
we're doing so in a bipartisan manner. Today's hearing is truly
about the technology of tomorrow. As we know, in 2018, the
Committee led the development in the bipartisan National
Quantum Initiative Act and the whole-of-government research
initiative on a topic that seems really ripped out of the
science fiction books I used to read as a teen, quantum
information science.
By all accounts, the first 5 years of this initiative have
been a big success. The initiative galvanized the U.S. Science
Committee around quantum technologies, and it's made our
country a world leader in many quantum applications. I was an
original co-sponsor of the act in the 115th Congress, and I'm
looking forward to partnering with the Chairman in considering
this reauthorization.
The first 5 years focused primarily on the fundamental
science advances needed to make quantum systems work. While
investments in fundamental research need to continue, they are
essential over the next 5 years, we're also, as the Chairman is
mentioning, need to invest in human, physical--and physical
infrastructure that's going to allow us to move quantum
technologies from the lab to the marketplace.
In my own district in Silicon Valley, companies such as D-
Wave and Rigetti Computing are already building hybrid quantum
computers that can address novel computing challenges. Now we--
these two companies are among many companies developing quantum
technologies. The nascent U.S. quantum industry does face
significant hurdles to continuing its growth and meeting its
potential to hopefully secure U.S. leadership in quantum
technologies.
One of these challenges, of course, is preparing the
quantum-ready workforce. We've not yet had a major focus on
quantum education and workforce development. Although in the
CHIPS and Science Act Congress updated the National Quantum
Initiative Act to promote early introduction to quantum
concepts and quantum science among middle school and high
school students, really, it's just a few universities that have
created their own interdisciplinary quantum science and
engineering degree programs. Significant hurdles remain to
getting a ready workforce, and one important topic for this
hearing is understanding those hurdles and exploring the role
of the Federal science agencies in helping to address them.
Another challenge, of course, is infrastructure. Enabling
our universities, national labs, and startup companies to
conduct quantum experiments and develop and demonstrate quantum
technologies requires state-of-the-art research infrastructure,
and this is, of course, a multilayered challenge.
NIST is one of the key Federal agencies charged with
conducting quantum research. It's really in a crisis of failing
infrastructure and unmet maintenance needs, and I hope that
this Committee can address that in our authorizing work. The
Department of Energy labs also face challenges. We're asking
our Federal scientists to conduct exquisitely sensitive
experiments in woefully outdated labs. In addition,
universities and small companies across the country will need
access to specialized equipment that they can't afford on their
own.
As we look forward into the future, there will be
additional challenges that we can start preparing for today and
additional challenges that we may not even imagine at this
point. I look forward to the discussion today to learn how the
reauthorization of the National Quantum Initiative Act can help
to address these challenges.
And, Mr. Chairman, it is a pleasure to work with you, and I
yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Lucas, for holding today's hearing. I
would also like to welcome our distinguished panel of
witnesses.
One of the joys of serving on the Science Committee is that
we are the committee of the future. Today's hearing is truly
about the technology of tomorrow. In 2018, this Committee led
the development of the bipartisan National Quantum Initiative
Act, a whole-of-government research initiative on a topic that
seems ripped out of the pages of a science fiction novel:
quantum information science.
By all accounts, the first five years of this initiative
have been a resounding success. The initiative galvanized the
U.S. science community around quantum technologies and has made
our country the world leader in most quantum applications. I
was an original cosponsor of the Act in the 115th Congress, and
I am looking forward to partnering with the chairman in
considering a reauthorization of the National Quantum
Initiative Act.
The first five years of the National Quantum Initiative or
NQI, focused primarily on the fundamental scientific advances
needed to make quantum systems work. While investments in
fundamental research will continue to be essential over the
next five years, we must begin to invest more in the human and
physical infrastructure that will enable us to move quantum
technologies from lab to market. In Silicon Valley, not far
from my own district, companies such as D-Wave and Rigetti
Computing are already building hybrid quantum computers that
can address novel computing challenges.
While these two companies are among many companies
developing quantum technologies, the nascent U.S. quantum
industry faces significant hurdles to continuing its growth and
meeting its potential to secure U.S. leadership in quantum
technology.
The first of these challenges is preparing a quantum-ready
workforce. The NQI has not yet had a major focus on quantum
education and workforce development. In the CHIPS and Science
Act, Congress updated the National Quantum Initiative Act to
promote early introduction to quantum concepts and quantum
science among middle school and high school students. A few
universities have created their own interdisciplinary quantum
science and engineering degree programs. However, significant
hurdles remain to enabling a quantum ready workforce at all
levels from the skilled technical workforce to the doctoral
level. One important topic for this hearing is understanding
those hurdles and exploring the role of the Federal science
agencies in addressing them.
The next challenge is infrastructure. Enabling our
universities, Federal labs, and start-up companies to conduct
quantum experiments and develop and demonstrate quantum
technologies requires state-of-the- art research
infrastructure. This is a multi-layered challenge. The National
Institute of Standards and Technology, one of the key Federal
agencies charged with conducting quantum research, is in a
crisis of failing infrastructure and unmet maintenance needs.
The Department of Energy labs face similar challenges. We are
asking our Federal scientists to conduct exquisitely sensitive
experiments in woefully outdated labs. In addition,
universities and small companies across the country will need
access to specialized equipment that they cannot afford on
their own.
As we look further into the future, there will be
additional challenges that we can start preparing for today.
Mathematicians theorize that the day will come when someone
builds a sufficiently powerful quantum computer to break modern
encryption algorithms. I sure hope it is a U.S. lab or company
that does so. The question for us today is what we need to do
to make that hope a reality.
I look forward to the discussion today to learn how a
reauthorization of the National Quantum Initiative Act can help
to address these challenges.
Thank you and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. I want to thank the Ranking Member for all
these thoughtful words.
And with that, let me introduce our panel of witnesses
before they begin their testimony. Our first witness is Dr.
Charles Tahan. Dr. Tahan serves as the Director of the National
Quantum Coordination Office (NQCO) and Assistant Director of
Quantum Information Science at the White House Office of
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP). Dr. Tahan came to Quantum
Coordination Office from the National Security Agency's (NSA's)
Laboratory for Physical Sciences. He holds a Ph.D. in physics
from the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Thank you.
Our next witness is Under Secretary Paul Dabbar. Mr. Dabbar
was the fourth Under Secretary for Science at the U.S.
Department of Energy serving from 2017 to 2021. Before entering
government, Under Secretary Dabbar served as a nuclear
submarine officer in the U.S. Navy. He's now the CEO (Chief
Executive Officer) of his own quantum networking company, Bohr
Quantum, and he also holds degrees in marine and nuclear
engineering and business administration. Thank you.
Next, we have Dr. Eleanor Rieffel. Dr. Rieffel is the
Senior Researcher for the Advanced Computing and Data Analytics
at NASA's (National Aeronautics and Space Administration's)
Ames Research Center in Palo Alto, California. She is a
published author on the subject of quantum computing and
received the NASA Exceptional Engineering Achievement Medal in
2019. The doctor holds two degrees in the subjects Americans
fear most, math from UCLA (University of California, Los
Angeles) and Harvard University. Thank you. Just an observation
about the obvious thing in the world out there.
Next is Dr. Celia Merzbacher. Dr. Merzbacher is the
Executive Director of the Quantum Economic Development
Consortium (QEDC), a coalition of quantum stakeholders
dedicated to the growth of a commercial quantum-based industry.
Dr. Merzbacher has served in various research and government
roles, including stints at the Naval Research Laboratory, OSTP,
and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. She earned a degree of
science in geology and earth sciences from Brown University and
her Ph.D. in geochemistry from Penn State.
Last but not least we have Dr. Emily Edwards. Dr. Edwards
is the Director of the Illinois Quantum Information Science and
Technology Center at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign. Her center is a leader in training scientists across
a variety of fields to enter the quantum-ready workforce.
Before moving to Illinois, Dr. Edwards was the Director of
Communications and Outreach at the Joint Quantum Institute at
the University of Maryland. The doctor holds bachelor's degrees
in physics and chemistry from Appalachian State University and
a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Maryland.
Thank you all for being here today, and I want to begin by
recognizing Dr. Tahan for 5 minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. CHARLES TAHAN, DIRECTOR,

NATIONAL QUANTUM COORDINATION OFFICE, OSTP

Dr. Tahan. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
esteemed Members of the Committee, I am honored to appear
before you today to discuss the future of the National Quantum
Initiative. My name is Charlie Tahan. I'm the Assistant
Director for Quantum Information Science and the Director of
the National Quantum Coordination Office at the White House
Office of Science and Technology Policy, or OSTP. I'm also a
practicing quantum physicist with over two decades of
experience in academia, industry, and government.
My mandate at OSTP includes working with agencies to
develop and maintain the National Strategy for Quantum
Information Science, a strategy that has been consistently
improved over the last few years. It is a privilege to lead the
National Quantum Coordination Office, and I want to thank the
Committee for establishing it under the NQI Act.
The value of the NQCO lies in our team of government
experts in quantum detailed to OSTP from NSF, DOE, NIST, DOD
(Department of Defense), and the intelligence community (IC).
Our duties extend to regular interactions with industry,
academia, and national and Federal labs in the global quantum
ecosystem, including our foreign counterparts.
Our participation in workforce development and public
outreach activities such as World Quantum Day and the National
Q-12 Education Partnership underscore our commitment to
building the community. One of the NQCO's most important roles
is to facilitate interactions between the agencies, members
from over 20 Federal organizations actively participating in
the working groups and events that we help organize.
The impact of information technology (IT) on our society
has been profound, and quantum information science represents a
foundational shift in our understanding of IT. Quantum
information applies the most surprising aspects of quantum
mechanics, which are the rules that govern how really small
things behave to how we process, store, and transfer
information. Quantum science has already made disruptive
impacts via technologies like GPS (Global Positioning System)
and MRIs (magnetic resonance imagings). Next-generation quantum
centers will create even more transformative systems for
precision navigation and for biomedical applications. Future
quantum computers will enable new science, as well as chemistry
and materials discovery. Quantum networks may one day connect
these new types of computers and sensors together.
But to get to that future, numerous scientific and
engineering challenges must still be overcome. Large-scale
quantum computers are also expected to jeopardize existing
secure communication protocols. This requires the United States
to balance the economic and national security implications of
quantum. National Security Memorandum 10 on quantum computing,
signed by the President last year, addresses these concerns
directly.
Given this immense potential, U.S. leadership in quantum
information science is crucial. The national strategy has three
broad goals: getting the science right, enhancing U.S.
competitiveness, and empowering our people. The first 5 years
of the NQI Act succeeded in strengthening the American quantum
ecosystem. It has solidified our all-of-nation response,
recruited new researchers to the field, and helped spur
significant industry investment. Federal funding for quantum
has doubled since the NQI's passage.
Our success can be seen by those who have emulated the
United States with many countries around the world launching
national quantum initiatives of their own. It is critical that
the United States reaffirms and strengthens its commitment to
quantum information science by reauthorizing the National
Quantum Initiative Act. By doing so, the United States will
signal to the world that it will continue to lead in this
critical yet emerging field. U.S. involvement is more important
now than ever, as it is essential that we continue to work with
trusted partners to get the development and protection of this
technology right, which includes the rapid deployment of
quantum-resistant cryptography.
Because of this importance, OSTP coordinated an interagency
process, recommending policies to the Committee to enhance the
NQI Act. Here are some of the most important points:
First, reauthorize the NSF and DOE centers and remove the
limit on the number of designated centers.
Second, support long-lived NSF programs focused on training
talents in quantum and understanding workforce demand.
Third, strengthen the whole-of-government approach by
expanding the core agencies. For example, a dedicated
international fund is needed to support U.S. commitments in
international cooperation. NASA, NIH (National Institutes of
Health), and DHS (Department of Homeland Security) also have
important roles to play and can do more, and we welcome further
integration of the DOD in the IC.
Fourth, we need to begin translating scientific discoveries
made in the NQI to commercial utility and agency missions
through engineering research and systems integration programs
and public-private partnerships. The NSF TIP (Technology,
Innovation, and Partnerships) Directorate, a NIST Center for
Quantum Engineering, and the QUEST (Quantum for Energy Systems
and Technologies) program at DOE are just a few examples of
such opportunities.
Finally, create and equip new laboratories across the
United States so that we can remain competitive with the world.
These recommendations complement those of the NQI Advisory
Committee whose first report is now available and I've included
in my written testimony.
I will end by reinforcing the importance of people to our
success. Training and recruiting talent both here and across
the world are the most important actions we can take to
strengthen U.S. leadership.
Thank you again for this opportunity, and I welcome your
thoughts and questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Tahan follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. I now recognize Under Secretary
Dabbar for 5 minutes to present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE PAUL DABBAR,

FORMER UNDERSECRETARY FOR SCIENCE,

DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. Dabbar. Chair Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Committee, I'm honored again to be before this
Committee, my favorite authorizing Committee, but please don't
tell E&C (Energy and Commerce) that. I am honored to be here to
discuss quantum technologies and this Committee's leadership
from 5 years ago on triggering a technology revolution and how
this next act can continue that momentum.
Not long ago, the prospects of quantum moving from the
science lab to applications seem farfetched. Barely 6 qubits
could be fabricated on a chip. And quantum teleportation was an
interesting science experiment at Berkeley. Your act 5 years
ago directed significant investments that led to results. It
built on the historical efforts of NSF, NIST, and DOD, provided
additional supports for universities, a commercial consortium,
and the five NQI centers and provided for coordination of
national efforts.
At DOE we stood up those research centers with over 70
participants from national labs, academia, and the private
sector. This was the first time that DOE Discovery Program
included the private sector. Major accomplishments included, at
Oak Ridge, development of a quantum computing hub, extensive
quantum networks tested at Caltech, Brookhaven, Fermilab and
Argonne. IBM fabricated a quantum processing chip with a record
433 qubits on its path to a quantum supercomputer. Google
developed a high-fidelity quantum processor and developed
quantum simulations, including a wormhole teleportation
protocol. And Berkeley lab researchers received the Nobel Prize
last year in experimentally proving quantum teleportation for
networking.
But your accomplishments were far beyond the direct NQI
programs. Your efforts were the seed round that triggered a
massive set of investments from others. In academia, a wide set
of university-started programs from the University of Chicago's
Molecular Engineering School to Caltech's quantum networking
efforts, just--the Columbia Quantum Initiative, Oklahoma
State's Lahiri's group, and Santa Clara University's
engineering physics program. You triggered foundations to
invest, notably, the Pritzker Foundation in Illinois. You
triggered a vast set of private investments. Since the NQI was
passed, over $6 billion have been invested by the private
sector, about five times what you appropriated and directly
authorized. On Wall Street that would be called leverage.
My quantum networking business Bohr Quantum and many other
companies benefited from this ecosystem, and not only have
American companies grown, but quantum companies from overseas
have moved to the United States, including in the Bay Area,
following your leadership.
As you consider the NQI reauthorization, here are a few
thoughts on how to build on your successes. We need to bridge
the gap between research quantum products and users. While
still advancing the science, it's imperative to look at first-
generation applications and deployment, including private
company quantum computers and enhanced QUEST program and
network systems. Stand up a program to design, procure, and
deploy at the national lab's first quantum-centric high-
performance computers. And I would recommend deploying a first
U.S. quantum satellite program.
Here are some specific ideas for your consideration for the
second NQI Act: Maintain core research programs at the various
centers and adding funding to that. Authorize a new program for
first steps of usable quantum computers, networking, and
sensing. I would recommend authorizing a quantum-centric high-
performance computing program. Authorize DOE to start a $200
million-per-year post-exascale high-performance computing
program that would incorporate quantum into the architecture of
the supercomputers. The NQI should build on the momentum of the
announcement by IBM, UChicago, and the two DOE national labs to
build 100,000-qubit supercomputer that was announced a few
weeks ago and included our great ally Japan in that. We should
look at doing a joint DOE-NASA quantum satellite program. We
should look at scaling up helium-3 production at Savannah River
National Lab, create a new quantum foundry effort in
instrumentation, and authorize allowing for allied nations to
work together with us.
This topic is important to national security. It is no
coincidence that when Snowden defected to China, they
immediately started ramping up quantum networks and their
quantum computing program. This technology is critical around--
about decryption, as the Chairman mentioned. And China, while
behind us, is right on our heels. I recommend that you--we
continue to move forward with the momentum that you created for
America in this next act.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dabbar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. And I now recognize Dr. Rieffel
for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ELEANOR G. RIEFFEL,

CHIEF SCIENTIST, NASA AMES

Dr. Rieffel. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
distinguished Members of the Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to discuss NASA's role in quantum research and
development (R&D). I direct the Quantum Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory, the QuAIL lab, at NASA Ames Research Center in
Silicon Valley. Our team focuses on quantum computing and
collaborates with other NASA centers on quantum networking and
quantum sensing. I joined NASA just over a decade ago to help
build its quantum computing effort.
Quantum Information sciences aims to harness the unique
properties of quantum systems to process information in
powerful ways. Applications range from computing to networking
to measurement, timing, and sensing. Potential NASA
applications include astronomical imaging, mapping of planetary
electromagnetic and gravitational fields, and aeronautics
communication and navigation.
When the QuAIL team at NASA Ames was formed, it followed
the model of the NASA advanced supercomputing program. It would
not build quantum computing hardware, but rather would form
close partnerships with groups that did. NASA's high-end
computing capability has long served as early testers for
supercomputing hardware and software advances from industry and
beyond.
Algorithmic work is essential for the ultimate utility of
quantum computing. Certain prototype--the current prototype
quantum processors are small and non-robust, but progress is
rapid, and as hardware advances, we will be able to explore
quantum algorithms in ways that are impossible today.
NASA, with its many computational challenges, is a rich
source of use cases in aeronautics, Earth and space sciences,
and space exploration. Quantum computing holds the promise of
addressing challenges that are beyond what high-performance
computing can do.
Advances in quantum optics have potential for new
networking technologies, both terrestrial and space-based, with
potential applications in security data transfer and
navigation. Quantum networking is key to link quantum computers
and quantum information systems. NASA's SCaN (Space
Communications and Navigation) program investigates optical
networking and has conducted multiple successful technology
demonstration missions in the last decade with more planned.
SCaN partners and other U.S. Government agencies in areas of
advanced adaptive optics for ground stations, space qualifiable
quantum sources, detectors, and memory, as well as to develop
quantum use cases. Mission concepts from these joint activities
include a space-based quantum testbed.
Quantum sensing uses quantum properties of matter and light
to achieve unprecedented measurement sensitivity that
outperforms classical counterparts. Quantum sensors can impact
technologies important for a range of NASA missions such as
timing, remote sensing, metrology, ranging, and imaging. For
example, improving gravitational mapping would enable
scientists to better understand changes in ice, oceans, and
land water on Earth. The gravity recovery and climate
experiments have been mapping Earth's gravitational fields.
NASA is funding efforts toward a future quantum gravity
gradiometer or QGG that provides 10 times better resolution.
Quantum sensing technologies such as atomic clocks and atomic
inertial measurements provide navigation and timing in space
and in areas in which GPS is unreliable or unavailable. Quantum
sensing technologies can revolutionize NASA's mission to unlock
the secrets of the universe, provide insights into dark matter,
and connections between quantum mechanics and gravity. NASA's
Cold Atom Laboratory has been operating continuously on the
International Space Station since 2018 and serves as a
pathfinder for future space technologies.
NASA and the QuAIL team have many partnerships with
industry, other government organizations, academic
institutions, and international entities. NASA has been at the
forefront of many technologies. NASA contributed to
demonstrating the potential of parallel computing with the
first massively parallel computer, the ILLIAC IV, coming to
NASA Ames in 1972. We are excited to play a similar role in
quantum information sciences.
Thank you again for allowing me to share my expertise in
this area with you and for your continued support of NASA
research. I would be pleased to respond to questions from
Members of the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Rieffel follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you very much.
I now recognize Dr. Merzbacher for 5 minutes to present her
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. CELIA MERZBACHER,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,

QUANTUM ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CONSORTIUM

Dr. Merzbacher. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and Members of the Committee. It's a great honor to
have the opportunity to participate in today's hearing. I'm
Celia Merzbacher. I'm Executive Director of the Quantum
Economic Development Consortium, or QEDC, which is managed by
SRI International.
QEDC is the consortium of stakeholders that was called for
by the NQI Act of 2018 We get what I think of as startup
funding from NIST, and we get some funding from the Air Force
Research Lab (AFRL) as well. But increasingly, we are supported
by our growing members. We have some 230 members today. About
170 of those are corporate, and about 3/4 of those companies
are small or startups.
More than 50 government agencies have also participated in
QEDC activities, so we're really building a broad, trusted
community of quantum ecosystem members. QEDC's mission is to
enable and grow the quantum industry and the associated supply
chain. Sounds easy, but it's not. We're exploring for use cases
of quantum. That's the most frequent question. And in order to
realize these use cases and the potential, we're looking for
gaps that need to be filled, gaps in technology, critical
technologies, like lasers and cryogenics and special
electronics, gaps in standards and benchmarks for measuring
progress, gaps in the workforce, and we're providing input on
policies like export controls.
The NQI was launched with a science-first strategy, which
made a lot of sense at the time. We needed multidisciplinary
research. We needed teams of researchers from physics and
materials and computer science and engineering to come
together. We needed to start creating the pipeline of talent.
You'll hear more of that from Dr. Edwards. And we did a great
job of doing that through the investments under NQI by NSF and
DOE in particular. We've had a great start, and those efforts
need to be sustained.
But other nations are investing as well, as we've heard.
Just recently, the U.K., Canada, Australia, Japan, India,
Germany--I could go on--have all released or renewed their
national strategies, and they're all funding the science, but
they're also focusing more on the application and
commercialization. China is investing a lot. Some reports say
$15 billion. They're hard numbers to verify, but the number of
high-quality, highly cited research publications and patent
applications indicate that China's research and industry in
quantum is growing as well.
The private sector is making big bets, too. I think most of
you, if not everyone, has heard about some of the large tech
companies' activities. They're developing products with their
own resources and making big investments. There's a growing
number of smaller, pure-play quantum companies, and I'll remind
you, there are no big quantum companies today. These small
companies have private investments. Some of them are getting
some government funding as well. But the venture funding seems
to be slowing according to a McKinsey report last year, and so
it's really important at this time for government to take
measures to de-risk the technology and to bridge to the quantum
economy of the future.
I noted the title of this hearing was ``Ensuring American
Leadership in Quantum Technology.'' Technology is the
application of science, and so I'll leave you with some
suggestions for how NQI could be improved in light of the
economic potential and the accelerating global competition.
First of all, expand R&D to address gaps on the pathway to the
quantum economy. For example, we could try some new programs
that really fund industry and academia to work together,
focusing on small businesses. This can be done in the NSF TIP
Directorate. TIP stands for Technology, Innovation, and
Partnership. Sounds like a good fit.
Fund QUEST. Thank you to this Committee for authorizing
QUEST. It's becoming urgent to fund the program, which is to
provide access to researchers broadly from industry, academia,
government labs to quantum computing resources. Other countries
are standing up similar programs. We need to fund this one.
Provide for upskilling and reskilling of the existing
workforce. We need to build the pipeline, and we're doing a
great job of starting that, but we need people today, and so we
need to fund the workers. And I want to just mention in my
closing to take full advantage of NIST. NIST has gotten four
Nobel Prizes in quantum technology. They do standards,
metrology, advanced manufacturing. They run the CHIPS R&D
program, so NIST should be a bigger part the NQI.
And I'll finally end by cautioning about being careful when
it comes to using export controls to control this technology.
It's early. Any controls should be done multilaterally or we
won't achieve our goals and risk hampering U.S. business.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Merzbacher follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you. And I now recognize Dr. Edwards
for 5 minutes to present her testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DR. EMILY EDWARDS,

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, IQUIST, UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

Dr. Edwards. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and distinguished Committee Members for the
opportunity to testify today before this panel. I'm Dr. Edwards
and I co-lead the National Q-12 Education Partnership through a
grant from the National Science Foundation. This consortium was
spearheaded by the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy and NSF. I also co-lead education and workforce programs
for one of the NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institutes, Hybrid
Quantum Architectures and Networks, and that's at the
University of Illinois, University of Wisconsin, and University
of Chicago.
We've heard a lot about the importance of quantum to our
Nation, and we've heard a lot about things we must do in order
to strengthen our leadership, including reauthorizing the NQI
and continuing Federal investments. It's really amazing what we
can do today with quantum, and I'm just so excited to talk
about it because it's one of my favorite subjects.
For success in the long term, we need to invest in programs
that significantly expand the participation of teachers and
educational institutions across the country, and I really
appreciated the opening remarks by the Chairman and by Ranking
Member Lofgren. This approach recognizes that scaling the
quantum workforce relies on empowering educators as mentors,
role models, and Ambassadors. Moreover, the public of all ages
should have a front row seat to the development of quantum
information science in places like museums and libraries so
that they can be prepared for a future that is influenced and
underpinned by emerging quantum research and technology.
The Q-12 has been convening stakeholders around the
development of a quantum workforce that draws on diverse
strengths and backgrounds of people across the country, and
we've had a lot of meetings. And we see that there is wide
agreement that students need exposure to quantum information
science early to ensure continued U.S. leadership in this fast-
evolving field. This is reflected in the CHIPS and Science Act,
which calls on NSF to increase the integration of quantum into
STEM (science, technology, engineering, and mathematics)
curricula at all levels, establishes a quantum education pilot
program, and requires a workforce assessment study. And I want
to thank Congress, and in particular this Committee, for
including these provisions in the legislation last year.
Currently, there are a lot of early stage programs, and
many are connected to Q-12 that are increasing quantum
readiness through--by expanding access to the field. And the
National Quantum Initiative Act reauthorization is an
opportunity to double down on this. Currently, we are missing
resources for K-12 teachers. At higher levels--and Dr. Tahan
mentioned this--educators broadly need cutting-edge labs to
teach the next generation and provide upskilling for the
current workforce. Essentially, we need more education and
training opportunities for students, which are two different
facets of workforce development, and they need to be readily
available no matter where you live in this country and no
matter your background. And this is important for addressing
the persistent lack of diversity across quantum-related fields
as this contributes to severe shortages and limits our
competitiveness as a nation.
There are a lot of programs that are working to remove
barriers to this field, but it's going to take time. You heard
about some--the mention of World Quantum Day. These and other
educational programs under the National Quantum Initiative Act
are helping to dispel the notion that quantum concepts are only
accessible to the very few. Rather, quantum can provide
inspiration for young learners and teachers alike and empower
them to understand the--a host of emerging technologies that
are so vital to our Nation.
In this context, I'll highlight two elements that are
possible opportunities as you look to reauthorize this act.
First, I urge the Committee to consider authorizing at least
one national center for quantum education and workforce that
will accelerate the readiness of educators and serve as a
resource for existing programs to scale their local impacts--
local impact in communities across the country. A center scale
investment will concretely link the different parts of the
educational pipeline and the different sectors and include the
public. A new center could amplify and connect the initial
workforce programs that have been developed such as those
supported across the many agencies. And it would--could provide
an avenue for the much-needed comprehensive regular workforce
studies.
Second, there's a critical need for investments and public-
private partnerships to build modern facilities, and we heard a
little bit about this. Expanding quantum educational programs
will help American workers have depth and agility over their
careers and allow more people to prepare what comes next,
quantum, quantum-adjacent, or whatever else is down the road.
And I want to just take a moment. I know I'm at my moment--
at time, but I want to take a moment and say that, you know, I
was reflecting yesterday on the National Quantum Initiative
Act, and I looked back 20 years, which predates it, and it's
around this time of year that I spent a summer at NIST as a
second-year grad student doing quantum physics research. It was
my second time at NIST because I also spent a summer there as
an undergrad coming from a small college. These experiences and
the teachers who guided me have been integral to my path into
quantum and my career today, and I hope this reauthorization
expands such pathways for more students and more educators
across our country.
Thank you for your time, and I'm happy to take questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Edwards follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Absolutely. And I want to thank the
witnesses for your truly outstanding testimony.
The Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Dr. Tahan, the National Quantum Initiative focused on
advancing fundamental quantum research across several agencies.
Fundamental research is generally open and available for public
consumption, even in areas with advanced technological
potential. Unfortunately, we know how China's happy to let the
U.S. advanced fundamental research while it overinvests in the
development of leading-edge applications after the fact. In the
next 5 years of the National Quantum Initiative, how can we
safeguard our research investments while maintaining our core
scientific values? That's a big question, but it is important.
Dr. Tahan. Thank you, Chairman, for the question. It is
important. It's a question that goes beyond quantum, the
question of research security in a new world. I will say that
this is something we take very seriously in the White House, in
the Subcommittees that oversee quantum, in OSTP. One of the
first things I did when I became Director was launch a fast
track action committee on the role of international talent and
research security and quantum information science. That report
is available. We can, you know, make it available to your staff
and follow up on it.
Some of the recommendations that were made in that policy
document--and these came from all the agencies--include having
the agencies write technology protection plans, even
fundamental R&D agencies like NSF. Those ultimately became
directives in National Security Memorandum 10. It is something
we follow on every year to help coordinate and share best
practices across agencies from the DOD to the IC to the FBI
(Federal Bureau of Investigation) to the NSF and DOE. We have a
subcommittee, the Economic and Security Implications of Quantum
Science Subcommittee, that's completely dedicated to that,
sharing best practices among the people who are actually
running the programs.
There's no perfect way to manage risk, and, you know, first
and foremost, our goal has to be to move--continue to move
fast, empower our scientists and entrepreneurs, keep the open
scientific community. This is a unanimous view from the
agencies. We need to keep our open scientific engine of
discovery going, but we need to do it in a smart way in this
new world, and that comes down to really knowing what's going
on across the world and in our country, what the risks are in
making good decisions.
Chairman Lucas. Dr. Edwards, each of our witnesses touched
on the need for more quantum workforce development investments.
You run an Education Workforce Center now, and you recommend
Congress authorized the creation of a national center for
quantum education workforce in your testimony. What would be
your vision for such a center, and how do you see it meeting
the needs of a diverse group of quantum stakeholders? I'll give
you another big-picture question, too.
Dr. Edwards. Let's see. I was trying to figure out which
indicated talk. Now, that's a really, really great question. So
for clarification, so the Q-12 partnership is a consortium, a
voluntary consortium, and so currently, we're setting up
scaffolding. And over the last couple of years, it's become
clear that what is needed is to build on this scaffolding to
have a national center that can provide a resource. The role of
such a center in this case is to draw together the existing
workforce efforts and leverage them. So basically, the centers
are doing awesome at the science, and the--and they're really
articulating the need for a workforce, but their original scope
was not at the K-12 and undergraduate levels. And given that
their original scope was not the--there is not necessarily
resources to scale the impact of the nascent programs they are
doing. And so I think a national center serves a--as a resource
to scale and to also build into communities that are not being
reached by the current National Quantum Initiative investments.
Chairman Lucas. Teeing off of that, using the phrase
national center, should Congress create more than just one
workforce center under a single agency, or should we promote
multiple centers?
Dr. Edwards. So this is a great question. So I think--
another great question. So I think there are two approaches.
The--what we need to do is--the goal when we design a center or
design a resource is to remove barriers, and so I would say it
would be ideal to have a center that is co-funded by multiple
agencies because this will serve to remove the barriers that
exist between the different investments across multiple
agencies. We really want participation and to leverage efforts
that are at the whole-of-government. In the absence of that, if
it makes sense policy-wise, then I would say you would need
multiple centers if you're not able to have one that kind of
pulls in the whole of government.
Chairman Lucas. My time has expired. I now recognize the
Ranking Member, Ms. Lofgren, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for your really fascinating and wonderful testimony.
One of the questions I--and most of you have mentioned
NASA, and it's great to see someone from NASA Ames. Thank you
so much for traveling here to be with us. Is there anybody who
doesn't think that NASA should be added as a member of NQI?
Should we add it? Everybody's saying OK. So I think that's
something I'd like to explore with the majority.
I'd like to follow up, Dr. Merzbacher, with the testimony
you had about the gap between science and application and how--
you know, kind of the valley of death if you're in Silicon
Valley. Could you be more detailed about what we might do to
enhance the delivery from the lab to the commercial market?
What are some of the things that we could do to enhance that
effort?
Dr. Merzbacher. Yes, this is not a quantum-specific
problem----
Ms. Lofgren. Correct.
Dr. Merzbacher [continuing]. Of course, but I view quantum
as sort of a poster child or a pilot project--you know, we can
focus on this. It's the emerging technology today, and we can
get it right. And so some of the approaches that could be taken
to move some of the research that's got practical application
into the marketplace is to better connect the industry and
academic researchers. And I run into this problem of capacity
at some of the small companies to even do longer-term research,
so we've got to somehow better connect the two, and that's
where perhaps some programs at places like NSF TIP could help.
We also know that there's going to be manufacturing and
scaling-up challenges. Right now, even at the companies, if you
go and visit them, it looks like a research lab. It's a big,
complicated system that takes a lot of people to keep it
running, and we need to be integrating these things and scaling
them up and making them more reliable. And so there's
manufacturing challenges and manufacturability challenges. And
programs like the Advanced Manufacturing Program that NIST runs
and that's supported by other agencies as well is an
opportunity. We could create an Advanced Manufacturing
Institute.
I'll remind you all that under the CHIPS and Science Act,
DOD is creating some hubs for prototyping, and they have said
they want to make one of those focused on quantum. We're very
excited to see what the outcome of that competition is. So
we'll have some prototyping capability. If we can get some
manufacturing capability to go along with the research piece, I
think we have the whole sort of innovation chain.
Ms. Lofgren. How much do we allow the private sector in to
utilize facilities that is--are funded by the Federal----
Dr. Merzbacher. Often, they're welcome. I'm on the board or
advisory committees for some of those user facilities. When you
look at the numbers, there are not as many from industry, and
that's often because maybe they don't know about it. There may
be IP (intellectual property) issues. That always comes up, but
I don't think that's unnecessarily standing in the way. I think
it's getting more--making it easier, and sometimes there's
really just a capacity problem. And so when I look around and
say where is the capacity for doing some of that early stage
work, it's in the government labs and universities, so we need
to connect the people in both sectors.
Ms. Lofgren. Dr. Edwards, let me ask you about the
workforce issue. Obviously--you know, when I first was
considering this, I thought, well, why would we do K-12
because, you know, a senior in high school is not going to be
prepared to go into quantum physics. But the more I thought
about it, the more I thought, you know, actually, that is
helpful because quantum seems at odds with the world as we see
it. And, you know, when I first read Schrodinger's cat, I'm
going, this is so weird, and yet--and so it would be helpful
for young people to actually get--wrap their heads around that
so that they could move on at a later date.
We can't be in every classroom, and, you know, not every
teacher wants to do this, but have we thought about creating a
model curricula that would be available to schools or teachers
who wanted to do this if they could just download it and print
it as a way to getting this across the Nation?
Dr. Edwards. Yes, thank you for that question. Yes, so the
through the Q-12 and the grant Q2Work, we've been able to
develop an initial framework that's a precursor to curriculum,
to infuse quantum into the STEM subjects at the high school
level and also at the middle school level. And this is an
approach led by teachers, and I think that it's a way that
recognizes the diversity of education approaches across the
country.
The next step is indeed to develop a model curriculum, and
this does actually--this is part of why we need a center
because it's--such a center would develop the appropriate
curriculum so that teachers and school districts and then even
primarily undergraduate institutions could flexibly adapt it to
the needs of their classroom because, after all, the teachers,
the educators, the communities, and the families, they know how
to best communicate this--these complexities to their young
people.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you. I see my time has expired. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. Thank you. The Chair recognizes gentleman
from Florida for 5 minutes, Mr. Posey.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
staff for putting together such a great and informative panel.
This has really been an interesting hearing.
What additional safeguards does the National Quantum
Initiative need to put in place to prevent countries of concern
like China from stealing our research? You know, Dr. Tahan
touched on it, and I'd kind of like to get the opinions of the
other witnesses. Left to right would be fine.
Mr. Dabbar. Congressman, so one of the things that we did
at DOE--around all technologies, but quantum was a part of it--
was develop something called a technology risk matrix, which
was actually to list technology by technology of what's OK to
work with on an open science basis and what is--although it may
not be classified yet, that it should be restricted on
engagement with countries that are adversaries. I'd recommend
that--while DOE has that, I would recommend that other agencies
also look at that screening process also.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
Dr. Rieffel. I'm a technical person--oh, I turned it off.
Oh, OK. I'm a technical person, so I just want to say that I'm
aware of NASA's strong export controls, and we vet foreign
nationals coming in to NASA. We look at documents going out of
NASA, et cetera. And for a stronger answer, I'll defer to other
experts at NASA and at other agencies.
Dr. Merzbacher. So I'm here representing the industry side,
of course, and I've come up with a term I call business
security. And my members need to understand that they are
making decisions every day that take them along the path that
leads to a position in the future that may or may not be
business-secure. They're accepting investors. They need to
understand who those people are. They need to be making really
smart decisions. And to help equip the members of QEDC, I have
a very good relationship actually with U.S. law enforcement
agencies, and they come in and talk to these companies,
especially the small ones. They don't have someone whose full-
time job is doing export control. So they need to have access
to resources, and we're really fortunate to have that
relationship that we can use to help them get access to useful
information that they can use now to be business-secure in the
future.
Mr. Posey. Have you noticed any attempts to capture any of
our resources and knowledge?
Dr. Merzbacher. I assume it's happening. I feel like a Q is
a big target, and I know that there are occasions when
companies have talked to some of our friends in government. I'm
not in the middle of that, so I'm not aware of all of it, but I
think the relationship has been very useful. And the government
people remind us, once the secrets are out, it's too late. We
need to be catching those problems before they lead to breaches
and leaks.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Doctor?
Dr. Edwards. Thanks. So I think mine's maybe just a little
bit different to complement what's already been said. I think,
you know, at a university--so I'll wear my IQUIST hat for a
minute as Executive Director of a quantum center there at
Illinois. Academia has in place export controls to follow--you
know, to follow the laws that are out there, but I think an
open dialog on how these are implemented and how these--what is
export-controlled and what is not that is continuous because
the technology is advancing so fast, and the research and the
labs at the universities changes really fast.
And we also have significant graduate programs that serve
both domestic and international students. And we want--and that
ensure--that is creating a very lively and robust enterprise in
the United States, and so we want to keep that in place. So I
think the key for--at the university level is to ensure that
there's open communications as these export controls are
developed, that recognize the role of academia and the role of
industry and the role of government, how we can work together
to make sure that as they come out of the labs, they are
safeguarded.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Doctor, any further thoughts? I mean,
you can go to any trade show in any industry in this country
and look at the new products that come online, and a week
later, they're duplicated from China----
Dr. Tahan. Yes----
Mr. Posey [continuing]. Almost any industry in this
country.
Dr. Tahan. I'll make two quick comments to add to my
previous ones. One, I think it comes down to making good
decisions at the beginning, like Paul said, that if it's
fundamental research, let it be fundamental research. If it's
technology development, let's--how are we going to protect it
over the long run?
The second thing is for emerging technologies like quantum,
we need to get in early, so bringing the FBI in, our
recommendation is for bringing DHS in to help the companies
secure their cyber networks. You know, we need to be proactive
and doing that early. Waiting till CFIUS (Committee on Foreign
Investment in the United States) and other things, that's way
too late. We need to be very proactive with emerging
technologies and get people educated, help them with their
cybersecurity, and then, you know, eventually have guidelines
for physical security and so on. But it's really an early game
here, and that's what we've been working on.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Thank you all. Mr. Chairman, thank
you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Stevens, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Well, thank you to everyone who has shown up
for quantum today. This is really remarkable to see the Science
Committee packed on such a critical and global-shaping topic
that we are eager to see the United States lead on.
Recently--I represent southeastern Michigan, a community, a
county called Oakland County, and we have Oakland University in
my district. And recently, Oakland University and their band of
researchers, alongside Argonne National Laboratory, discovered
a breakthrough to help lay the foundation for future
advancements in quantum computing. These scientists uncovered
opportunities for manipulating quantum information by coupling
magnetic behavior to a superconducting circuit, thus
potentially creating a sort of quantum disk drive with
mindboggling amounts of storage. We're really excited about
this. And this research, as many of you have articulated in
this phenomenal panel of witnesses, is happening in
universities and think tanks all over the world.
And one of the major barriers to research development and
education in quantum information science is the relative lack
of shared research infrastructure and instrumentation. The
National Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee released a
report last Friday, just last Friday--and we're glad to have
these guys on speed dial--calling for Congress to invest in
infrastructure for quantum in the reauthorization of the
Quantum Act.
So Dr. Tahan, can you talk about the scientific community's
needs for quantum-related research infrastructure and what
Congress should be doing to address these challenges in the
reauthorization of the National Quantum Initiative Act?
Dr. Tahan. Absolutely, I'd love to. I think the important
thing to keep in mind here is that if we want to lead the
world, we need the people to do it, and so we can't rely
anymore on the top 25 universities generating talent. We need
to expand the capacity of the United States to generate talent
wherever it is. And really what--to make that happen, we need
to do a few things. We need to educate----
Ms. Stevens. Expand talent and keep it here.
Dr. Tahan. And keep it here, right----
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Dr. Tahan [continuing]. And wherever they may be. You know,
at the end of the day, that's what I'm passionate about and
we're all passionate about. That's what we need to do. To do
that, we need to educate people. This is a great opportunity.
There are great careers here for our young people. We need to
incorporate much more universities, community colleges, other
places of learning and training into the leader--leading
universities, R1 schools, through--and that means investing in
infrastructure, equipment, even small labs so people can be
trained up. We need to get, you know, quantum computing
testbeds that students can learn in a thousand schools, not 20
schools.
Ms. Stevens. And you see a return on such an investment,
right? I mean----
Dr. Tahan. This is--I think there's a great--and I like--
this is what I always say. Quantum is more than quantum
physics. If you think about what it takes to build a quantum
computer or a quantum sensor or a quantum network, what are the
skills you need? How to design a circuit, how to do microwave
and RF (remote frequency) engineering, how to do programming.
Like those skills in any industry of the future are going to be
valuable----
Ms. Stevens. Well, and Dr. Rieffel's career sort of
represents that in many respects, artificial intelligence to
quantum now at NASA, and so, you know, we'll find the bookend
to spend, you know, a couple of days with you and your career
and your career trajectory.
But I just want to get in for the record here because we
have these manufacturing institutes, Manufacturing USA, and
there is one in Rochester, New York, not in Michigan's 11th
District, but in Rochester, New York, called AIM Photonics. And
I'm just curious--and I see Dr. Merzbacher nodding and Dr.
Edwards. Are any of you working with AIM? Can you tell us about
that consortia experience particularly on talent, R&D, and some
of these broader challenges that we're talking about here?
Dr. Merzbacher. Thank you. Yes. We actually put together a
team with QEDC members and others on a proposal to the DOD
prototyping call for proposals, and AIM is one of the partners
because they have capabilities. The idea of being able to make
things--and as I think Charlie Tahan said or someone else,
quantum is really about light and matter interacting, and AIM
Photonics is about managing light, you know, making these
compact systems and these photonic integrated circuits that
they make are critical to future quantum systems. So AIM is a
great part of the ecosystem----
Ms. Stevens. You know, I'm wondering if they're going to
rebrand and start calling themselves the quantum lab. But
certainly the photonics component of it is deeply important.
And we'll ask for the record--because, Dr. Edwards, we want to
continue to get you in here as well--about the need for the
technology dominance for the United States, the strategic
investment, what my colleague on the other side of the aisle
was talking about with regard to export controls and how some
of your enterprises, in addition to a Federal public-private
partnership that we have with Manufacturing USA, is helping us
to achieve that goal.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes gentleman from Texas, Mr. Babin, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Lofgren. I really appreciate all of you witnesses being
here. It is a fascinating hearing, and we thank you.
Dr. Dabbar, I'm glad that you mentioned in your testimony
the impact that quantum has on our national security,
specifically when it comes to certain defense capabilities that
we have or want. Can you please elaborate on our network
systems and how we can strengthen these systems to prevent
vulnerabilities and damage from our adversaries? And then also,
can you share where China is in this same technology?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So I'll start with China. So
China is--especially in the networking topic as you asked
about, has accelerated their efforts in some respects farther
than us. As I mentioned, after Snowden left and defected, he
laid out the--how efficacious NSA is. And, amazingly, they
massively built out a quantum network from Shanghai to Beijing,
which is not close. They are not close to each other. They also
launched a quantum satellite 6 years ago, OK, and so when I
mentioned about how networking and satellites and security and
codes, they started doing that 6 years ago. And as I look at
NASA and other people have been pitching internally at NASA and
elsewhere for us to go do that, and that hasn't happened yet.
So I think leadership from this Committee for us to catch up on
some of those areas.
On the positive side, when it comes to entanglement and on
the high end of distribution of quantum data and networks, the
United States is by far the leader in, and so the ability for
us to take the CHIPS Act and some of the infrastructure built
out authorized in that and for whatever you feel is appropriate
to authorize in the NQI to accelerate that further, the United
States is ready to deploy the highest-end quantum networks that
will be helpful for quantum computing networking, as well as
security.
Mr. Babin. Absolutely. Can you please share why we're
behind China in quantum satellite efforts? And you alluded to
that right then but--and what can we do going forward? You
mentioned leadership, especially from this Committee. Because I
don't believe that we can afford to continue to delay making
moves to catch up, especially in encryption and some of these
fields with quantum. If you can elaborate a little further.
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So I think America is ready
at your direction and your authorization between the photonics
works at NIST, at DOD, and at NASA to actually design a quantum
satellite, probably in conjunction with some of the NASA labs
and DOE labs and provide miniaturization of the photonics, get
it on chip, and be able to get it down into a package that can
go up into a satellite. I think the interaction of that with
the terrestrial networks that should be bid out under the CHIPS
Act, so the likelihood of New York winning a terrestrial
network, a land-based local network, Chicago also winning one,
probably one in California and probably one in Oak Ridge in
east Tennessee all likely winners, and taking downlink stations
with the satellite and start networking across the country is
within the technological capabilities with your leadership.
Mr. Babin. Outstanding. And what are some ways that DOE can
better collaborate with the industry on existing and future
initiatives, and how are agencies already engaging with the
private sector to meet the needs of our national security
space? To you, Dr. Dabbar, and if I have time, then someone
else can answer as well.
Mr. Dabbar. So one of the strengths of your last act was
that it authorized efforts between government and private
industry that was kind of leading-edge for an early discovery
science. First time it was, I think, really ever done. So it
is--it can continue to be enhanced, but your last act was
really groundbreaking on that for something so early stage and
collaborative.
I think that as you look at authorizing a big quantum
computing program, building on what was just announced in
Illinois and with New York, with a lot of private sector
leadership to be direct, I think if you authorize programs for
government to continue to be potentially the first owner of
those systems or customer of those systems, just like when Dr.
Merzbacher's organization in 1969 controlled the internet with
the first nodes--four nodes was controlled by her organization.
That was a great example of DARPA (Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency) and Stanford at the time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman----
Mr. Babin. Thank you, and I'm out of time.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ross,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you for holding this hearing, Mr. Chairman,
and to Ranking Member Lofgren, and thank you to all the
panelists for being here today.
I'm proud to represent North Carolina's 2d Congressional
District in the Research Triangle and home to the IBM Quantum
Hub at NC State University. Since its opening, the IBM Quantum
Hub has been a center of quantum computing, education,
research, development, and implementation. I also recently
visited the Duke Quantum Center, a unique vertical quantum
institute located just outside my district, which I believe
Representative Foushee will be telling you all about. It's a
really, really--you actually get to see the computers, the
inside of them. It's really cool. Anyway, I'm excited about
quantum advancements being made in our home State of North
Carolina, and look forward to your testimony.
I do want to point out one of the major barriers to
research development and education in quantum information
science is the relative lack of shared research infrastructure
and instrumentation, and I heard a lot about this at Duke. The
National Quantum Initiative Advisory Committee released a
report just last Friday calling for Congress to invest in more
infrastructure for quantum in the reauthorization of the
Quantum Act.
So, Dr. Tahan, you--could you talk more about the
scientific community's need for quantum-related research
infrastructure and what Congress should be doing to address
these challenges in the reauthorization of the National Quantum
Initiative Act?
Dr. Tahan. Yes, thank you, Congresswoman. We worked very
hard, the advisory committee, to get recommendations to inform
you all as you were writing the new legislation. One of those,
as mentioned, and also in the agency recommendations, was a
fund for infrastructure investments across the country. This
could take many different forms, but in terms of the science,
it's how do we give researchers access to the tools that can
sometimes cost $3-5 million apiece in a more efficient way such
that we can move the science forward? You know, you don't want
to become a professor at NC State and then have to wait 5 years
to get the tools in place to actually do your job. And I--this
is something we hear about from many different professionals
across the country.
So one way to do that is to create programs like the qubit
foundry program to make devices and give them out across the
country, have centralized places like Lincoln Labs, national
labs that make the qubits, or from industry, make the qubits
and give them so that the science can be done on campus with
students and we can come up with new ideas. Another way is to
provide sources to equip labs. That's--that--those things are
not typically done within the R&D funding program at the
agencies. It really has to be an addition. It's purely for
equipment and an investment around that. So that's really what
I think the greatest opportunity is.
Ms. Ross. OK. And, Dr. Rieffel, how does NASA currently
fund and share research infrastructure?
Dr. Rieffel. We have broad collaborations with industry,
with other government labs. We're also part of two of the
National Quantum Initiative Centers and have access to the
technology there. One of the really exciting things to build on
the previous question has been to see hardware moving from
place to place as opposed to staying in one lab. And as we work
with other agencies and across the different centers at NASA,
we expect to be able to support these efforts in really
phenomenal ways.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much.
Dr. Edwards. Sorry, can I jump in----
Ms. Ross. Sure, absolutely.
Dr. Edwards [continuing]. Just to----
Ms. Ross. My next question was for you, so you can take the
remainder of the time.
Dr. Edwards. Oh, if you would like to ask it.
Ms. Ross. No, go ahead.
Dr. Edwards. OK. I just wanted to underscore this need for
infrastructure through an educational lens. So Illinois--and I
believe the vision also actually at Duke Quantum Center of
which I've also visited, Dr. Monroe was my postdoctoral
advisor, but both Illinois and there and other places, we're
talking about user facilities and open access educational
testbeds to cross-train students and even be flexible to do
upskilling of the current workforce.
I think there's a risk right now that with the current
investments, people don't have access to easily get into these,
particularly students, and so I see a need that you could build
educational testbeds, coupled with user facilities at
universities, to provide access to electrical engineers,
computer scientists, physicists because we still do need them
even though it's just a--it's not just physics, mathematicians
and others to work at the different levels of the pipeline from
K-12 all the way to upskilling.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses, a very important discussion here obviously.
I think we're at a really meaningful part of our Nation's
history. I actually view this technology quantum coupled with
AI and machine learning as the fourth offset, the fourth
military offset. The first offset, if you recall, was our
nuclear programs, the Manhattan Project, the propulsion
programs that paralleled that, the second offset being stealth
technology and the technologies that were derived from that
that gave us this asymmetric advantage over our adversaries on
the global stage.
I think the third offset can best be defined as the
autonomy and miniaturization of systems that yielded things
like the B-2, the B-21 now being produced in my district, as
well as UAVs (unmanned aerial vehicles) en masse.
And I think that the fourth offset, like I said, is now the
ability to overlay the quantum computing and underpin the AI
and machine learning to--by quantum to fully enable the
processing of data, the data management systems, the networks
of networks, the information flow on the--you know, the fronts,
the military fronts specifically.
When you look at it through that paradigm, it puts a little
bit of a different importance on these programs. And I think,
given sort of the nascent position of some of these programs--
and, first of all, I think we're also drinking our own
bathwater a little bit relative to China's progress. I think we
are trying to have a self-fulfilling prophecy that China is not
doing the same investments and not making the same progress
that we are. I think they actually are keeping pace and they
are spending as much money. It may not be visible to us, but
they're utilizing an entire commercial base in conjunction with
their military operations. So I think we should be paranoid
about their progress and not assume that we have a
technological advantage or even a funding advantage in many
cases. I think it's very important to look at it from a
disadvantage perspective and a paradigm that we need to catch
up so that we keep our foot on the pedal and we gain
efficiencies.
But I also think because it is the fourth offset, and I
really believe that, that from a security perspective, to your
point, Dr. Tahan, we need to be proactive. And I don't get the
sense across the disparate agencies, the government side and
the commercial side, that we are actually putting in place the
security protocols, and not on the fundamental research, but on
the actual technology development, the higher-end technology
development that could feed into weapons systems. My concern is
that we are not vetting all of the all folks that are working
these programs to the levels that we should. Do we have insight
into how many Chinese nationals are working these programs?
Have we done background checks? These don't necessarily need to
be classified programs, but do we manage and keep track of the
personnel working these technologies that are feeding into our
fourth offset?
My concern with the CHIPS Act--I ended up supporting it,
but I spent probably 6 hours in the skiff talking to intel and
Department of Commerce and Department of Defense--that the
investments we are making in CHIPS didn't port cleanly to DOD
applications, that we were focusing on 7, 9 nanometer wafers
and not looking at the smaller wafer chip sets that would go
into hypersonics.
The second concern I had that--is that we weren't porting
over the requirements for supporting quantum development. You
know, I don't recall seeing any sort of specific tailoring of
the semiconductor development to quantum computing, whether
it's quantum dot arrays or the layers and substrates needed to
do what is necessary for quantum computing.
And the third concern I had with the CHIPS Act was that we
weren't looking at how to protect the intellectual property
across all of these efforts. They're all evolving on separate
islands almost, and we're allowing for venues to share
information, which is good, we've got to be able to share
information, but we also have to protect that information from
the CCP and then also make sure that the folks working these
programs are vetted and not effectively getting educated here,
getting smart on the technology, and then going back to
mainland China, where they may not have a choice to share the
information.
So I've used up my time just talking about this, but I'm
really concerned that we as a government right now are not
looking at this as a national security program and that we are
only looking at this as sort of a commercial program, maybe not
only, but not enough emphasis on the national security
implications of this. The idea--you know, the OPM (Office of
Personnel Management) data breach from several years ago, the
only thing really keeping the Chinese from really leveraging
that data against us is their ability to compute and manage
that data. So I'll end with that. I don't have any questions.
And, Ms. Edwards, the QUEST program, I'd like to take it
offline. We're going into markups for appropriations, so if you
can help us understand that.
I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr. Bowman, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
the witnesses for being here.
The CHIPS and Science Act is intended to promote domestic
development, manufacturing, and testing of advanced
semiconductors, and the definition in the bill is specific
about semiconductors. However, companies like SEEQC based in my
district are designing and manufacturing more advanced chips
for scaling quantum technologies using superconductors.
Superconductors are useful for quantum computing, quantum and
classical sensing, and other cases outlined in the NQI. Does
anyone have thoughts on the role that superconductors could
play in the advancement of the quantum computing industry? And
what might be needed from Congress or the Administration here?
Mr. Dabbar, I will turn it to you first, given the
Superconducting Quantum Materials and Systems Center managed by
the DOE.
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So Westchester County is
certainly a leader in quantum technologies. SEEQC in Elmsford
has some very interesting control systems which could lead to
scaling of quantum chips well beyond what most people are
talking about. IBM has obviously made significant announcements
in Westchester County in their operations. And then finally,
the CHIPS and Science Act authorizing a quantum network to be
bid I think it is extremely likely that New York will win, and
there'll be networks not only in the city and Long Island but
up to your town and Westchester.
The support for those sort of efforts, I think, would be
critical, and I think one of the things that people don't see
is that companies like IBM, like SEEQC, like what's going on in
Brookhaven are far beyond basic science, and I think first
deployments in conjunction with the private sector, as you
mentioned, but also with universities and labs, including in
New York, will--are ready. And so that's why when a number of
people here talk about first deployment and cooperatives
between universities and labs and companies, it's ready.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome. Would anyone else like to just add?
Dr. Edwards. It looks like a lot of people, but maybe I
will just very quickly say that the one thing that in my
experience with the superconducting technology is that the
ability to make high coherence qubits is a grand challenge that
Dr. Tahan is familiar with deeply, and I think that it relies
on currently infrastructure from a few companies that are
overseas in order to successfully make qubits. We have a piece
of equipment at the University of Illinois that we waited 12
months for, and it's one of the only pieces of equipment in the
world that's known to make successful high coherence qubits
using superconductors. And so I--at least it--that is publicly
available, and it's very expensive. So when you ask what people
can do, I think it's important to look at these investments to
buildup the supply chain. And I'll--of course, I think the
panelists have other comments.
Dr. Rieffel. We're really excited, as part of the NASA
QuAIL team, to be part of C2QA (Co-design Center for Quantum
Advantage) right out of Brookhaven and SQMS run out of Fermi
Lab, which both do superconducting technologies and have really
advanced that. Thank you all for supporting those centers.
I want to mention that in addition to doing faster
computing, superconducting technologies and other quantum
technologies have the potential of reducing energy consumption
for the computation, and that that's another real advantage
that we can push on here. So thank you again for your support.
Dr. Merzbacher. And I'll just add that SEEQC is actually a
member of our team that put in this proposal to develop
prototyping capability. They're a key facility that we hope
will be able to grow so that the broad community can use their
expertise and capabilities to make these systems.
Mr. Bowman. Please.
Dr. Tahan. I've been working on crowd computing for most of
my career. You know, we make some chips at SEEQC in my home
lab. It's a great lab.
I'll just say in terms of what Congress can do, you know,
as the CHIPS and Science Act is implemented, you know, there's
about $11 billion in R&D in the National Semiconductor
Technology Center (NSTC), advanced packaging. If we can ensure
that emerging technologies or quantum are covered in the
implementation of those R&D facilities, that's the greatest
opportunity, frankly, probably of a generation to ensure that
we have continued technical leadership of the next generation
of IT. You know, so facilities like the DOD Commons--you know,
that's something that we worked on internally to encourage
quantum to be part of that, but also as the NSTC gets stood up,
that they include exotic materials like superconductors, of
optics, other things that will matter beyond CMOS
(complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor) to future quantum and
other types of technologies like neuromorphic computing.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The Chair now
recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Obernolte, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses. It's been a fascinating hearing on a really
important topic.
I think we're all in furious agreement on a few things,
first of all, that NQI should be reauthorized; second of all,
that we need more people and more money. We have talked about a
couple of problems, and I think every single witness has
brought up these problems in your testimony: One, the problem
of enabling a quantum-skilled workforce and growing that
workforce, and then the second problem of commercializing some
of the technology that's been developed in labs and in
academia. And I think everyone at the table mentioned this
problem.
I want to point out that these two problems are related
because if we can solve the second problem, the second problem
solves the first problem. If we get more commercial
application, you're going to get more private investment.
You're going to get companies that are delivering these
solutions to market. They are going to create jobs. They're
going to create pipelines into their companies. They're going
to create their own training programs, and that'll make this
self-reinforcing cycle that solves the first problem of the
quantum educated workforce.
Ranking Member Lofgren asked a great question on this,
about how we start doing that, getting these applications out
of the lab and into commercialization. And the answer was,
generally, we need better communication between the labs and
academia and commercial companies. I'm not sure I agree. Count
me skeptical on that, and here's why. I mean, I think the
problem that we're facing is that most of the potential
applications for quantum computing technology are largely still
theoretical. It is great that IBM has a chip with 433 qubits on
it. You know, that's amazing, way more than we thought we would
have at this point, but we're still going to need millions, if
not tens of millions of qubits to solve the kind of computing
problems that traditional computers are unable to solve. And we
still have--as has been brought up, we still have some
technical problems to solve like the problem with decoherence
before we get there.
So, you know, I really think we need to identify the low-
hanging fruit, some applications of quantum computing
technology that we can start to commercialize now while we're
working on these longer-term solutions.
So, Mr. Dabbar, you're the private sector guy here. Do you
agree with that assessment? And what are the low-hanging fruit
that you can see that that might lend themselves to immediate
commercial application?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes. Yes, Congressman, sticking to your quantum
computing specific point, you know, one of the three major use
cases. I think the likelihood of there being a heterogeneous,
high-performance computer that has QPUs (quantum processing
units) as part--underline the word ``part''--of the
architecture in conjunction with CPUs (central processing
units) and GPUs (graphics processing units) for it to be an
accelerator to narrow down very large problems is actually
something that could probably be designed into the next high-
performance computer today. That's why I recommend that when
you authorize the next high-performance computing program for
the national labs, that you direct them to do that.
The computer at Oak Ridge was--the last previous one,
Summit, was the first one that had two different types of
chips, and that was proven, and it dramatically improved AI and
general computing performance. I think it's low-hanging fruit
to start taking a look at the chips that are going to be
available in the next computing cycle to be included as part of
a system. A fully quantum computer that has advantageous
capabilities is, I think, farther out, but I think as part of a
system, I think that's low-hanging fruit.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you. Yes, that's encouraging.
Dr. Edwards, I really respect the role that you have here
on this panel because you are dealing with education very
near--a situation very near and dear to my heart, which is
education. I think the problem is bigger than the one that
we're confronting here. I mean, we've got--China has passed the
number of--has passed the U.S. on the number of Ph.D.'s in
computer science that they have awarded a couple of years ago,
and within the next year or two, they'll award double the
number that we award. So our problem, I think, is broader than
just educating students in quantum computing. I think we don't
have enough students in STEM in general and computer science in
particular. How do we solve that problem?
Dr. Edwards. So this is a very big question, so maybe I'll
keep my remarks brief and----
Mr. Obernolte. Well, you've got 21 seconds.
Dr. Edwards. I know. And then I'll be happy to answer also
in writing.
So quantum information science is more than just quantum
computing. I think we all know that. And there are near-term
technologies, as well as far-term applications that you spoke
of. It's a convergent area that spans all of STEM. So it's an
opportunity akin to the space race, an opportunity to take this
moment to inspire students and to inspire the current workforce
to buildup public literacy and to unite across all sectors to
address the critical challenges you talk about. It can't fix
all of STEM, absolutely not. I don't say that, but I think that
we can use the NQI reauthorization and continued Federal
investments to buildup the infrastructure to take a next step
forward. And again, I'm happy to provide more detailed remarks
in writing. Thank you so much.
Mr. Obernolte. We'll follow up. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs.
Foushee, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
Committee hearing today, and thank you to the witnesses for
your testimony and for appearing before us this morning.
I am proud that in my district, North Carolina's 4th,
indeed includes the Duke Quantum Center, a partner of the
Department of Energy-funded Quantum Systems Accelerator, one of
five quantum information resource centers in the country. Mr.
Dabbar, the Department of Energy Quantum User Expansion for
Science and Technology Program, or QUEST, was first authorized
in CHIPS and Science to match researchers with existing
commercially available quantum computing capabilities. Should
the next phase of the NQI be expanded to include quantum
computer use of facilities? I understand from reading your
testimony that you have some recommendations for this program
in the context of the NQIA reauthorization. Could you please
elaborate on those recommendations?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes. Yes, Congresswoman. So I think there's two
potential things as you mentioned in your question. The QUEST
program, which allows computer access for all researchers and
develop computational scientists in the quantum algorithm space
that was authorized in the CHIPS Act, I highly recommend that
that get even more accelerated or you consider that. Taking
that up to $50 million a year is something I would recommend,
which is a little bit of a bump from the CHIPS Act. Getting
broad access to quantum cloud capabilities that researchers at
universities or schools all over the country, I think, would be
a great use for development and research. And then I would
also, as I mentioned previously, recommend a concentrated
effort to building the first heterogeneous, high-performance
computer system at one or more of the national labs as part of
the next big supercomputer effort, similar to what was
announced here recently by DOD and some private companies.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. And, Dr. Edwards, although I
understand that many quantum technology jobs require extensive
postsecondary education, there are also many roles that only
require an associate degree from a community college or trade
school. Can you discuss what the skilled technical workforce
looks like for quantum and how we can enable affordable
educational opportunities for people to train for those jobs?
Dr. Edwards. So for the second part of that question about
how can we enable affordable training, I think we need to
develop the curriculum that was referred to before. There are
some initial strides that have been made possible by
investments of the initial 5 years of the NQI Act, and it needs
to be modular to be able to be deployed in community colleges.
We need community college consortiums. I know there's several
of them working to go--to model after the photonics initiative
to buildup capacity--or capability at the technician level.
For the actual skills needed, I actually would like to
maybe ask Dr. Merzbacher to----
Mrs. Foushee. I was coming there.
Dr. Edwards. Oh, excellent. I was going to say I think she
can provide more depth on the initial understanding of what
skills are there, but to underline that this is all happening
in real time, and we don't have enough data yet. And so I think
building on what maybe Dr. Merzbacher will say, we need more--
we need to know more in order to design these programs for the
populations you're talking about.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you for that. So Dr. Merzbacher, if you
would, please.
Dr. Merzbacher. Yes, I'll add to that as well. So my
organization has a number of standing committees. One is the
Workforce Committee. It's very active, and it involves members
who are both in the education business, but also the industry
members. And we asked them, do you have jobs that are being
done in your company by a Ph.D. that could be done by a
technician? And they all said yes. So there's a huge
opportunity here. And I was talking with actually someone from
your district about this. He said we don't have as much trouble
hiring Ph.D.'s as we do technicians.
So we're doing a workshop this year to get more
understanding around this. I think it's--it is a very diverse
ecosystem, and companies have different needs when it comes to
technicians, but a technician doesn't need to have quantum in
front of their name. If they understand how to use vacuum
systems, how to run electronics, how to keep things maintained
and operating, they can be qualified. So what we need is to
sort of get them quantum-comfortable and appreciating the
opportunities and then, you know, helping to connect them with
those opportunities. A lot of times technicians don't
necessarily relocate across the country, and so there's a
difference in the education at that level, but it's equally
important.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Fleischmann, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. I thank the Chairman and the
Ranking Member for having this hearing, and to our
distinguished panel, thank you very much. Secretary Dabbar, it
was a privilege working with you in the last Administration.
I'm glad that we could continue to work together, but to each
and every one of you all, thank you so much.
So you know, I represent the people of the 3d District of
Tennessee, which encompasses the entire Oak Ridge reservation
and all that it entails, including our great national
laboratory.
If I may, the main goal of the National Quantum Initiative
Act was to accelerate development of quantum information
science and technology applications in the United States over
10 years. Since the law passed, we've seen major advancements
in technology, which has led to significant Federal and private
investment. Last year, Chattanooga's utility EPB launched the
EPE--EPB Quantum Network, which is the first industry-led
commercially available quantum network designed for private
companies, government, and university researchers to run
quantum equipment and applications using EPB's fiberoptic
infrastructure. And while we still need to continue our quantum
research and development activities, I think we have a real
opportunity to jump to the next step, which is connecting the
science to specific application areas.
I'm interested in the panelists' thoughts talking--taking a
regional approach to this, one where the key players in the
region would form a consortium to create a testbed where one
could take advantage of everyone's strengths and focus them on
specific applications.
Using east Tennessee as an example, you could take EPB and
its network, bring in the Oak Ridge National Laboratory with
its expertise in exascale and quantum computing, maybe some
business and universities and focus them on applying quantum
science and technology to securing the electrical grid.
My question for the panel, do you think a regional approach
like this might lead to accelerating scientific discoveries and
translating them into real-world applications? And I think we
can begin with--on this side and move across the panel, and I
thank you all.
Dr. Tahan. Thank you for the question, Congressman. Let me
just start by saying that the U.S. Government is taking
protecting our networks extremely seriously, and NIST has been
leading a standards competition for quantum-resistant
cryptography, and the government is working to deploy that as
fast as possible. That does not require quantum technology
right at the beginning.
In the long term where we look to quantum networks,
hopefully connecting our quantum computers and sensors, we're
very fortunate in the government to have a lot of expertise in
the agencies, and we brought them together to make
recommendations for you through various reports. One of them is
the quantum networking report. The key thing is to focus on the
hard technical challenges. One thing we really need are very
high-fidelity components to connect different types of qubits
to enable a network. If we can do that, if we can solve that
science problem, we can make everything the industry wants to
do much easier, and I think that's maybe very well-focused and
compatible with regional teams focusing on these core
transduction components that can go into those networks. If we
can solve those problems first, then everything else becomes
much easier. And I would encourage--you know, this being a
science-focused initiative, the government can really
accelerate that hard piece and make it easier for all the
applications thereafter.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir. Secretary Dabbar?
Mr. Dabbar. Congressman, the Chattanooga effort with Oak
Ridge is a great example of the capabilities and prospects of
regional efforts. Almost by definition, if you're going to
build a network, it has to be regional. And so Oak Ridge in
east Tennessee is at the lead and there's others. New York,
Chicago are other big areas of the country where things are
being tested. The CHIPS Act authorizes certain aspects of that.
I would recommend that this Committee look to enhance that
because that's the way that things get built out. Once again,
going back to the internet example of 1969, that's how the
first four nodes of the internet started, and I think that's
where we're at with quantum is to do the same.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Rieffel. I agree that regional efforts are very
important. Bringing people together to work together in ways
that can only be done if people are close by. On the other
hand, with the technology that's here, being able to work
across the country is really important as well. And, for
example, we at NASA worked with people at Oak Ridge National
Lab to support Google's quantum supremacy experiment, and so
being able to do cross-country collaborations is also
important, so balancing those things is critical going forward.
Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time is----
Mr. Fleischmann. OK. I guess I have to yield back. I was
going to ask the others if I might get at least a 10-second
response, Mr. Chair?
Chairman Lucas. Yes, Cardinal, 10 seconds each.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Dr. Merzbacher. I just want to say that EPB is a very
active member of my consortium, and I visited them in March. We
held actually our meeting in Chattanooga so that we could go
and visit. I think it's a great model. I think quantum
expertise isn't consolidated within regions across the country,
so if you want best-in-class, you're going to have to kind of
break that open a little bit.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you.
Dr. Edwards. So I think that building infrastructure to
have regional hubs in areas especially that are quantum
information deserts is critical and I think could--is--it
aligns with the notion that our educational systems are local
and locally governed and provides on-the-ground access or could
provide if we were successful on-the-ground access for people
of all ages to have a front row seat I was talking about.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. I thank the Chair's indulgence.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Jackson, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Jackson. Dr. Tahan, I want to follow up on the answer
that you just gave to Representative Fleischmann's question.
I'm very interested in trying to verbalize for my constituents
the gap between the state-of-the-art and practical
applications, and I really don't know if that gap is more about
scaling up existing technology and finding something that's
affordable, or whether there are huge technical problems we
have to solve. It sounded like your answer was that the big
thing--the biggest thing the government can do is help solve a
particular technical problem, and that was the limit of my
understanding. So am I right about that?
Dr. Tahan. Well, this is a pretty broad field. You know, it
depends on the category. So there's computing, networking,
sensing, right? For networks, the point I was trying to make is
that there is a classical solution to the risk of a future--far
future quantum computer that the government is working to
deploy--to standardize and deploy. There are opportunities for
quantum-enabled networks to do more, and that's more of a
research and development thing that we need to solve a lot of
problems to solve. So that's for networking.
For computing, you know, the question of applications is
always--you know, has been the most important one. You know,
we've taken the last 25 years to build very small research-like
computers, 100 qubits, just starting to be at the point where
we can't simulate them on our laptops or even on our
supercomputers, but we don't have applications to run on those
things yet that do anything useful other than science and
trying to understand how to build bigger computers. We don't
know when quantum computers--at what scale they will start to
be actually useful like generating Nobel Prize science or
commercial applications. It could be in the next 5 years, it
could be longer than that.
Mr. Jackson. I want to drill down on that exactly. So the
state-of-the-art is roughly 100 qubits. Is that what you're
telling me?
Dr. Tahan. Hundreds, hundreds. You know, IBM right now it's
a 400-qubit machine, but we're sort of in the hundreds category
now.
Mr. Jackson. OK. And we really don't have a working theory
as to what level of qubit is going to unlock some practically?
Dr. Tahan. No, we do. So over the last 20 years, we've
developed algorithms, proposed algorithms that do useful
things. One of them is cryptanalysis, which is a negative
thing. We need to protect against. It could break codes.
Another is chemistry and materials discovery. Those algorithms
that we can cost, meaning we know exactly how many qubits you
need, the estimates are around hundreds of thousands to tens of
millions of qubits, OK? But there are other proposed algorithms
that are more heuristic, kind of like deep learning-based that
we cannot with mathematics prove will work until you build the
machine.
Mr. Jackson. OK.
Dr. Tahan. So the goal is we need to build bigger machines
and see if they're going to work or not.
Mr. Jackson. OK. So you think we've got some practical
applications at the 100,000 level, but we may be some practical
applications short of that, but we really don't know yet?
Dr. Tahan. Exactly.
Mr. Jackson. OK. Are--between the 100 qubit level that
we're at, the state-of-the-art, and 100,000 qubit, what's the
biggest technical challenge?
Dr. Tahan. Scaling up, you know, how to control all those
qubits. Each one of those qubits is like a little, very
sensitive animal that you need to touch all the time. You need
wires or lasers to go down to it. So unlike your classical
computer, which has, you know, 10 billion transistors but only
1,000 wires, a computer with 100,000 quantum transistors would
need hundreds of thousands of wires, so that's the big
technical challenge.
Mr. Dabbar. So, Congressman, probably as early as later
this year, we might have 100,000 qubit chip out there that's
capable, and how--the equivalent to architecture of high-
performance computers with CPUs and GPUs, we don't have a GPU
chip the size of this room. It's a bank of chips, as you know.
And so the likelihood of taking a 100--sorry, 1,000 qubit chip,
and starting to network that, maybe 3 or 6 in one cryochamber,
so you can maybe get to 6,000 qubits. And as was announced
recently, as part of a bigger high-performance computer with
CPUs and GPUs, 100,000 might be able to provide an accelerator
function to dramatically improve that--high-performance
computers.
Mr. Jackson. I just need to understand. Is there a
breakthrough that hasn't happened, or do we have the science
and now we're just scaling up?
Dr. Edwards. OK. I might jump in here.
Mr. Jackson. Please.
Dr. Edwards. We don't know yet how to build such a machine.
There are roadmaps from several companies, but it hasn't been
built yet. And the physics--the ability to control this many
quantum objects all at once to do computing is of course
critical, and we will get there, but it's--there are massive
engineering challenges as you try to scale this.
Mr. Jackson. Name one.
Dr. Edwards. So in the--there's multiple platforms. We
don't know which qubit is the best qubit. There's
superconducting qubits, there's semiconductor qubits, there's
atomic physics qubits, both ions and neutral atoms. There's a
number of different ones of those, and we know how to get to
100, but the challenge is like Charlie's--or Dr. Tahan said,
the challenge is connecting all the wires. In the atomic
physics case, it's using all the lasers.
And we don't--we often don't have the--we're operating on
the edge of what's possible, and people are right now in
industry often inventing solutions to help be able to
circumvent the necessary amount of wires or to try to reduce
the number of lasers you would need to control that many
quantum objects and especially to avoid or correct errors,
which is a major challenge. It's a really hard problem, and we
will get there, but there are significant--I don't know if
they're necessarily physics breakthroughs, but there are
engineering challenges that have to be codeveloped with
industry in order for us to succeed at building this.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Collins, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, the discussion that we're having today I think is
about an area of science which probably very few of us really
understand. You know, Albert Einstein himself kind of struggled
to keep--put his mind around this. And he was often quoted as
saying, if quantum theory is correct, it signifies the end of
physics as a science. So he clearly had mixed views on the
subject.
So my question is to any of the witnesses. What would you
tell a Georgian in my district if they ask why the government
should be investing billions in quantum research, and how is it
going to impact their lives?
Dr. Tahan. Maybe I'll start out by saying it's already
impacted their lives. You know, if you think about the global
positioning system which helps us get home, that's estimated to
be a trillion-dollar impact in our society. I mean, it saves me
every single day from a lot of traffic. That is based on
quantum clocks or quantum's--a version of a quantum sensor.
Magnetic resonance imagers, brain imagers are based on our
understanding of quantum physics.
You know, the next-generation brain imagers, if we can
really bring some of these ideas from lab to market, could be
around your neck. You know, instead of having to go into a big
tube to see if you have a tumor, you could be monitored all the
time or much more--less invasively. I mean, think of what that
could do to broaden healthcare to the world, right?
So we can bring these over the market, but we need to keep
our eye on the ball on the applications that can actually
affect society and carry it, you know? And that means bringing
other agencies involves investing in industry to make it
happen.
Mr. Collins. All right.
Mr. Dabbar. Congressman, I just want to highlight the
biology imaging point. The prospects of moving from an MRI,
which, for lack of better description, comes up with a blob,
right, that you see, and you still have to do biopsies and it
has to reach a certain scale of the cancer, for example, before
you can even see it. The prospects of--and NSF has been funding
some of this--of a higher end either magnetic or other type of
quantum imager to go to the individual cell. And so if you
could capture and visualize the first cell that is cancer and
it moves from your thyroid to your pancreas, not wait until it
turns into a tumor, that's the possibility. And so the
possibility of catching something that early with, you know, a
piece of quantum sensing will remake medicine, and so that's a
prospect.
Mr. Collins. Good. I know--maybe--I had some--another area
that I really wanted to get into real quick, and I appreciate
your answers. That really makes it easier when we're talking to
our constituency. We just penned a letter, Chairman Lucas and I
did, as Committee Chairman, Subcommittee Chairman, to the NSF
about China and Berkeley and how they were receiving money from
the Chinese and money from the Federal Government on research,
semiconductor research, and how they were conducting tours of
these research facilities for the Chinese, and that's very
concerning. I know we've been talking about that here this
morning.
I also had the opportunity to speak to a group not too long
ago about quantum technology. And my question is for Ms.
Merzbacher and Ms. Edwards. Thank you for the good southern
name down there, easy to pronounce. When I was talking to them,
they mentioned the fact that we need to keep these visas for
the Chinese coming in because we don't have people that have
the education to help us with quantum technology. And that
worries me. And so from an education standpoint, Ms. Edwards,
is that true? Do we still need to make sure that we have visas
coming through for the Chinese, and Ms. Merzbacher? The
workforce, you indicated in your opening statement, upscaling
existing and upcoming workforce, and I would just like some
comment on that so that we don't get into this same situation
that we have now with the semiconductor research.
Dr. Edwards. So I'm--I admit, I'm not an immigration
expert, and--but I do recognize the challenges of national
security in this space, and I do think that, you know, aligned
with the recommendations that came out on Friday, it is
actually important, especially at the graduate level, for us to
continue to draw on the international expertise and the
domestic expertise that's available. We need to simultaneously
build the domestic workforce, and that is a major, major gap.
And we should not get distracted from doing that. But it is
really important to recognize the contributions internationally
that colleagues across the world, including China, have brought
and that they work in--you know, work in our labs and academia,
and I think this is incredibly valuable. And there are
recommendations that Dr. Tahan can speak to more directly about
this.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Sykes, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the
panel for your time with us. This is a--certainly a very
interesting and important conversation.
One thing I've probably said in this Committee and
otherwise is the best part of this job is learning about a lot
of fascinating pieces of information, technologies,
professions, but I also wonder how I would ever know about
those things if I were not a Member of Congress. And it
frustrates me as much as it encourages me to learn about these
things.
And I wanted to go back to something you mentioned, Dr.
Tahan, about the people being the most important part of this
equation, and none of this technology works without people who
truly understand and know what's going on. And when I think
about the people in my community in Ohio's 13th District and
what do they actually know about quantum technology and how do
they get involved in quantum technology? And is it just
something that they've seen or heard the term on TV but it's
not for them?
So I would like you to dive a little bit more into what are
the opportunities that we can do to connect the dots to our
constituents and members of our community who are not familiar
with it and then start talking about the pipeline to get them
involved and employed in this.
Dr. Tahan. Yes, a pleasure to answer this question. It's
something I'm very passionate about, you know, just looking at
my career, how I got into science. And to me, it comes down to
there being careers, you know, for parents that want their kids
to go into and then educating, inspiring, and giving
experiences to people, you know? So what we have done is try to
use the White House to amplify the great efforts that are
already going on in NQI. World Quantum Day, we've tried to make
into big events where we have, you know, famous people,
frankly, give videos about quantum. We've--with Emily's and
other people's help, we brought quantum modules into hundreds
of schools across the country to--and that's 100 schools times,
you know, 30 students, you know, so we're giving people a taste
of like, this is really cool. It's a great career. Many people
can be successful in it, and now it's our job to even--how do
we scale that even more? And that's really what we're talking
about, having a center, having, you know, more coordinated
activities to really bring this into living rooms and not just,
you know, The New York Times op-eds. It's--that's what we
really need to do.
Mrs. Sykes. Well, thank you for that, and I also
appreciated your comment about moving this beyond the top 25
schools within the country and allowing other universities. And
I believe that was you, Dr. Edwards, who has a degree from
Appalachian State. And, again, thinking about how do we get
people who are a part of tech schools, trade schools, State
schools involved in this and not feeling like they just have to
be Ivy Leaguers to be a part of this conversation. And in
reading your testimony about your K through 12 curriculum and
encouraging more people, if you could share a little bit more
about the work that you have been doing and that you can
continue to do with the right support from people like us.
Dr. Edwards. Thank you for that question. So I would like
to say that--acknowledge that the work that I've been doing is
a work of an incredible group of people, and that really I'm
just providing a conduit to share what's going on. And so what
we've been doing--and my colleagues at University of Chicago
and University of Pittsburgh have worked very hard to pull
together teachers to build a quantum information science
framework for introducing quantum into high school chemistry,
high school physics, computer science, math, as well as middle
school. There's also a public elementary school in Philadelphia
that we've talked to that--we don't have anything for--formally
for elementary school outside of the activities that Dr. Tahan
mentioned, but there's a school there that's actually
experimenting with having a science lab focused on quantum in
the elementary school that students have exposure to.
And so the framework that we're developing is agile, and
the next step is curriculum. So what needs to happen is a
center to build on the steps that we've taken so far. There
needs to be a national resource to develop curriculum, to
develop--to connect these different parts of the pipeline, to
work and buildupon the data collection that the QEDC has
supported, and to really buildup robust programs and make sure
that they are effective and, again, address these information
deserts that exist widely across our country. And so we've been
working on it, but it's--we need a center or something to build
on this partnership, the Q-12 that's currently voluntary and
supported with limited funds from NSF for a short period of
time.
Mrs. Sykes. Thank you so much for that. And with my
remaining time, I'll just express one part that I just don't
hear often in here and would like to hear more of is the fact
that representation does matter. The fact that we have three
women here on the panel is incredible. It would be great to see
more people of color as we're trying to find the missing
million technology workforce that is not here, and if you can
see it, you can be it and you can believe it.
And as I sit across from Eddie Bernice Johnson, it is a
reminder to me that seeing someone on the wall that looks like
you allows you to see yourself in these positions. So thank you
for all that you're doing and continue to be good
representations of what it means to be a woman in STEM.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Collins [presiding]. Thank you, Mrs. Sykes. The
gentlelady's time has expired. The Chair now recognizes Dr.
McCormick from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So what an esteemed
presentation today, so many educated people. I'm really
excited. One thing that caught my--I had a bunch of questions
asked from a bunch of people, but right off the bat, I wanted
to address Dr. Merzbacher. Am I'm saying that correctly? You
said something very interesting during your presentation. You
said that we're not getting the same investment from the
private side of the world that we used to have and that that's
kind of tapered off, and that's why it requires more government
investing to continue the leaps, if you will, in technology in
this. Can you tell me why you think it is that investing in
quantum technology is decreasing?
Dr. Merzbacher. Well, it actually isn't decreasing, but the
growth has slowed, important difference. So when you look at
the growth, it's not as fast as it was, and that could be for a
number of reasons. It could just be that there was sort of an
initial spike and things have sort of tapered off a little bit,
but there's still a strong investment taking place. You know,
look at the tech economy. It's an economic situation that may
be influencing or impacting this. That could be temporary.
I think there's high risk, and there's a lot of hardware
problems that we heard about today, and those are not the
typical VC (venture capital) investment opportunity. And so
these are all reasons why I think that there really are areas
where government has the opportunity to step in, de-risk, bring
things a little bit farther along, and then the private sector
will come in when they see a business case, but they have to
see that business case.
And I will just point out that we haven't said the word
supply chain yet here, but there is a supply chain that's
critical and has some special components for quantum systems,
and those companies are sort of looking around and they don't
see the markets today, so there's a chicken-and-egg problem. So
whether they're using their own R&D funds or looking for
investors from outside, that chicken-and-egg market problem is
where we are right now.
Mr. McCormick. That's what kind of concerned me a little
bit just from the standpoint--I--that surprised me when you
said that concerning what's going on with AI and the private
investment in AI. You're right, once the seeding money is there
and we see it start to bloom, it's very unusual to see somebody
stop with the investment from the private sector if they see
something that's really forward-looking and visionary. So I
just thought that was interesting. I'm not sure we want the
government to continue after the seeding money. I like to see
the free market just kind of go with whatever it's supposed to
go with, so I'm--thank you for that remark.
Dr. Rieffel, I wanted to really quickly--I just went to SAS
in Luxembourg and was looking at all the different orbital
systems and stuff like that. I know that one of the things that
we talked about recently was that the NASA Ames quantum
computing and the way it tracks orbits and space debris and
everything else like that. What is this technology going to be
used to take that next step in this huge, vast universe of
debris and satellites and everything else like that and the
way--is it going to have a direct application in tracking this
immense population in the inner and outer space?
Dr. Rieffel. We believe so. The extent of that is still a
research question, but there's quantum sensing technologies
that can help with that. The other thing is that there are huge
computational challenges there. We also need to get the data
back. There's more and more data, which is super exciting, but
we need to get that back, and so doing data compression and the
like can be super helpful there as well. Lots of possibilities
here for quantum computation in those areas.
As was mentioned before, this is a heuristic area for the
next few years, and that means we don't have pencil-and-paper
proofs yet, but the technology is just at the point where we
can do things on the processors that we can't do in simulation,
and so the next 5, 10 years are going to be super exciting on
that.
Mr. McCormick. Yes. It's crazy to think about how complex
the calculations get when you're in a 3-D universe and you're
talking about the vast space that we have to compute as far as
deconflicting.
My final question, Under Secretary Dabbar, how do you think
the regulatory burden is going to affect both the development
and the--with the guardrails on future technologies in the
quantum space as far as where do we draw the line, you know,
controlling the process of leaking out information that can be
harmful or developing processes that can be harmful versus
developing stuff that can protect us? How do we regulate as
Congressmen and women what we're supposed to do in the future?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So I--as I mentioned earlier,
I'd recommend the DOE risk matrix for technologies as a
screening mechanism that not only DOE but other agencies could
use, that they can green light certain open-science topics, and
we're like, OK, but we're consciously knowing what's OK, and
then identifying what type of technologies should not be, you
know, engaged with adversary nations.
Mr. McCormick. We'll look for guidance on that. Thank you.
With that, I yield.
Mr. Collins. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Frost from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So even experts in quantum computing see their field as
mysterious, complex, and full of surprises, but one thing is
clear, that this is a powerful, revolutionary technology on a
historic scale. Dr. Rieffel, did I say that right--correctly?
Dr. Rieffel. Rieffel.
Mr. Frost. Rieffel. Thanks to NASA, industry, and research
being done at the University of Central Florida--Go Knights--
that is in Florida's 10th Congressional District, rockets are
sending science experiments into the skies above my district
all the time. You've discussed how NASA conducts research,
including basic quantum physics to understand how quantum
mechanics--to understand quantum mechanics and general
relativity. What are the unique benefits of the International
Space Station for quantum physics experiments?
Dr. Rieffel. So we're able to do things up there that are
unprecedented. Just as one example, it's the unique place where
we can get Bose-Einstein condensates and explore that. I also
just want to go with some of what you've said there. This is an
incredibly exciting area. It's also one that none of us totally
understand. I think critical for building up the workforce is
to have people be super excited about working in areas that
they don't totally understand and that those mysteries there
will really help us go further in that area. There are a lot of
NASA areas like do people really know what a black hole is? But
people are super excited about that. Let's do that for quantum
information sciences as well.
Mr. Frost. Dr. Dabbar, where would quantum computing
research be in the United States if Federal agencies and
funding had not provided the infrastructure that you've spoken
about today?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. High-performance computing
and quantum is a subset--quantum computing is a subset--would
not anywhere near be placing the United States in a leadership
position without Federal investment.
The first high-performance computers, the No. 1, you know,
next high-performance computer is always developed by the
Federal system, namely the DOE national labs. So the current
No. 1 is at Oak Ridge, the previous one is at Oak Ridge, the
next one will be in Illinois, and right now, you won't see
commercial customers paying for the very high-end next chip. It
will be--it has historically been the national labs, as well as
NSA. And so that's the only way that the next stage--and it's
been a tried-and-true method of accomplishing that.
Mr. Frost. And, Dr. Tahan, what would you say would happen
if these investments did not continue?
Dr. Tahan. If you look at the history of quantum computing,
you know, as the government's seed investments in building the
technologies that enabled the 100 qubit machines, the 100 qubit
machines we have today, right? Industry is mostly focused on
integrating what's been--already been discovered into trying to
make something useful that they can provide their customers
value with, right? So if we stopped government investment, all
the new inventions that would enable the 1,000 qubit, the
10,000 qubit systems would be much less likely to be
implemented. And as Paul said the draw of a customer would be
lost, an important customer. So, I mean, it's really critical
that the government stay engaged----
Mr. Frost. Yes.
Dr. Tahan [continuing]. And make sure that we're still
leaders.
Mr. Frost. Yes, I mean, it's good to know that Federal
investments can really serve as a broader investment to attract
private funding and spur innovation in the country.
And to any one of our witnesses, I wanted to give anybody
the opportunity to bring up any suggested improvements in the
National Quantum Initiative Act that hasn't been mentioned yet.
Dr. Tahan. I'd just like to mention, once again, you know,
we have international allies and partners that are vital to
growing this ecosystem. Quantum is extremely broad. We can't
investigate every part of phase space, and we also need a
trusted supply chain with countries who we trust, right? So we
need to follow up on international cooperation statements by
having some kind of joint funds to push this forward,
independent of everything else we're doing in the United
States. I think that would be really beneficial.
Mr. Dabbar. Just to highlight that, authorization from the
act to allow for what Charlie just said, to allow the agencies
to know that that you say it's OK I think is key. DOE centers
that happened in the first NQI we have--at Fermilab we have
Italian cooperation. And what was just announced at University
of Chicago in terms of the big quantum computing effort, Japan
is now the--really the second most powerful high-performance
computing country in the world is a part of that consortium. So
I think any authorizing language would--makes it really clear.
The agencies know they have authority to do what Charlie just
said would be a great line item in a bill.
Mr. Frost. Good. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Mr. Collins. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
now recognizes Mr. Kean from New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all of
our witnesses for being here today.
Dr. Merzbacher, in your testimony, you highlight several
key areas to explore utilizing quantum solutions to solve some
of our greatest challenges. I'm particularly interested in
hearing more about the possibility to improve
biopharmaceuticals, particularly when it comes to drug
discovery and personalized medicine. Could you please elaborate
on how quantum computing and modeling may help advancements in
this field?
Dr. Merzbacher. Yes, thanks for that question. The
application to the pharmaceutical industry is one of the areas
of high interest on the industry side, and I think it will
leverage some of the benefits of quantum computing for being
able to optimize and, you know, streamline search problems.
Today, the way that drug discovery happens is there's a huge,
wide net cast, and then there's a very expensive and long
process to winnow that down to find, you know, one drug maybe.
So there's a lot of opportunity to improve that process to make
it more efficient and take less time.
The pharmaceutical companies are hiring people who have
enough knowledge about this field to start exploring the
application of quantum computing in their business. There's
actually a consortium that my group works with that's focused
on life sciences, and all of the big pharma companies are
there, and they're actually talking quite a lot about what
they're doing because it's still early stage. But I think there
are real opportunities, and that's an example of one where the
communities can come together and educate each other. The
pharmaceutical industry needs to say here's what our problems
are, the kinds of challenges we have, and then the folks who
are doing the development of the software and the hardware can
more quickly develop the tools for addressing that.
Mr. Kean. Thank you. Dr. Tahan, telecommunications is key
to our society, and having a strong and resilient telecom
infrastructure is critical. From broadband to 5G rollout,
optimization after emergencies, and keeping our systems up and
running, telecommunications sector faces a wide variety of
challenges that could benefit from quantum technologies. In
fact, the Presidential Advisory Committee on Communications
recommend a Quantum Sandbox program for developing applications
that could benefit communications resilience in a report
released on May 2021. Applications are already being developed
in Europe but not yet in the United States. Can you please tell
this Committee how U.S. Government will engage with the quantum
industry and research community to help utilize today's
technology for telecommunications, both quantum computing, as
well as quantum communications?
Dr. Tahan. Yes, I'd be happy to, Congressman. I think
there's two ways. One, as the country moves to upgrade all our
networks to quantum-resistant cryptography, there's a huge
opportunity for industry because, one, agencies, organizations,
companies are going to need help understanding where--what
parts of their telecommunications infrastructure needs to be
upgraded. Then, they will need the new routers, the new
software to actually upgrade them. I mean, this is going to be
a very large, long-term upgrade cycle. It's a great opportunity
for industry.
The second part is, as we hopefully through the NQI start
to build quantum network testbeds to prove out and find the
applications for new types of networks that involve quantum
mechanics, you know, hopefully, there will be opportunities to
build the core components that go into those networks and make
them actually reliable and robust. And I think there's going to
be a lot of spinoff applications for other parts of
telecommunications as well, low swap, frequency modulation, and
so on, they can impact even classical technology. So I think
those are the two domains where there's real opportunity.
Mr. Kean. OK. And my last question, Princeton, while it's
not in my district, is near my district, leads one of the five
DOE quantum centers, and the university is leading in this
field. Princeton's work to expand the quantum information
science ecosystem includes participation in an annual quantum
career fair, quantum summer schools, internships, training for
young researchers, and a unique summer research program in
collaboration with IBM.
I guess this is a question for Mr. Dabbar and Dr.
Merzbacher. What recommendations will you have for these
facilities and universities to build out their workforce? How
would you recommend that we engage with physics and engineering
departments, as well as with computer science and algorithm
development disciplines to build out this critical workforce?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman, I think, you know, one of the
things that can be done is actually start taking a look at
specific technologies and applications that are attributable to
different departments at universities and try to drive those
with the experts of those universities in terms of developing
them. I'll give you an example. There's a workshop being
prepared right now on energy deployment for quantum computation
and systems. So taking for Princeton plasmas for fusion, taking
a look at modeling for that is going to be one of the breakout
workout sessions on energy and discovery for quantum, and
that's a direct example for Princeton.
Mr. Collins. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Kean. Yes, thank you. I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Collins. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Bonamici from
Oregon for 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. Thank you all for your testimony
and your expertise. There's a tremendous promise and potential
with quantum technology, so thank you for being here.
I was an enthusiastic co-sponsor of the original National
Quantum Initiative Act, and I'm--I want to note that I'm very
proud that Dr. Michael Raymer, who is from--a physics professor
from my alma mater, University of Oregon, played a role in
shaping the initiative, and the University of Oregon has
continued, of course, to lead on the Pacific Northwest on this
issue. So also an enthusiastic supporter of the CHIPS and
Science Act, which, as you know, really is building on quantum
technologies.
So Dr. Rieffel, I really appreciated your excitement when
you talked about how you don't all understand everything, and
we want people--the word that came to me was curiosity. We want
people who are intellectually curious, I think, to get those
people and get them into the field. But I want to ask you, you
underscored the potential for quantum sensing tools, including
gravitational mapping and laser cooled atoms to radically
improve the precision of Earth measurements. I work a lot on
climate issues, and I wonder at what scale do these
technologies need to be deployed to effectively measure trends
like sea level change, dwindling freshwater resources, for
example? And how can these technologies improve climate
modeling as we rapidly approach the global temperature rise of
1.5 degrees Celsius?
Dr. Rieffel. We would like to see these widely deployed. As
I mentioned, this gives much higher resolution, which enables
us to understand these issues much better, and this affects all
aspects of Earth science and potentially beyond. And I'll also
just mention that curiosity is a wonderful NASA word, and I
think for young folks and older folks being able to address
challenges while helping us investigate our curiosity will help
bring the workforce to us. And it doesn't have to just be young
folks. It can be--a bunch of us had careers in something else
because quantum information science didn't exist----
Ms. Bonamici. Didn't exist, right.
Dr. Rieffel [continuing]. And so people should remember
that they can come join this effort from their different
expertise, including in areas that you mentioned.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. And as a Member of the
Education and Workforce Committee, I'm always thinking about,
you know, the students who are in school today, the jobs that
will be available when they're in the workforce might not exist
today at all, so we have to spark that curiosity.
So I'm going to address this to Dr. Edwards, but others can
weigh in. I'm looking at policies, you know, of course,
focusing on research and development, promoting public-private
partnerships with--Representative Obernolte brought up, but
also that workforce issue. So I want to hear about how we can
encourage collaborations among private sector, industry,
government, academia.
But also, I want to follow up on the question that was
asked about building the workforce and the diversity of the
workforce. We have a lot of conversations about the importance
of a diverse workforce and talent line when it comes to AI, for
example. Why is that also important in quantum, and how can we
spark that curiosity? I'll start with Dr. Edwards, and others
can weigh in.
Dr. Edwards. Thank you, Congresswoman, for this question.
So, you know, quantum information science is so cross-
disciplinary, and there's a lack, as you recognize, of
diversity across any measure of diversity in the fields that
contribute, computer science, chemistry, physics, math,
electrical engineering, material science, you name it. There is
a persistent lack of diversity, which means we are leaving
something on the table in terms of the American workforce.
We--quantum information science is exciting, it sparks
curiosity, and offers us perhaps a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to try to begin--start at the beginning of a field
to bake in opportunities and build out infrastructure in
deserts across the country that don't have necessarily access,
and to really try to move the needle because when we look
historically--if we ignore this until there is application in
jobs, then the quantum workforce will look exactly the same as
it does today, and we will be sitting here in 10, 20 years from
now, and if I have the privilege, I'll be saying the same
thing, and we'll be having the same conversation.
Ms. Bonamici. We hope we've invested. So one of the
articles I was reading talked about the importance of
interdisciplinary education, and I think you touched on that.
And my time is about to expire. Does anybody want to briefly
mention the importance of the public-private partnerships?
Dr. Merzbacher. Well, I run one, so I totally want to foot
stomp on that idea. I come from a background--my previous job
was in the semiconductor space where I saw the magic that
happened when industry and academia work together and the
students had exposure while they were a student in industry,
jobs, and experience. Mostly when you're at a university,
you're seeing the university world, and if you can get industry
engaged with the academic enterprise, you get those students
seeing life outside of that bubble, and it's hugely valuable
for the students during their education, so I can----
Ms. Bonamici. Absolutely.
Dr. Merzbacher. Yes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Issa [presiding]. And I thank the gentlelady for her
clever asking of the question with zero time remaining. That is
a skilled professional.
We go to the gentleman now from Illinois.
Mr. Casten. I'm going to sit here and let the clock run out
until I get to zero and then ask my question.
Mr. Issa. You may not be as lucky.
Mr. Casten. Thank you all so much. The--Dr. Edwards, you
had mentioned a little while ago about this question of how to
get sort of high coherence qubits. And the--that facility you
mentioned, Fermilab is just at the edge of my district, and
those materials that come from foreign countries, I'll come in
there and I--it is, of course, true that we want to make sure
that we preserve IP in the United States. I also think it's
important to remind ourselves periodically that we have these
amazing national labs that attract people from all over the
world. And I would say it's actually a blessing that we have
those international components there because those people who
know how to make those things have no ways to deploy them but
at our national labs.
Mr. Dabbar, you and I were 4 years ago I think at the
groundbreaking for the Integrated Engineering Research Center
at Fermi, which is--I was just there a couple of weeks ago for
the ribbon cutting. I would say that they have completed the
project as you and I intended when we dug those ceremonial
first shovels. But that's a very intentionally international
space, and so just let's not lose sight of that.
I want to stay on the high coherence, and you had raised
the issue, but you--I think you had mentioned that Dr. Tahan
was the one with the expertise, so I'll turn to you for a
moment. Can you give us a little understanding? Because every
time I go to visit the folks at Fermi, there's this question
about how long can we hold these qubits in a predictable way,
and what's the progress? And could you give us just a little
understanding of what--both what the progress has been in
creating coherent qubits and what's sort of the benchmark we
should be watching that says, yes, once you can hold it for
this amount of time, now we've really unlocked quantum
computation in a reliable way?
Dr. Tahan. I can try. Thanks for the question. I was
actually just at Fermilab earlier this year. It's a really
great team working on there just along these lines. If I try to
simplify it in terms of the history, 20 years ago when I
started, the field started. Coherence time of some--one of the
best qubits was a nanosecond. OK. Now, people at Fermilab,
others, are making 100 mils0 microsecond, even a millisecond,
you know, so we're talking about many orders of magnitude
improvement.
Where do we need to get to, right? That is a little bit of
a more--so we're seeing dramatic improvement every year, right?
It's a little bit more difficult question to say where we need
to get to because it's a holistic problem. Like when you're
trying to build a quantum computer, it's not just one number
that you're trying to optimize. It's a how hard is it to
measure these qubits? How hard is it to control them? How fast
can you do it? Because if you can do it faster, it matters less
how long they live, how much--or how good is your error
correction?
But nominally speaking, we're approaching the time where
you can start to devise systems that can--you can imagine one
day could do something useful. I think this sort of millisecond
timeframe is probably good enough to do errors--error
correction and build a big system, a lot of qubits to run the
algorithms that we've costed very well. The better we can make
it, the easier--the better we can make the coherence, the
easier, the smaller the system will be. So that's why you can't
stop, right? You need to keep working on the disruptive new
ideas because if you can make these 10, 100 times better, then
suddenly everything becomes much more feasible and much less
engineering problems need to be solved. I hope that's useful.
Mr. Casten. Yes, and I guess what I always struggle with
when I go to Fermi is, No. 1, they're way smarter than me.
That's a challenge. But No. 2, there's these sort of
fundamental basic material science questions of how do you
create surfaces with the appropriate atomic purity to keep
these things going? And how much should we understand this as
a--as still a basic science challenge versus engineering?
Because, I mean, scale up to me is an engineering challenge.
Every time I go visit the lab, it seems like they're doing
basic science. And I don't say that judgmentally. I'm just----
Dr. Tahan. Yes, the way the way to think about it is--I
mentioned coherence time is milliseconds, but if we talk about
fidelity, like 99 times out of 100 the thing works or 99.9. We
talk about the 9s a lot. We need three 9s fidelity, four 9s
fidelity. Each extra 9 requires solving a whole bunch of
material science and physics problems, so we can--and then you
take the engineering that put them together to make a computer.
So there's always going to be in quantum computing scientific
and real science problems to solve all the way toward what--
till when we have a quantum computer, we just have to embrace
that, just like in the transistor industry. Every new type of
transistor needs--you know, thousands of people are working on
material science problems to get that next generation.
Mr. Casten. So I have 3 seconds, and I want to respect the
Chair and not do what he just criticized, but, Mr. Dabbar, I'd
love to follow up with you afterwards in writing. You and I
talked 4 years ago about sort of pacing out these quantum
networks and what that would take, and I would love some update
from you. Maybe we can follow up offline about what it's going
to take to start building those out because it still seems
revolutionary, and it still seems like tomorrow.
Mr. Dabbar. I'm glad to, Congressman. Illinois and Chicago
area has made dramatic progress since NQI was passed 5 years
ago. It's hard to describe it even in 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. I'll take that offline. Thank you, yield back.
Mr. Issa. And now, the lesser questions will come from me.
I don't have a university in Illinois, but I do have the
University of California, San Diego, and we're proud of the
work we do. Some of my questions, though, I think are going to
be monetary. Mr. Secretary, I'll start with you, and I want to
give everyone a chance. We talk a lot about diversity, we talk
about spreading out, but then we also talk about the cost of
this rollout. Now, we're rolling out something that, quite
frankly--you said it very well. It's a mixture between lab and
production. The Manhattan Project wasn't done in every
university in the country for a reason, not just the
sensitivity of the material, but the need to concentrate the
brain trust in that work. How can we see the--when we're
competing against China with over $15 billion of direct support
and they clearly concentrate--even India concentrates among
relatively few universities the best and the brightest--from a
standpoint of the move forward? How can we balance that rather
than spreading out our money and make sure that we are
concentrating those fields of excellence? And then I have a
follow up.
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So I think the Federal system
does it well, and I think if we just kind of continue with
that. You have entities like NSF that are very good at single
researchers at a university doing a project, including in
quantum, and having a broad base, much which was discussed, and
then periodically, you have highly concentrated efforts because
you do want to have some highly concentrated efforts to build
something. So let me take southern California, Caltech, San
Diego, University of San Diego, JPL (Jet Propulsion
Laboratory), Santa Barbara, Google in Santa--also in Santa
Barbara, UC Santa Barbara, as well as Google Santa Barbara, are
at the precipice of building a quantum network. And they're--if
funding kind of fully comes through authorized underneath the
CHIPS Act, I think that the prospects of doing that is
relatively straightforward.
So I think there's a balance, right, between the different
sort of systems, individual principal investigators and let's
go build some systems. And I think in this area we're ready,
including southern California.
Mr. Issa. OK. And I saw a lot of head shaking, so usually,
it's a good sign.
Dr. Tahan. Yes, I agree. This has to be an ''and,'' not an
''or.'' You know, we cannot give up our scientific excellence
by expanding. We need to also expand. But I think in terms of
expanding across the country, we're really talking about not
these huge mega efforts actually to build and focus developed
systems integration, solve these system integration challenges,
but developing smaller systems that can be used to train up the
talent for those people that can contribute to those big
effects.
Mr. Issa. OK.
Dr. Tahan. [inaudible] work quite well.
Mr. Issa. Well, then perhaps you can be my visionary or
others on my follow up question. Going back generations of
computers, when I was in college, you know, we put paper into
NCR 500's. We--you know, we wrote our programs. We were
learning, but we were learning at a very rudimentary level. By
the time I was a lieutenant running a DEC facility, we were a
hub for all kinds of places because our processing capability
was available through those high speed 2400 baud super
dedicated lines of the day. But ultimately, it didn't matter
what the connection was. They had access to our large
capability that we had within a very expensive facility. That
hybrid system, which eventually became the internet where
universities had access to what was a military facility and
vice versa, we could reach out to them for development. How do
we take quantum, get the most bang for the buck by leveraging
what one might call hybrid, the existing technology, the
existing computers that can help reach those but not overburden
them or at least maximize the benefit?
Dr. Tahan. Yes, well, we are very fortunate in our field
that the internet already exists, that cloud computers already
exist.
Mr. Issa. I'd heard that.
Dr. Tahan. So people, you know, have been hooking up their
quantum computers to the internet providing access. And the
QUEST, you know, bill that was authorized in the Science Act
would expand that access to more subject matter experts who
actually are experts in chemistry materials. We need to bring
the domain experts to be able to use those machines across the
country.
Mr. Issa. And so----
Dr. Tahan. Anything we can do to do that would be better.
Mr. Issa. Yes, my follow up question for the record now
will be for each of you. If you could give the Committee,
myself as much of your vision of how we leverage these areas of
excellence, in other words, where we invest in research
facilities but where we invest in facilities that can be that
hub-and-spoke to the rest of the universities so that no young,
bright mind will be left without the ability to reach out
beyond? If you're sitting at Kent State University, you're
likely not to be the hub, but if you can have the spoke that
leads to that hub, wherever it is. So if you could give me your
vision because our investment might best be in making those
tentacles much better than they are today. I am concerned that
we all take credit for the internet, but the reality is, what
have we done to make it better at reaching out to this new
quantum world that we're going to be in? So if you would each
give that for the record, I would appreciate it.
And with that, I go to the gentlelady, Ms. McCollum from
Virginia.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon.
Recently, I was able to visit the Thomas Jefferson National
Accelerator Facility in Virginia, which, as you know, conducts
groundbreaking nuclear and particle physics research. Recently,
their engineers were able to use an innovative photon detection
system to solve challenges in quantum computing, quantum
sensing, and quantum cryptography, which is one example of the
potential for quantum information science to help us solve
previously unsolvable problems and better understand the
fundamental building blocks of matter. So I look forward to
hearing more from you today and in the future about how
Congress can support the advancement of quantum information
science on behalf of society.
But my first question is, you know, computational models
are essential to our understanding of the mechanisms driving
climate change and the impact of efforts to mitigate climate
change. These models are highly complex and computationally
demanding, making climate modeling an ideal application for
quantum computing. So, Dr. Rieffel, could you discuss how
Congress can support the development of quantum computing for
climate applications in potential--in a potential National
Quantum Initiative Act reauthorization?
Dr. Rieffel. Thank you. Yes, there are many computational
challenges in climate and Earth science generally, and quantum
computing has the potential to really affect how quickly we can
compute those things, reduce the energy with which we can
compute those things. We also have quantum sensing, which can
help us understand better ice, oceans, landmass, and changes.
So the applications in those areas are broad, and to tie in
with some of what we've talked about before, bringing in folks
who have expertise in those areas and tying them tightly with
the folks who have expertise in the quantum computing area and
really understanding what really specifically are the
computational challenges in your areas that will really make
the difference. And we're working on that at NASA, but I think
more broadly, having those computational challenges would be
great.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. The advances in quantum computing
put our traditional forms of encryption at risk so--with
serious national security implications. And my understanding is
that some agencies like NIST are already working to develop
secure post-quantum encryption techniques. So, Dr. Tahan, could
you speak to OSTP's work to address the national security risks
posed by quantum computing and what support you need from
Congress?
Dr. Tahan. Thank you, Congresswoman. I'll just start by
saying I went to William and Mary, and I know Jefferson Lab
quite well.
We've been doing a lot to support the transition to post-
quantum cryptography. Probably the most important thing that
has happened in that space in the last year is the President
signed a NASA security memorandum, NSM-10, on quantum
computing, which lays out clear objectives for the agencies to,
in a timely and equitable manner, move the whole Nation to
quantum cryptography. So it's going to be expensive to upgrade
all the routers, to understand what needs to be upgraded not
only in the Federal Government, but also in our small
businesses, in companies across--States across the country. To
do that, we need to know what we need to do. So first and
foremost, you know, this process included OMB (Office of
Management and Budget) and included the agencies like NIST, DOD
that that have significant equities to make that process. And
that's being run out of National Security Council, and we could
help facilitate interactions with them if you want to know
more.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you. And in the time left, providing
students with the hands-on quantum research experience is
expensive, and availability is limited at many institutions if
we just--as we've discussed, including many HBCUs (historically
Black colleges and universities) and minority-serving
institutions (MSIs). So, Dr. Edwards, how can we ensure that
all students interested in quantum-related fields have
opportunities to access experimental training, cutting-edge
facilities, and advanced instrumentation?
Dr. Edwards. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
You know, representation is so important, and participation in
this is critical toward closing wealth gaps in many cases,
particularly for students at underrepresented groups. I think
that I want to acknowledge the efforts of DOE RENEW (Reaching a
New Energy Sciences Workforce) program and NSF ExpandQISE
(Expanding Capacity in Quantum Information Science and
Engineering) as initially trying to address this at
universities and colleges. It's a complex problem that I'd be
happy to provide more in writing. But in short, I will say
that, right now, there are early stage activities and initial
stage modular curriculum, but we'll need to explore more models
out there to find successful ways, particularly because our
MSIs, HSIs (Hispanic-serving institutions), community colleges,
and--you know, are primarily undergraduate institutions that
have professors that are typically tasked with a lot of
teaching. And they play an outsized role and a lifeline to
their students. And by engaging them in this and providing
research funds, we want to make sure we don't risk taking them
away from their students and breaking that lifeline.
So I'd like to provide more in writing if that's OK on this
complex question and ideas on how the NQI Act can help move
this forward.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I yield back.
Mr. Baird [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back, and now
we go to New York with Representative Williams, please.
Mr. Williams. Thank----
Mr. Baird. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I bring you
greetings from my Air Force Research Lab in Rome, New York. In
our district, we're very proud of that. And Dr. Michael Hayduk
says hello to many of you that you've worked with in the past.
So, yes, I just want to talk about AFRL and the work that
the Air Force is doing, but I'll draw it to something I'd ask
for your insight into. AFRL is doing a lot of active R&D
programs in quantum information science and principally around
clocks, sensing, communications, and computing, much of what
has been discussed here today. This, you know, groundbreaking
research is to support the Air Force and the Space Force in
critical issues related to our national defense. And they also
have spent a lot of effort around private-public partnerships
around the end of our center and working together with academic
startups, as well as the Department of Defense. It's an
excellent model, and I'm interested to see particularly how we
can pull these things together.
As I think about the funding really for anything but
related to the government but specifically around quantum
science is there's public funding like we've discussed for the
Air Force or for basic research. There is public-private
partnerships. The NQI seems to be well-suited to that and
successful. And there's also, of course, a lot of private
funding that's taken place. I come out of the tech industry, so
I'm always interested in what's happening in Silicon Valley and
other areas in these fundamental areas.
But my question--and, Mr. Secretary, I'll focus in on you
just because you and I have spoken about this previously. You
know, how can DOD-funded efforts interact with NQIA, NIST, NSF,
you know, any of these kinds of funded ventures? How can they
interact? Is there things that we can do better?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. So I think, subject to your
Committee of jurisdiction and being able to put it into a bill,
I think being very explicit in a line item authorizing between
DOD and the--you know, the non-050, so to speak, agencies, the
non-DOD agencies and make it really explicit that they could
work together because sometimes Federal agencies are--get
worried, and sometimes staffers say that, you know, we're not
doing the right thing because it's not in the bill.
But I think if you explicitly do that, let me say one thing
about AFRL. AFRL is part of a group in New York. Upstate New
York is amazing on this topic. AFRL has been the leader, as you
said, on many aspects that you just mentioned, but they're part
of the group looking to make the bid for the CHIPS Act, DOE-run
New York quantum network. And so there is already cooperation
going on between AFRL and the nonmilitary side. And I think
making it clear that that's OK I think would be good.
Mr. Williams. Great. Anyone else want to add to that?
Dr. Tahan. I'll just say it was up at AFRL Rome last year.
It's an amazing place, and I think it's a really great model
for everything that we've been talking about today, research
security versus fundamental research, public research versus
private companies being involved. We welcome the DOD being, you
know, a more formal member in the NQI, including the centers.
The National Defense Authorization Acts of '20 and '21 and '22,
you know, designated--allowed DOD to designate some of those
centers as quantum information science centers, but anything
more you can do to make that more formal I think would be very
welcome.
Mr. Williams. Great. Well, thank you. I just want to point
out that Secretary Dabbar and I served on submarines
contemporarily, we did not overlap in our squadron but
appreciate your service. And it's not too many times we get
shipmates from submarines in the same place without throwing
things at each other. So anyway, I'm glad you're here, and I
yield back the remainder of my time. Thank you.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. And now we
go to Pennsylvania with Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all so much
for your time and your testimony today.
Quantum science conceptually is very difficult for anyone
to wrap their heads around, or maybe just me. I'll speak for
me, and, no less, our constituents. However, what I do
understand is that quantum technology has the potential to
vastly improve the quality of life of folks in my district and
across various fields. In my district, the Pittsburgh Quantum
Initiative combines expertise across Duquesne University, the
University of Pittsburgh, and Carnegie Mellon in developing new
materials, computational science, engineering, and physics to
advance quantum computing. Quantum computing R&D can and will
have a profound impact on industries such as finance and
logistics. Investing in quantum sensor R&D will support medical
imaging and drug discovery for my district's healthcare workers
and help bring cleaner air and water to the western
Pennsylvania region through precision environmental monitoring.
While this field is still looking toward the future, our
commitments to date supporting further research and development
of quantum technology will improve the stability, reliability
in quantum systems to make them more practical and commercially
viable for day-to-day applications.
So to anyone, we joked in my office that this hearing will
be a great way to talk about Marvel's Ant-Man movies and if
we're closer to making ant suits. We are admittedly a very Gen
Z and Millennial office. That would, of course, we think, be
true American leadership. Realistically, though, why is
American quantum leadership an issue that should capture the
minds of my constituents in western Pennsylvania, and what
makes something as complex as quantum important to everyday
American people?
Dr. Merzbacher. I'll just start by reminding all of us that
we have actually probably no idea of the big killer app that
this technology is going to make possible if you sort of think
back or try to put yourself in, you know, 50 years ago and
imagine the technology that we have. So the potential is there.
We can kind of imagine some of it, but it's really hard to
under--or overestimate how important it's going to be. We can
start where we are now, and there are even systems that can do
small problems that are useful. How it's going to play out
going forward is really hard to predict, but we can sort of
envision that it's going to solve these problems that are just
outside of where computers today can even touch. And so it's
exciting because it's enabling, and I think conveying that to
people--the problems that are likely to be solved near term or
maybe sort of business problems that are optimizing, you know,
financial portfolios or speeding up drug discovery, those are
really important, and I think people appreciate them, but
there's probably a huge universe of applications that we
don't----
Ms. Lee. We haven't even touched yet.
Dr. Merzbacher. Yes.
Ms. Lee. I understand. Mr. Dabbar, what role can we look to
see quantum research and technology play in mitigating the
multifaceted effects of climate change like air and water
pollution?
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congresswoman. So one of the interesting
pieces of technology I've seen about quantum sensing and about
the environment is that I know some people who are doing
quantum sensors to more accurately image cloud systems and
weather fronts as they're about to come through, and they could
very, very accurately figure out how much rain is about to hit.
And, as a result of that, they could figure out when to plant.
And there's places in Egypt and Indonesia and applicable in
America of knowing exactly when to plant more--like better, you
could increase your yields for your food. You're going to have
a better kind of impact by significant effects. And that's just
like one example of looking at the environment, better sensing,
and actually taking action as a result of that.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Is there an opportunity to leverage the
new TIP Directorate at NSF to build partnerships between
industry and academia for these various purposes?
Dr. Tahan. Absolutely. I mean, I think that's a tremendous
opportunity in the Science Act, and if it's properly funded,
they can really try to bring some of these science experiments
to actual useful society. I mean, that's really the goal of
that. So if we can make that happen, it would really be
transformative.
Ms. Lee. I thank you all so much for your time talking to
those of us who are not experts in this field and as we are
trying to figure out what our role is in support and supporting
this particular field. Thank you for your patience, and I'm
certain that we will continue all these conversations as we are
looking into these new fields of discovery and figuring out how
we can make life better for all of our constituents. Thank you,
and I yield back.
Mr. Baird. The gentlelady yields back, and you can relax,
witnesses. They tell me that I'm the last one to ask questions,
and they aren't really tough, so I think you'll be OK. Is that
true? Yes, OK.
Anyway, my--you know, I come from a district in
agriculture, west central Indiana, and so I'm very interested,
similar to some of the questions that she asked, but I'm really
interested in how well quantum computing deals with
agriculture. You know, we have planters today that are very
precision-oriented, put the seeds exactly where we want. We
have harvesters or combines that you go to the end of the
field, you hit an auto button, and it'll turn around and go
back. We have sprayers that can control--you know, you put on
less spray, you do it more efficiently. And we even got drones
that we can look over the fields with. We've got robots that we
can harvest strawberries and so on with.
My point is, can you explain to me, Mr. Dabbar--I am just
going to start with you--briefly how we're using these new
technologies in quantum that are working to help agriculture?
And you mentioned that a little bit ago, so----
Mr. Dabbar. Yes, Congressman. In addition to the water and
planting point, which I think can absolutely be implemented
with quantum sensing and understanding weather fronts coming
through, let me talk to you about fertilizer. So one other big
thing about high-performance computing is being able to design
from a chemistry point of view different products in a much
more tailored fashion, much more efficiently, producing it more
efficiently, less emissions, so designer--you know, designing
of different types of chemicals, and so in this case,
fertilizers is a big prospect. It has--high-performance
computers with current computing capacity has been very
valuable, but using computational chemistry to come up with
what's next at a much more powerful level, much more detailed
has a great prospect. And we're looking at having that
discussion at a workshop here in the fall.
Mr. Baird. You know, I want to emphasize what you just
mentioned, the ability--when we had the fertilizer shortage in
the last year or so, precision agriculture, and you mentioned
being able to--having the equipment and the technology, which
includes the computer capability, to know where to place--you
know, when you got soils information and you know what that
seed needs and so you can strategically place those nutrients,
and fertilizer is one of them.
So anyone else have a comment in that regard?
Dr. Edwards. Yes, I'd be happy to add--you know, underscore
some of those things and add a little more detail. You know,
I'm just over the border in Illinois, and--not too far.
Mr. Baird. I know where you're at.
Dr. Edwards. Not too far at all. There's a lot of farmland
there, too. And I think that, you know, in the near term
everything you just talked about, I bet, relies on some of the
advancements in GPS and sensing that are--either happened in
the latter part of the 20th century or are happening on the
ground now. And so I have no doubt that that kind of navigation
element will play a critical role. We're a ways off yet from
having--being able to address the fertilizer problem in terms
of the scale that we were talking about earlier, to go from 100
qubits to however many it's going to take. And so I think in
the near term, continuing investment in hybrid approaches to
both quantum computing but other architectures is critical to
see applications on the ground in ag tech and other areas that
are so critical toward that region of the country.
Dr. Rieffel. I'll also add that I believe a lot of the data
that you use in agriculture comes from NASA, and that while
we'll continue with conventional technologies, quantum sensing
and quantum computing can increase both the data rate and the
data processing in ways that we can't even imagine how that
will end up affecting things.
Dr. Merzbacher. And I'll just add from the industry
perspective that in order for these technologies to go from
being research projects to used in the field, there's a lot of
industry or private sector players in that chain, and so
companies like the big companies that are making the chemicals,
that are making the equipment, that are making the software
that's going to be run on the combines and drones and
everything else, they all need to understand this is coming,
and they need to be thinking about how to integrate it into
those products. And so the users, the--what I call the quantum
takers, not just the quantum makers, but the takers need to be
learning about this technology, too, so that they can put it in
the hands of the farmers at the end of the day.
Mr. Baird. Anyone else? I would just say I want to thank
the witnesses for being here. Your input is extremely important
to us to try to make decisions. And, you know, when you talk
about what we were talking in this Committee hearing, we're
really trying to feed the world, and we're all responsible for
trying to make those efforts.
And so I just want to thank all of you for being here, and
your testimony was extremely important to the Members of this
Committee. The record will remain open for 10 days for
additional comments and written questions from the Members.
And so this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:54 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by Dr. Charles Tahan
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by the Honorable Paul Dabbar
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Eleanor G. Rieffel
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Celia Merzbacher
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Responses by Dr. Emily Edwards
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Letter submitted by Representative Frank Lucas
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
