- AN UPDATE ON THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PRIORITIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN UPDATE ON THE DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PRIORITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

SEPTEMBER 14, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-23
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-341PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman
BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

September 14, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Jay Obernolte, Acting Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    10
Written Statement............................................    12

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    13
Written Statement............................................    14

Written statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    15

Witnesses:

The Honorable Jennifer Granholm, Secretary of Energy, U.S.
Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    19

Discussion.......................................................    28

Appendix I: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Jennifer Granholm, Secretary of Energy, U.S.
Department of Energy...........................................    88

Appendix II: Additional Material for the Record

Articles submitted by Representative Claudia Tenney, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Ethics--Impartiality in Performing Official Duties,''
Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer..................   130
``Ethics--Fourteen Principles of Ethical Conduct for Federal
Employees,'' Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer.....   132
``Biden Energy Secretary Granholm admits false testimony
about owning stocks,'' Thomas Catenacci, Fox News..........   135
``Energy Sec's Husband Held Stock in Ford as Admin Approved
Billions in Electric Vehicle Subsidies,'' Collin Anderson,
Free Beacon................................................   141
``Biden touts electric car company potentially worth millions
for his energy secretary,'' Kristen Holmes, CNN............   143
``U.S. Energy Secretary Granholm violated ethics law,
watchdog says,'' Kanishka Singh, Reuters...................   146

Letter submitted by Representative Andrea Salinas, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
To the Honorable John Barrasso, United States Senate, from
Teri L. Donaldson, Inspector General, Department of Energy,
Office of Inspector General................................   148

Report submitted by Representative Sean Casten, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives
``Global Fossil Fuel Subsidies Remain Large: An Update Based
on Country-Level Estimates,'' IMF Working Paper, David
Coady, Ian Parry, Nghia-Piotr Le, and Baoping Shang........   155

AN UPDATE ON THE DEPARTMENT
OF ENERGY'S SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY PRIORITIES

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 14, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jay Obernolte
presiding.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Obernolte. Good morning, everyone. The hour of 10 a.m.
having arrived, the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology
will now come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Committee at any time.
I'd like to welcome everyone to our hearing today entitled
``An Update on the Department of Energy's Science and
Technology Priorities.'' I will recognize first myself for five
minutes for an opening statement.
Before we convene the hearing, I would like to recognize
the absence of our friend and the Chairman of this Committee,
Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma. Recently, he endured an injury while
working on his farm. Frank is obviously a huge presence on
Capitol Hill, both personally and legislatively, and only Frank
could prove conclusively that a Member of Congress should not
tangle with 1,000 pound bull. I'd like to ask everyone to keep
him in your prayers and your thoughts and to wish him a speedy
recovery. I know that we will rest easier when he's back with
us here on the Committee.
Today, the Science, Technology Committee will examine the
U.S. Department of Energy's (DOE's) goals and priorities for
its civilian research, development, demonstration, and
commercial application programs. I would like to welcome the
Hon. Jennifer Granholm and thank her for her testimony this
morning. Secretary Granholm, since your last appearance before
this Committee, which I believe was in May of 2021, the DOE has
been substantially transformed. With the passage of the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act in 2021 and the
Inflation Reduction Act last year, the DOE received $100
billion in supplemental funding. These laws have created over
70 new programs and increased the DOE's Office of Loan Program
authority to $400 billion.
To administer these new programs, the DOE underwent a major
structural reorganization and expansion, creating a new Under
Secretary position, several new program offices, separating
energy demonstration projects from their core research and
development (R&D) activities, and the hiring of over 1,000 new
employees at DOE. In the light of these massive changes, which
the DOE was tasked with seemingly overnight by Congress, I,
along with many of my colleagues here on the dais, are
justified in having several serious concerns.
The DOE has been placing an unprecedented focus on its
applied programs, and I'm troubled by the comparative lack of
support for the Office of Science. The DOE Office of Science
and its National Laboratories play a critical role in
maintaining U.S. leadership in emerging technologies including
artificial intelligence (AI), quantum information sciences, and
fusion energy. Unlike applied research, which the private
sector provides abundant resources to fund, the Office of
Science conducts basic research, which the Federal Government
provides a primary role in supporting.
While the Office of Science accounts for nearly 20 percent
of DOE's annual funding, it unfortunately received less than
two percent of IIJA and IRA funds. And while its mission is
essential to DOE's overall mandate, the Department, through its
budget proposals, administrative actions, I believe continues
to demonstrate an indifference to this central responsibility,
so I hope to discuss that with you today.
This directly hampers our ability to innovate and compete
with our adversaries, especially the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP). Instead of doubling down on already funded applied
energy programs, I believe the DOE should rebalance its
portfolio by reprioritizing support for the Office of Science.
The DOE can accomplish this by fully implementing this Science
Committee's responsible and well-vetted authorization of this
office, which was included in the CHIPS and Science Act last
year.
Also, as the Chairman of the Investigations and Oversight
Subcommittee, I am deeply concerned about the Department's lack
of resources assigned to the Office of Inspector General (OIG).
It's troubling to me that among the hundreds of billions of
newly appropriated funds and loan authorities, less than 1/10
of one percent was allocated to the OIG to oversee this new
spending. This lack of oversight amplifies my concerns about
the DOE's ability to implement critical research and
development programs with the necessary safeguards to protect
taxpayer dollars.
Today, despite engagement with the DOE over many of these
concerns, I remain skeptical about the Department's ability to
smoothly oversee the distribution of over $100 billion, in
addition to its annual $45 billion budget with the necessary
guardrails in place. In fact, we have already experienced some
problems with how these funds are being disbursed. In the fall
of last year, the DOE selected a company with known links to
the Chinese Communist Party to receive $200 million in Federal
funding. After several congressional inquiries over this
alarming development, the DOE ended award negotiations with
this company. However, as of this morning, the DOE has refused
to provide us with its reasoning for terminating this
agreement. The Committee is waiting to receive a classified
briefing by the Department regarding this critical issue, and
our expectation is that we will receive more information on
this shortly.
In addition, over the past few months, Energy Subcommittee
Chairman Williams and I have submitted letters to the
Department requesting information on a disturbing trend of
conflict-of-interest violations. Most recently, our oversight
touched on your own practices, Madam Secretary. As public
servants, I believe it's critical that we hold ourselves to the
highest levels of integrity with the American people not only
in practice, but also in public perception. I hope that we have
an opportunity for a productive discussion on these issues this
morning.
This is an unprecedented time at the Department of Energy.
Americans deserve access to a secure, resilient, and affordable
energy network which permits competition and increases
reliability, instead of picking winners and losers in the
marketplace. But we must neither break the bank nor cut corners
to get this job done. And I know you share those sentiments.
I want to thank you for your willingness to participate in
our hearing today. I look forward to an update on your vision
for the DOE and how the Department intends to carry out
congressional direction in a way that maximizes the return on
investment for the U.S. taxpayer.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Obernolte follows:]

Good morning. Before we convene this hearing, I'd like to
first recognize the absence of my friend and the Chairman of
this Committee, Mr. Lucas of Oklahoma. Recently, he endured an
injury while working on his farm. Frank is a huge presence on
Capitol Hill both personally and legislatively, and I'd like to
ask everyone to keep him in your prayers and wish him a speedy
recovery.
Today, the House Science Committee will examine the U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE)'s goals and priorities for its
civilian research, development, demonstration, and commercial
application programs. I'd like to welcome the Honorable
Jennifer Granholm and thank her for her testimony this morning.
Secretary Granholm, since your last appearance before this
Committee in May of 2021, DOE has been substantially
transformed. With the passage of the Infrastructure,
Investment, & Jobs Act (I-I-J-A) in 2021 and the Inflation
Reduction Act (I-R-A) in 2022, the DOE received $100 billion in
supplemental funding. These laws created over 70 new programs
and increased the DOE's Office of Loan Program authority to
$400 billion.
To administer these new programs, the DOE underwent a major
structural reorganization and expansion: creating a new
Undersecretary position and several new program offices,
separating energy demonstration projects from their core
research and development activities and hiring over a thousand
new employees.
In the light of these massive changes, which the DOE was
tasked with seemingly overnight, I--along with many of my
colleagues--are justified in having several serious concerns.
The DOE has been placing an unprecedented focus on its
applied programs, and I am troubled by the comparative lack of
support for the Office of Science. The DOE Office of Science
and its national labs play a critical role in maintaining U.S.
leadership in emerging technologies, including artificial
intelligence, quantum information sciences, and fusion energy.
Unlike applied research, which the private sector provides
abundant resources to fund, the Office of Science conducts
basic research, which the federal government provides a primary
role in supporting.
While the Office of Science accounts for nearly 20% of
DOE's annual funding, it unfortunately received less than 2% of
IIJA and IRA funds. And while its mission is essential to DOE's
overall mandate, the Department, through its budget proposals
and administrative actions, continues to demonstrate an
indifference to this central responsibility.
This directly hampers our ability to innovate and compete
with our adversaries, especially the Chinese Communist Party.
Instead of doubling down on already-funded applied energy
programs, the DOE should rebalance its portfolio by
reprioritizing support for the Office of Science. The DOE can
accomplish this by fully implementing the Science Committee's
responsible and well-vetted authorization of this office, as
included in the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022.
As the Chairman of Investigations and Oversight
Subcommittee, I am also deeply concerned about the Department's
lack of resources assigned to the Office of the Inspector
General. It is troubling that among the hundreds of billions in
newly appropriated funds and loan authorities, less than 0.1%
was allocated to the OIG to oversee this new spending.
This lack of oversight amplifies my concerns about the
DOE's ability to implement critical R&D programs with the
necessary safeguards to protect taxpayer dollars. Today,
despite engagement with the DOE over many of these concerns, I
remain skeptical about the Department's ability to smoothly
oversee the distribution of $100 billion in addition to its
annual $45 billion budget with the necessary guardrails in
place.
We have already experienced problems with how these funds
are disbursed. For example, in the fall of last year, the DOE
selected a company with known links to the Chinese Communist
Party to receive $200 million in federal dollars. After several
congressional inquiries over this alarming development, DOE
ended the award negotiation process with this company. However,
as of this morning, DOE has refused to provide us with its
reasoning for terminating this agreement.
The Committee is waiting to receive a classified briefing
by the Department regarding this critical issue and our
expectation is that we receive more information shortly.
In addition, over the past few months Energy Subcommittee
Chairman Williams and I have submitted letters to the
Department requesting information on a disturbing trend of
conflict-of-interest violations. Most recently, our oversight
touched on your own practices, Madame Secretary. As public
servants, it is critical that we hold ourselves to the highest
levels of integrity with the American people not only in
practice, but also in public perception. I hope we have an
opportunity for a productive discussion on these issues this
morning.
This is an unprecedented time at the Department of Energy.
Americans deserve access to secure, resilient, and affordable
energy, which permits competition and increases reliability
instead of picking winners and losers. But we must neither
break the bank nor cut corners to get the job done.
Thank you for your willingness to participate in our
hearing today. I look forward to an update on your vision for
the DOE and how the Department intends to carry out
congressional direction in a way that maximizes the return on
investment for the U.S. taxpayer.

Mr. Obernolte. So with that, Madam Secretary, I will turn
it over to you. Thank you very much for attending the hearing.
Oh, I'm sorry. Oh, I'm sorry. You can tell I'm a rookie at
this. It is my honor to recommend our Ranking Member----
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. Lofgren for her opening
statement.
Ms. Lofgren. And I join you with well wishes for Chairman
Lucas. I've let him know that we stand ready to assist in any
way while he recovers.
And thank you, Secretary Granholm, for being here today.
As you know, this Committee has played a leading role in
shaping energy policy through the last Congresses, which
includes major contributions in CHIPS and Science, the IRA, and
Energy Act of 2020. As we focus on energy innovation, one of
the areas I'm particularly focused on is U.S. fusion research.
This is actually one of the reasons why I sought the Ranking
Member position of this Committee. I'm excited about the real
breakthroughs we've seen in fusion over the last two years,
ignition at the National Ignition Facility (NIF) late last
year, as well as even more progress in the last few months at
the NIF. And I'm also encouraged by rapid growth in the private
sector on fusion energy and the major technical achievements
they're now bringing forward.
I'm very happy that you and the President proposed funding
that matched what we have authorized for fusion research, a 32
percent increase, a vast improvement over every other prior
President, but there's a lot more to be done to keep the United
States in the lead and ahead of our competitors, including
communist China.
Unfortunately, I'm concerned that neither the House nor
Senate Appropriations marks are where we need to be at this
point. I'm disappointed that the top-line levels that they have
proposed for fusion research is low, but the details also
matter. The most recent long-range plan produced by the Fusion
Energy Science Advisory Committee recommended substantial
increases in support for materials and fusion nuclear science
R&D and for public-private partnerships. Under any fusion
budget scenario, this would include flat or modest growth
scenarios that would be consistent with the total funding
that's currently be being proposed by both bodies. Now the
President's budget request followed these recommendations, but
our marks do not.
However, we need to take a look at how we can rescue that.
You know, we're getting reports daily about the increasing
deterioration of the conditions of our planet. Just today, an
article in Scientific American noted that there are sectors of
our planet that are in such dire health that we're on a plane
to not have a planet that is habitable by humankind. If you
take a look at what is on the horizon to rescue our planet, the
most promising is fusion energy and its capacity to play an
important role in decarbonizing the environment through direct
carbon capture, as well as carbon in the ocean, which is one of
the reasons why I am so, so focused on the need to do what's
right on the fusion research program at this time. We are at a
turning point. And when you take a look at the stakes and the
amount of resources that we are not allocating, it really is
impossible to defend.
So I'm hoping, Madam Secretary, that you will be able to
address this issue in your remarks today, and afterwards--
obviously, you are not responsible for what the House and
Senate does in appropriations. You made the appropriate
request. But if we fail, I will look to you to reallocate
resources because if we fail at this critical time to put
resources into the material science provisions, we will be
letting down our country and the world. The private sector
companies who are doing a lot, they don't have the capacity to
do this research, and only we can fund it for the various
science entities that have that capacity.
So that is the major concern that I have at this hearing. I
look forward to hearing from you. And as you know, the fusion
program has received bipartisan support in this House and in
the Senate. It's got bicameral support. And I do think that we
are almost at an emergency time for this program, so please
help me understand what we can do as an Administration if we're
unable to correct the deficit and the defects that have been
already engaged in in the appropriations process.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for this hearing,
and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning and thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
very important hearing today. And thank you to Secretary
Granholm for being here. As you know, the Science, Space,
andTechnology Committee has played a leading role in shaping
our nation's energy policy through the last several Congresses.
This includes major contributions to the CHIPS and Science Act,
the Inflation Reduction Act, and the Energy Act of 2020--which
guided much of funding included in the Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act.
As we focus on the implementation of the energy innovation
provisions in each of these landmark bills, an area that I am
particularly focused on is fusion energy, as the Members of
this Committee and the Secretary know well by now. The need to
significantly improve support for our U.S. fusion research
enterprise is actually one of the major reasons that I first
ran for Congress in 1994, and one of the top reasons that I
decided to seek the Ranking Member position of this Committee
after Chairwoman Johnson retired last year. This support is now
strongly bipartisan, and it is also bicameral.
I am excited about the real breakthroughs we've seen in
fusion over the last 2 years alone, including the monumental
achievement of ignition at the National Ignition Facility late
last year- which was followed by even more progress from NIF in
the last few months. I'm also encouraged by the rapid growth we
are now seeing in the private sector for fusion, and the major
technical achievements that they are now bringing to our
overall national effort.
And I am especially encouraged that Secretary Granholm and
President Biden recognized this progress in their Budget
Request for 2024, which includes over $1 billion for the
Department of Energy's fusion energy research program, a 32%
increase. Thank you, Madam Secretary. This proposal for fusion
is a vast improvement over any previous budget request that I
can recall in my time in Congress.
All that said, let us be clear. There is still a lot more
work to do. This Committee has built a solid legislative
framework that would ensure that the U.S. is the world leader
in this potentially transformational emerging industry through
the bipartisan laws that I mentioned. And this Administration
is now clearly ready to follow through on this direction. But
if we don't translate this sizeable leap in support into actual
appropriated funds this year, then our nation will have missed
a major opportunity to meet this pivotal moment. And given the
growing global competition that we're now seeing in the race to
commercial fusion, I believe that we would all deeply regret
that.
Unfortunately, neither the House nor the Senate
Appropriations marks are currently where we need them to be to
get this right. I am certainly disappointed with the topline
levels they have proposed for fusion research, but the details
matter quite a bit as well. Of particular note, the most recent
Long Range Plan produced by the Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory
Committee recommended substantially increasing support for
materials and fusion nuclear science R&D and for public-private
partnerships under all fusion budget scenarios. This would
include the flat and modest growth scenarios that would be
consistent with the total funding currently proposed by the
House and Senate Appropriations Committees for fusion. The
Department's Budget Request closely followed these
recommendations, proposing a well-justified increase in support
for materials and fusion nuclear science R&D to $147.5 million
in FY 2024, and an increase for DOE's milestone-based public
private partnership program to $130 million.
However, the current House and Senate Appropriations marks
both fall well short of those goals. So, unfortunately, our
Congressional budget process right now is not recognizing the
guidance provided by the fusion community, the Department of
Energy, or by Congress itself in recent bipartisan, landmark
legislation. At this critical juncture for the budding U.S.
fusion industry, we need to make sure we are prioritizing our
Federal investments to best ensure success.
That said, we still have a long way to go before a final
budget gets to the President's desk, and this is no time to
give up.
So I am doing everything in my power to make sure that
going forward, our annual federal funding reflects this immense
progress and the promise of fusion energy, and I invite
everyone here to join me in this effort.
Thank you and I yield back.

Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Although I can't be there in person today, I'd like to
thank Secretary Granholm for joining us to discuss the
important work being done at the Department of Energy to
advance American science and next generation energy
technologies.
As the nation's largest federal supporter of research in
the physical sciences, the Department of Energy plays a vital
role in driving scientific discovery, advancing emerging
technologies, improving domestic energy production, and
supporting American competitiveness.
Today, DOE's work has never been more important. The United
States faces a growing threat from the Chinese Communist Party,
which is working to overtake us as the global leader in science
and technology.
It's critical that as we work to combat this threat, we are
investing our federal research dollars wisely and protecting
them from misappropriation.
Over the past year, much of this Committee's oversight work
has been focused on doing just that. While the Department has
worked with us on some of these oversight inquiries, we're
still waiting on a lot of answers.
My hope is that today's hearing will give us some of the
information we need to ensure we're protecting taxpayer
dollars.
These aren't small sums at stake. Through the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) and the Inflation
Reduction Act (IRA), the Department received $100 billion in
additional funds outside of the regular appropriations process,
as well as an expansion of its loan authorities to $400
billion.
That's an astonishing amount of money, and I think we can
all appreciate how challenging it is to ensure that the
Department is scaling up efficiently and disbursing these funds
appropriately.
Unfortunately, we've already seen some evidence of problems
with DOE's process.
One issue we worked on extensively this year is probing the
Department's decision to award $200 million to Microvast, a
company with known ties to the Chinese Communist Party.
While the Department ultimately decided to end contract
negotiations with this company, DOE's vetting process has been
opaque and confusing from the start, and we still lack clarity
on why the Department pulled this funding. I'm concerned by the
possibility that a vetting process is being built as we go
along. That's no way to handle taxpayer dollars.
This incident is deeply alarming and raises questions of
broader research security issues across the Department. We need
to know whether DOE has thorough guardrails in place to ensure
that its grants aren't unintentionally funneling money to our
adversaries.
What's worse, the DOE's Office of the Inspector General,
tasked with overseeing DOE's work and the tens of billions in
new IIJA and IRA activities, has received almost no additional
funds to do so.
I'm very concerned about this imbalance of resources,
especially given the Department's track record.
In addition to these issues with how the Department is
scaling up and disbursing these funds, I'm also concerned that
the Department's primary focus on its applied research programs
is eroding support for its Office of Science and the critical
basic research being done there.
Applied research and development programs are designed to
advance specific technologies, many of which can be funded by
industry, which has an incentive to do so.
On the other hand, the basic research done through the
Office of Science and our national labs is responsible for
breakthroughs that can only be supported by government
resources, facilities, and coordination.
The milestone achievement of fusion ignition at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory was made possible through the
Office of Science.
Advances in exascale computing, quantum information
sciences, and the energy technologies of the future are all
supported by DOE's work on basic and fundamental research.
This work--which supports innovation at a wide range of
Federal agencies like NSF, NASA, NOAA, and the USDA, is
essential to the competitiveness of U.S. research enterprise.
So it's troubling that the Department hasn't been focusing
on this work. While the Office of Science accounts for nearly
20% of DOE's annual funding profile, it received less than 2%
of DOE's IIJA and IRA funding.
The President's budget request only exacerbates that
disparity, and the Department's halfhearted approach to filling
senior vacancies in the Office of Science further demonstrates
the low priority being given to this work.
Congress, through the CHIPS and Science Act, made historic
authorizations for DOE's Office of Science, providing a
detailed roadmap for how the Department can prioritize cutting-
edge R&D. I'd like to see DOE do more to focus on this critical
work.
Those are just a handful of the wide range of topics I
expect this hearing to cover today, and I look forward to
hearing your testimony, Madame Secretary, and getting your
responses to these key issues.
Thank you for your time.

Mr. Obernolte. Ladies and gentlemen, our witness today is
Secretary Jennifer Granholm, the 16th Secretary of the United
States Department of Energy. Secretary Granholm, you are now
recognized for five minutes to present your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE JENNIFER GRANHOLM,
SECRETARY OF ENERGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Secretary Granholm. Great. Thank you so much, Chairman
Obernolte and Ranking Member Lofgren and Members of the
Committee. I'm honored to be here with you today to discuss the
Department of Energy's science and innovation priorities.
Over the last 2 1/2 years, it's been my great privilege to
be able to lead this agency, which I fondly refer to as
America's solutions department. From unlocking the secrets of
our universe to developing innovative tools and algorithms to
building cutting-edge technologies, groundbreaking scientific
solutions are at the core of DOE's DNA. This work is critical
to ensuring the United States can outcompete our rivals,
outmaneuver aggressors, and deliver more reliable, resilient
energy for our people, especially as we face unprecedented
challenges.
Last week, the World Meteorological Organization confirmed
that this was the hottest summer ever recorded on Earth. In
July and August, average temperatures were roughly 1.5 degrees
Celsius warmer than preindustrial levels, which is the exact
threshold scientists have warned that we cannot breach without
causing catastrophic and irreversible changes to our climate.
Our communities are suffering the consequences, fiercer
heat waves, hurricanes, wildfires, floods that are only going
to become more frequent and costly in the coming years. Indeed,
there have been 23 extreme weather events this year, costing
over $1 billion so far. It's only September. The record for
those kinds of events, billion-dollar events in the past has
been 20 in a year, and that was for the whole year. So no doubt
climate change is one of the greatest scientific challenges
that we've ever faced.
And on the flip side, it also presents one of the greatest
economic opportunities of this century. The global market for
decarbonization technologies is expected to reach $23 trillion
at least by the end of the decade.
America's innovation capabilities uniquely position us to
corner this market, and thanks to the bipartisan assistance
that we've received from Congress, the Department, as was
noted, now has more tools than ever to drive those efforts
forward. With the Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law, which granted appropriations for many of
the programs authorized by the Energy Act of 2020, we're
marshaling DOE's applied science breakthroughs out of the lab
onto the marketplace and into the field. And as of today, I'm
proud to say that we've launched 98 percent of our programs
under IRA and BIL.
We're funding demonstration projects for next-generation
technologies like clean hydrogen, long duration energy storage,
advanced nuclear, direct air capture (DAC). We're working
closely with industry to accelerate their commercialization,
and we're making the United States the most attractive
destination for investment in new energy technologies, which
will boost our energy security and independence. All of this
will ensure American workers and families reap the benefits of
our scientific capabilities through good-paying jobs and lower
energy bills.
Still, we know maintaining our edge depends on continuous
innovation. And thanks to this Committee's efforts, the CHIPS
and Science Act granted the first-ever comprehensive
authorization of DOE's Office of Science, which will help us to
secure U.S. leadership in the technologies of the future.
President Biden's budget request for Fiscal Year 2024 calls for
$8.8 billion in appropriations for this office advancing toward
the CHIPS-authorized level so we can get to work. This includes
more than $1 billion for fusion research, one of the most
exciting pieces of our basic portfolio of science. Our Lawrence
Livermore, as was noted, National Lab now achieved fusion
ignition not just once, but twice. And in the meantime, we've
hired a new Associate Director for our Fusion Office. We've
awarded $46 million to companies who are advancing commercial
fusion energy.
The President's budget request would allow us to fully
capitalize on those breakthroughs. It will also let us
accelerate progress in the emerging field of artificial
intelligence. DOE has been harnessing AI technologies since the
1960's, giving us unique insight into their power and
limitations as we're reaching a threshold where they may be
used, as was noted in this--in the Capitol yesterday, for more
widespread applications for good and for bad. We are eager to
use AI for good in science. The Department's been able to make
real progress in these matters thanks to Congress, but there's
more work ahead. Our ability to tackle it depends on your
continued support.
And thank you for the opportunity to address you today. I
look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Granholm follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Obernolte. Well, thank you very much, Secretary
Granholm, for your testimony. And I know we're all eager to ask
you some more questions about your vision for the future of the
DOE. I'll begin by recognizing myself for five minutes for
questions.
In my opening statement, I mentioned my concerns about a
lack of additional funding for the Office of Science within the
DOE. And the point that I made is that funding basic science is
a fundamental part of the DOE's mission. When we talk about
applied science, that's a field where there's abundant
resources in the private sector to also provide funding for
research. But basic science often it's government that provides
that fundamental source of funding. So I am concerned that less
than two percent of the IIJA and IRA resources are being put
toward basic science with the Office of Science. Could you
address that concern and tell me whether or not you share it?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we have put forward a robust
Office of Science budget, and it is important that science,
along with applied and strategies to deploy these technologies,
all work in a continuum. Office of Science has been
instrumental and will continue to be instrumental in being the
framework on which all of the rest of the architecture of this
new energy economy, the existing and the new energy economy,
will rest. So I agree with you about the importance. I don't
agree with you about deprioritizing. We have prioritized
science. We have asked for an increase in science. We want to
get to the authorized level of the CHIPS and Science Act. We
hope that we can get there within the next two years.
Mr. Obernolte. Well, it sounds like we're in furious
agreement on that, so----
Secretary Granholm. All right. Good.
Mr. Obernolte [continuing]. I look forward to working with
you on making sure that basic science is not neglected.
I also mentioned in my opening statement my concerns about
a lack of additional funding for the Office of the Inspector
General within the DOE. We had a hearing in this Committee
several months ago in which we had testimony from several OIGs
within our Committee's sphere of jurisdiction, including that
of the DOE, and those concerns were surfaced in that hearing.
In particular, I'm concerned that we are asking you to
distribute $100 billion in new funding. And yet only 1/10 of 1
percent of that actually goes to the OIG to oversee the
distribution of that funding and make sure the rules are being
followed. Is that a concern that you share? And what can we do
to address it?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I know that the OIG office
request is a doubling of the funding of what it was last year,
which is important recognition that oversight is very
important. We agree on this as well, that oversight is
necessary. We are in constant contact with our OIG to make sure
that we are setting up programs in a way that are consistent
with protecting the taxpayer dollars, making sure we are doing
things in the right way. So we believe that the OIG should be
funded at the level that is necessary. And to that end, I know
that there has been a doubling request.
Mr. Obernolte. What do you think will be the Department's
response to that request?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we have put forward that. That's
part of what our budget request is.
Mr. Obernolte. All right. Well, I'm glad to hear that. I
think that we all agree on the importance of the role that the
OIG plays in making sure that there's transparency and
accountability within the Department.
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Obernolte. Having those resources available just
forestalls future problems, and so I'm appreciative that you
share our point of view on that.
One more thing that I wanted to discuss with you is the
National Artificial Intelligence Research Resource (NAIRR),
which is something that's very near and dear to my heart. As
you know, AI is going to play an increasingly critical role in
the development of our economy and the empowerment of American
workforce. I am concerned though, that the concentration of the
power to create advanced AI foundational models might wind up
resting in the hands of only a couple of companies, and that's
something I think would be very destructive to
entrepreneurialism and transparency in our country. It's been
our tradition that academia has been the home of cutting-edge
research. And the transparency that's enforced by our academic
system, I think, has been good not only for advancing the
frontiers of human knowledge, but also for giving the public
the confidence that this information is being developed and
shared transparently.
The purpose of this resource would be to make sure that our
academic institution, our researchers, and our students have a
shared resource available to them to be able to access the
amount of compute that's necessary to do this research. Is that
something that the DOE supports? Because you would have a
fundamental role to play in overseeing it.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, the NAIRR process is something we
support. And we've also put forward a strategic plan called
FAST. So NAIRR, we are in partnership with the National Science
Foundation (NSF). That goal is to basically sort of democratize
AI and to make sure it does get out into the academic
institutions so that we can create a workforce for AI. There's
a component of it that is more secure that relates to national
defense. That is the part that's being led by the Department of
Energy. And then because we have these massive computers, these
exascale computers onto which so much of the AI capabilities
are--that offer is to the private sector as user facilities, we
want to make sure that the foundational models, as you say, are
done as well in the national labs, in addition to academia.
Mr. Obernolte. I will look forward to working with you on
that. I see my time has expired.
I will now remember to recognize the Ranking Member for
five minutes for her questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here.
As I mentioned, I am laser-focused on the fusion energy
program. I think we are in a race against time for the planet,
and fusion is a key element to saving our climate. Along those
lines, the Fusion Energy Science Advisory Committee had a long
range plan, and the emphasis was on material and fusion nuclear
science, as well as the Milestone program. Now, they did not
include the Inertial Fusion program that has been in the mark,
but that was prior to ignition being achieved, so I'm not going
to quibble with that emphasis. But the you and the President
asked for an increase in materials and fusion nuclear science
from $56.5 million to $147.5 million, almost double. Can you
explain why R&D in fusion materials and fuel cycle technologies
are important at this particular moment?
Secretary Granholm. Oh, this is a crucial time. I'm so
grateful to you for your leadership on fusion, Congresswoman.
It's such an important potential for solving the greatest
crisis that we're facing, which is climate change, as you
noted. The request is actually strengthening the Milestone
program, so we want to be able to put out benchmarks of what
barriers we need to break through in order to achieve
commercial fusion. The goal is to achieve commercial fusion
within a decade. And so the portions of that that are related
to the Milestone program that's $105 million increase, we also
have R&D centers in the following areas: in structural and
plasma-facing materials, in the blanket fuel cycle, and
enabling technologies in advanced simulation. That's part--this
is $120 million increase. And then additionally, supporting
studies and research for more fusion neutron source facility
that isn't--is going to be an important part of the future. All
of these, of course, the Inertial Fusion Energy program, it has
a small increase. But we are all about that and are very
excited about the milestones that have been achieved this year.
So we are excited about being able to take these next steps in
partnering with the private sector to be able to achieve this
goal of a commercial fusion facility within 10 years.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you for that answer. I was going to ask
about the Milestone program, which is the other element that
the experts recommended for emphasis and that I believe needs
attention.
What I'm hearing from the scientists who are out in the
private sector is the materials research in terms of materials
for containment walls, as well as fuels, is something that they
don't have the resources and lab capacity to do to study in the
same way that we would fund in the national labs or, in some
cases, the academic world. So it's very important that we focus
in at least on those two because it cannot be done and--for any
of the various alternatives for private sector fusion. All of
that will be necessary.
I would just--one other question. Several have suggested to
me that we need an Applied Energy Office for fusion as we do
for other energy sources. I'm wondering if you could comment on
that proposal. Are there any steps that you think would be wise
for the Department to take in that direction?
Secretary Granholm. It's certainly something we have been
considering. And as this continues--as we continue to see the
promise of fusion coming to reality, that is certainly
something we would consider. As you know, as I mentioned, we've
just hired a new Director of Fusion Sciences, and we're excited
about that. So this is a conversation that is live. I'll just
say that.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me just go into one other element. We
already have private sector firms that are doing direct carbon
capture out of the air. The problem is they don't have a
nonpolluting energy source to fuel that effort. We know how to
do that. We just need fusion energy to ramp it up. NSF has done
some research on carbon capture out of the ocean, which is the
biggest sink of carbon ever. That is a more complicated
endeavor than direct carbon capture from the air. I'm wondering
if you are looking at some additional research that would guide
us on carbon capture from the ocean so that, as we're racing
for a fusion source, we're going to have the capacity to
actually utilize that source to decarbonize our planet and save
the day for humanity.
Secretary Granholm. Yeah, I know we're looking at all
sources potentially, soils, ocean, et cetera, obviously, direct
air capture. We want to continue researching all of this, and I
can follow up on the ocean component with you after this. I
don't have the details in front of me, but I know we are
looking at it.
Ms. Lofgren. My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Obernolte. Thank you, Ranking Member Lofgren.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey,
for five minutes for your questions.
Mr. Posey. Thank you, Chairman Obernolte.
Secretary Granholm, what is the Department of Energy doing
to lower the price of gasoline, electric, and natural gas for
Americans?
Secretary Granholm. Well, supply obviously has been a big
component of that. And we are now at record levels of
production of both natural gas and of oil. And hopefully--I
mean, obviously, oil is traded on a global market, and so what
happens internationally with OPEC (Organization of the
Petroleum Exporting Countries), et cetera, has an impact on us
at home. However, our oil and gas companies have really stepped
up to try to fill some of that gap. And that's important.
Mr. Posey. What is the agency doing to encourage any
decrease in those prices?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we don't have--obviously, the
prices are met on a--on the private sector, on a market, so we
don't have direct impact on that market.
Mr. Posey. Like killing drilling in Anwar. That----
Secretary Granholm. No, that has nothing to do with the
price today.
Mr. Posey. Interesting. What is the Administration's
specific plan to increase electric vehicle (EV) sales from the
current seven percent level to the 36 percent level proposed by
rule in 2027?
Secretary Granholm. Are you talking about the EPA
(Environmental Protection Agency) rule? Is that what you mean?
Mr. Posey. Yes
Secretary Granholm. The Administration is--or at least the
Department of Energy is doing everything possible to bring down
the price of electric vehicles by investing in research and
development on battery technology. The price of vehicle
batteries has already dropped by 85 percent over the past more
than a decade, and a lot of that is due to DOE research. We're
also making sure that the uptake of electric vehicles is easier
for people who may have range anxiety because there's not a
sufficient amount of charging network. And so we have partnered
with the Department of Transportation (DOT) with a joint office
that is set up to put out funding to achieve 500,000 additional
electric vehicle charging units across the Nation both in
transportation corridors as well as in areas where the private
sector has not seen fit to put up charging stations perhaps
because there's no electric vehicles. So we're trying to solve
the chicken-and-egg issue on that, and we're trying to bring
down the price. And of course, the Inflation Reduction Act, by
reducing the price at the--on the hood of vehicles--electric
vehicles as they're purchased will also make them more
attractive.
Mr. Posey. OK. What's the total amount of Fiscal Year 2023
grants to--and subgrants to support researchers that are
citizens of other countries? I mean, I'm told we have some that
have gone to Iranians, North Koreans, Russians, and China, and
I'm just wondering if that's correct.
Secretary Granholm. No, our funding is--and in fact, I
signed an executive order saying the research, et cetera, and
the funding for research has to be done and the technologies in
our labs has to be commercialized in the United States.
Mr. Posey. OK. So are applicants for grants and subgrants
required to provide the Department with specific information
about each foreign national listed on the application?
Secretary Granholm. So I'm not sure if you're talking about
entities from foreign entities of concern.
Mr. Posey. I'm talking about any----
Secretary Granholm. We----
Mr. Posey [continuing]. Applications for grants and
subgrants.
Secretary Granholm. We look very carefully to make sure
that grantees are not controlled by foreign entities of
concern. That means that we are not--whether you're talking
about Iran or Russia or China or North Korea, we are not
providing grant money to entities from those countries.
Mr. Posey. But do we require them to provide DOE with
specific information about each foreign national listed on the
application?
Secretary Granholm. We do not require grantees to list out
the citizenship of everybody who applies. If a Canadian--a
person who was born in Canada applies for a grant and is
building a business in the United States, we don't reject that
situation. We are particularly attuned to those foreign
entities of concern.
Mr. Posey. Canada is, I think, a friend of ours. I'm
thinking of----
Secretary Granholm. Well, right, but you said any.
Mr. Posey [continuing]. Countries that may not be friends.
Secretary Granholm. Right. You said any, so that's why
I'm--I understand what you're getting at, and that's why I'm
saying the foreign entities of concern, those four countries we
are very attuned to.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. And I'm just curious. When was the
last time you attended a Cabinet meeting with the President?
Secretary Granholm. Yesterday.
Mr. Posey. Very good. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll go next to the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici.
You're recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Yes, thank you, Chair Obernolte. And thank
you, Ranking Member Lofgren. I join you in sending best wishes
to Chairman Lucas for a speedy recovery.
Welcome, Secretary Granholm, to the Committee.
Last Congress, we made historic investments in renewable
energy that will jumpstart our clean energy future. And Oregon
continues to work toward 100 percent clean energy economy by
testing and deploying novel energy technologies, including
advanced battery storage, marine energy, small modular nuclear
energy, and offshore wind power. I don't think it's a surprise
that your Under Secretary for Science and Innovation, Dr. Geri
Richmond, came to you from Oregon, my alma mater, University of
Oregon. Oregon researchers like the team at PacWave are tapping
the vast potential of the ocean by leveraging wave energy and
deploying clean energy resources, will create good-paying jobs,
lower costs, and address the climate crisis.
So as we develop the next generation of renewable energy
technologies, we must also invest in grid capacity and
resilience, and importantly, in an energy-smart workforce. So
last month, the Department of Energy announced a $39 million
investment from the Grid Modernization Initiative for projects
across its national laboratories to strengthen the grid and
enhance climate resilience. So importantly, these selected
projects include the Medium Voltage Resource Integration
Technologies, or MERIT, which is intended to develop high-
efficiency technologies that can integrate a range of energy
resources such as solar, wind, and fuel cells into the grid.
So, Madam Secretary, as we adopt these advanced
technologies and diversify energy generation resources, how can
Congress and the Department of Energy support additional R&D
programs like MERIT that will make direct investments in grid
modernization efforts to balance the goals of broadening our
clean energy resources and also securing that important grid
resiliency?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you so much for the question, and
thanks for your support for the mission of the Department and
especially on the science side. One of the biggest ways, of
course, you can help is by funding the budget at the requested
amount.
Ms. Bonamici. Got it.
Secretary Granholm. We are--this issue about grid
resilience and reliability in the light of the fact that we now
have many more types of energy on the grid is extremely
important. And the technologies associated with long duration
energy storage, for example, to ensure that renewable energy,
which is intermittent, becomes more like baseload. And if you
add, of course, storage to that, they become a reliable source
of constant energy. Those kinds of things, as well as grid-
enhancing technologies like--that are--that create more
efficiency on the grid and that create more stable power, I'll
just say, dynamic line rating, advanced reconductoring
materials, et cetera, all very, very important both on the
research side and on the deployment side. And we appreciate
the----
Ms. Bonamici. Exactly.
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Support for the research
on--from this Committee.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And one of the reasons I'm so
excited about marine energy is because we know the wind doesn't
always blow and the sun doesn't always shine, but the waves and
the currents don't stop.
So, Madam Secretary, the Inflation Reduction Act has
created more than 170,000 clean energy jobs so far, projected
to generate 1.5 million more in the next decade. So I was
recently visiting the Vestas Wind Systems Training Center in
Portland, Oregon. It's pretty exciting work that they're doing
there to discuss how we can work together to grow a diverse and
talented clean energy workforce. So what is the Department
doing to help train and retain talent for the clean energy
workforce? And what are the gaps in clean energy education and
training, and how can Congress and the Department work to
resolve that?
Secretary Granholm. Right, thank you. The workforce issues
in this area are enormous. The opportunities are enormous for
people to be able to transition from fossil energies to--if
they choose to, to clean energies. It's also really critical to
know that there's all kinds of jobs for all kinds of people in
this very broad clean energy space. So whether you are talking
about somebody doing geothermal or wave or line people for
installing the grid or designing the components for the grid or
nuclear, I mean, all of it creates huge opportunities.
There was another report out this morning that said, I
think, 127,000 jobs had been created. I don't know if that's
consistent with what you said or maybe it was 142,000. But
there's--these jobs are being created even before
groundbreakings have fully happened as a result of the
Inflation Reduction Act. So it is happening. The question about
workforce training is very important. So what the Department is
focused on is when we do a grant for a facility, so say we're--
we've given a grant, for example, in a--to a direct air capture
hub in Louisiana, we want to make sure that the applicant also
has a strategy for what they are going to do for workforce. And
that means they have to have a community benefits plan, which
includes workforce training, how are they going to get the
workers, what does the pipeline look like to be able to ensure
that it's going to be a success. So for all grants from the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, they all have to have a strategy
associated with it.
And then the White House is also very being very--
aggressive and conscientious about creating workforce hubs in
key areas that we know these grants are going--are coming
through so that we have both private sector strategies for
apprentices, as well as universities and community colleges all
feeding in to what will be the economic opportunity of our
lifetime.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you. And as I yield back, I'll note
that there are several Members of this Committee on both sides
of the aisle also on the Education and Workforce Committee. We
look forward to working with you on it.
Secretary Granholm. Great.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll go next to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Babin. You
are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here,
Madam Secretary.
First question, in the Houston area, which I represent,
we're eager to hear from DOE on the regional clean hydrogen hub
funding, which I'm told will be announced any day now. How is
DOE working with the Treasury Department and others on the
hydrogen production tax credit?
Secretary Granholm. Right. So yes, we are in the final
stages of the hydrogen hub evaluations and selections. And yes,
we are working with Treasury to make sure that the hubs are a
success. And in fact, today, one of the components of that is
we are releasing a funding opportunity announcement for a
demand side strategy for hydrogen from the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law. So all of those components are under
discussion right now, and hopefully, the Treasury decision will
be made around the time of the hub announcements----
Mr. Babin. And bring it to fruition, right?
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Babin. OK. Second, I'd like to ask you about U.S. LNG
(liquefied natural gas) imports----
Secretary Granholm. Exports.
Mr. Babin [continuing]. Or, excuse me, exports. Since you
are responsible for considering export authorization permits,
the United States has emerged as a leading LNG exporter, and
according to the EIA (Energy Information Administration), so
far this year, we're the largest exporter of LNG in the world.
We know that this is in no small part thanks to the science and
technology innovation at DOE's National Laboratories. What is
DOE doing to support continued U.S. LNG exports? And is the
Administration trying to ease the burden on our LNG producers
to provide the world with clean LNG?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, this is a really important
question. And first of all, as you've noted, we are at record
levels. We are leading the world. We're providing this source
of fuel to our allies in Europe, in Japan, et cetera. And at
the same time, all of our allies as well as we are looking to
make sure that that LNG is as clean as it possibly can be,
right? So the--we are looking at all of that. We have
permitted--right now, existing permits for LNG expansions are--
get us to, I think, 20 billion cubic feet (BCF) for the ones
that are under construction, 49 billion for the ones that
haven't even begun construction. So we are permitted to be able
to deliver if those who are proposing those developments
actually move forward.
But we have to make sure, honestly, as a nation and the
industry, that the demand side of the equation will demand that
methane leakage has been taken care of and that CO
2

has--all greenhouse gases (GHGs) associated with LNG have been
taken care of. And so that's part of what our research now is.
How do we do methane monitoring, methane mitigation in
partnership with industry to make sure that the LNG is in fact
the cleanest in the world. And that's a lot of what DOE's focus
has been on from our Fossil Energy and Carbon Management
Office.
Mr. Babin. There's no question about it, it is the
cleanest.
You--speaking of permits, you mentioned permits. It's
disappointing to see this Administration that has taken
actions, many, many actions that--really denying permits,
prohibiting drilling and production on U.S. public lands here
just recently in Alaska, which essentially crippled much of our
own domestic energy production, which in fact I think we're
down to a million barrels less production today than we have
been in the last three years. OK. Well, that--if that's not
right, then you can tell me what the correct number is. But I
know we're not producing as much as we were.
Would you agree that buying oil from other countries
actually supports dirtier, less-clean energy production, and
more pollution? Do you agree that we should increase clean and
efficient oil and gas production here in the United States
where we have the most clean production of fossil fuels on the
face of the Earth, especially at a time when we need reliable,
affordable energy? Wouldn't we be making a cleaner planet if we
relied more on U.S. producers? I know that several questions in
one, but if you could----
Secretary Granholm. Let me first with respect--if you look
at the Energy Information Administration, they are projecting--
and right now, we are at record levels of production of oil and
gas, the United States is, more than ever before, more than
before COVID, we are producing at record levels. We're at, I
think, 12.7 million barrels per day or we will be by the end of
this year. We'll be at 13 million by next year. So there is no
blocking of production in the United States, so--we are
continuing to move, and we will continue to see that happen.
I do think, though, it is important if we want to address
this big question about climate that the oil and gas industry
partner on the solutions to mitigate the greenhouse gases that
are produced. And so the partnering with the industry on
geothermal exploration, for example, or on, obviously, carbon
capture and sequestration are very important components of the
overall push, which is to expand clean energy, not just in the
United States, but globally.
Mr. Babin. But you didn't quite answer it, should we be
more reliant on--relying on our own domestic production.
Secretary Granholm. We want to--we are relying on our own.
And I would say relying on our own so that we--also because of
price. I mean, oil of course is traded on a global market, but
if we develop our own clean sources in the United States, we
won't be subject to a volatile market, you know, where
decisions about production are made by those with whose values
we do not share.
Mr. Babin. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentlewoman from Michigan. Ms.
Stevens, you're recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, Madam Secretary, thank you so much for your incredible
leadership of America's solution department. I liked that
dubbing of the Department of Energy. You appear to be in the
right place at the right time with so many incredible
initiatives running through the Department of Energy as we
transition our clean tech sector and train the workforce of the
future that is hitting us today.
But I do want to ask you a couple of quick questions about
some recent DOE announcements. One, we were pleased to see just
at the end of last month about the retooling initiative of the
plants, the $15.5 billion, some of which has come through the
Jobs and Infrastructure Investment Act that we passed in 2021.
And when I saw the announcement come down, I was wondering if
that initiative would have been possible without the IIJA being
passed. Did you need that money? I know you drew down on some
existing DOE money to put forward this retooling dollars.
Secretary Granholm. Oh, 100 percent we needed it. And thank
you so much for your support of making that happen.
Ms. Stevens. Yes, well--and we're also excited to see that
the bids have gone out and applications are going to close on
December 7, and we look forward to seeing what comes out of
those applications, particularly as industry in my neck of the
woods is booming and I think aggressively looking to adapt and
transition to electric vehicles.
Mr. Babin asked about hydrogen, and I had some similar
questions. Most recently, I held a hydrogen roundtable in
Auburn Hills at Quantron. And we heard from a number of very
interesting enterprises, startups that are--that have developed
in the hydrogen space. And they were--the feedback I've
received is that these companies, these startups are eager to
continue meeting, eager to get the guidance, and are also
looking to the Department of Energy, I think, for the overall
hand-holding process. And so just curious, in addition to what
Mr. Babin had just asked, but also from the viewpoint of the
hubs that are going out, I heard you say demand side, but
anything else that we need to be thinking about as we are sort
of in a fragile moment right now with hydrogen? We want to make
sure this technology gets developed and is owned here in the
United States of America. And these early stage companies,
which I know you're so familiar with from your great career,
are just precious to this process. So how is the Department
thinking about them?
Secretary Granholm. Yeah, I appreciate this question
because we don't have a hydrogen economy really yet. I mean,
hydrogen has been around, obviously, and in the industrial
process, but we haven't used it in a more broad scale. And it
could be, as they call it, the Swiss Army knife of clean energy
because of course it can carry energy, it can store energy, et
cetera. But it's not going to happen on its own without some
start, and that's what the hydrogen hubs are all about. This is
why the demand side strategy is important. It's also why we are
considering what is the ecosystem that surrounds these hydrogen
hubs. What's the offtake? Who are the customers?
Ms. Stevens. The hubs are kind of going to be--they're
going to be a carry-through.
Secretary Granholm. Right. I mean, some may be quite
physically geographically connected. I know there have been
applications that are more geographically dispersed, but the
bottom line--and what are the feedstocks, essentially? You
know, some I'm sure will have applied who are interested in
supplying nuclear power, some renewable power, some natural
gas. Bottom line is that whole ecosystem, in creating a
hydrogen hub, is a source of a new economy for the country.
Ms. Stevens. New and critical economy.
Secretary Granholm. And critical.
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Secretary Granholm. But it's not just for the United
States. It's as well----
Ms. Stevens. For the world.
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. For other--the world. We
are in the lead in all the other countries in terms of what we
have decided to do. Everybody's looking to us, but everybody's
catching up very quickly.
Ms. Stevens. Right.
Secretary Granholm. And so it's an exciting moment.
Ms. Stevens. And one other question for you. The Department
of Energy put forward the critical materials assessment report
that highlighted numerous materials and minerals that are
expected to be vital to our clean energy future. This is
somewhat going back to electric vehicle batteries. Can you just
provide any update from the Department and your work on
critical materials and how you all are thinking about that
maybe working across government?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, well, first of all, it's the
foundation, right, for how we get to be energy independent, and
we want to make sure that we are the place that are producing,
for example, the batteries for electric vehicles. We've--and
that means the whole thing, soup to nuts. We do not want to be
reliant on China for the production or processing of materials
like lithium. We want to be able to source that in the United
States or source alternatives. And so we've got a whole
strategy inside the Department that is from extraction to
making sure that we are exploring alternatives, which is really
heavy.
This Committee, I know, has been supportive of looking at
alternatives to making sure that those materials are integrated
into the battery, the anode, the cathode, the separator
material, the electrolyte. All of that, the Loan Programs
Office is funding some components of this supply chain. The
grant process is funding some components of this supply chain.
And the reason why you're seeing so many investments in
Michigan and in all of these States is because they see the tax
credit associated with the Inflation Reduction Act and the
grant opportunities as making the United States the
irresistible place to invest.
Ms. Stevens. Yes.
Secretary Granholm. And so we are creating that supply
chain thanks to the good work of many of those who are in this
room.
Ms. Stevens. Well, with that, Mr. Chair, we close on a
great note. The United States is an irresistible place to
invest. Madam Secretary, always a pleasure to ask you
questions. Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We will hear next from the gentleman from Tennessee. Mr.
Fleischmann, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for visiting with me in my great city of
Chattanooga, Tennessee. I know we work together very well with
the DOE reservation at Oak Ridge, so thank you so much for all
of your hard work together with us.
I have three questions. The first one I'm going to ask for
a rather brief answer. It's on critical minerals. I do want to
touch on two nuclear issues as well. The development of so many
exciting new energy technologies has demonstrated the growing
need for a range of critical minerals. The Department of Energy
is implementing important efforts to develop and expand
domestic critical minerals recycling efforts. That is
laudatory. It's great. However, it seems increasingly clear
that recycling and friendly foreign sources will be
insufficient for the exploding market demand.
Madam Secretary, if you can very briefly, what is DOE doing
to foster domestic critical mineral production? Thank you.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, so we are--through the
Loan Program Office, for example, there's been conditional
commitments to lithium extraction. We have funded lithium
extraction from geothermal brines in the Salton Sea from the
earlier stage efforts. We have funded graphite material, anode
material in Louisiana as, again, a conditional commitment that
the Loan Programs Office has made to Sera. So we are
identifying the gaps in the supply chain and going after them
strategically.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. Madam Chair, as you know, I
chair--Madam Secretary--five nuclear-related caucuses,
including the fusion caucus, which is the sixth. There's
tremendous bipartisan and bicameral support in that regard. I
would like to focus on the fission side for today, if I may.
The Department of Energy has been making progress on the
Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, ARDP, including the
Kairos research reactor and the X-energy TRISO fuel facility
located in Oak Ridge. However, with all the new technologies,
there are inherent challenges. What is the best path forward to
making new nuclear a viable energy source? Specifically, how is
DOE actively working to make these first-of-a-kind projects
successful?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thank you for your leadership on
nuclear as well. We are very excited. These advanced
demonstration projects are really important for us to be able
to have lessons learned, obviously, and that there are
different types of reactors that are being funded, whether--and
I will say this. Part of the opportunity is for our small
modular reactors, for example, to be exported, that technology,
and to partner with allied countries, again, forming stronger
relationships globally through nuclear power through the atom.
But I do think that it's important to note that research
continues on all of these different types of reactors in the
Nuclear Energy Office, who I know you know Dr. Huff well, and
the--although the demonstration project was moved by Congress
to the Office of Clean Energy Demonstrations because it is
large scale, all of the symbiosis between research and
development and deployment continue. There's a very strong
nexus so that we can learn from the demonstration projects and
of course what's happening in Idaho National Lab, what's
happening at Oak Ridge, all a component of the spectrum of
nuclear investment.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you. And, Madam Chair, as you may
know, before I get into my last question, last week, I was
privileged, as a Member of the House and the Chairman of Energy
and Water Appropriations to speak in London at the
International Nuclear Symposium. I want to thank you. Your
Department was present. You have two folks embedded at the
English Embassy as well. So we did a good job as Americans on
the international stage, so I thank you for your cooperation in
that regard.
Last question, on nuclear fuel, if I may, we recognize the
developing--that developing a domestic source of high-assay
low-enriched uranium, HALEU, fuel for our advanced nuclear
reactors is critical to our energy independence. So many of the
promising advanced reactor designs, including many ARDP,
require HALEU. How is the Department of Energy prioritizing the
buildout of domestic HALEU fuel supply? What is the biggest
barrier to developing a domestic supply of HALEU? And I would
say that in the energy and water bill, I made it a priority on
the House side to put in four--I'm sorry, $2.4 billion for new
HALEU. And I would defer to your answer.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you so much. I so appreciate,
again, your leadership on this. We need a full-on uranium
strategy from HALEU, you know, to our--to the fuel that--to low
enriched uranium. We need a full cycle that we are providing in
the United States so that we are not reliant upon Russia or
other countries who don't have our interests at heart. So thank
you for your leadership on that.
We have a strategy. I know that you've been briefed on it
in terms of the full cycle. We have a $700 million downpayment
on the HALEU, which is important, but it's not going to be
enough. So we hope to be able to come back to you, this
Committee, as well as you and your other hats, to be able to
request funding for that full strategy when the time is right.
Mr. Fleischmann. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I know I'm
over my time. One last request that we talk to our good friends
in the Senate. The House mark is very high. The Senate mark is
not as high, but it's respectable. But together, I think we can
get there.
And I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We will hear next from the gentleman from New York. Mr.
Bowman, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here.
Can you please talk to us about how public schools fit into
your vision for the implementation of the IRA and the
infrastructure bill? My understanding is that there was much
more demand than could be accommodated, including from my
district for the first round of funding from the Renew American
Schools Program. Schools are also eligible for some tax
credits, but many will need technical support and bridge
financing. I would love to hear what efforts are happening at
DOE and in coordination with other agencies to help public
schools take full advantage of all relevant funding
opportunities in these bills.
Secretary Granholm. Great, this is absolutely a priority.
Thank you so much for this question. I think what we saw from
the first round of funding was it was wildly popular. We had
over 1,000 applications, and we could only fund 24 selections.
And the need is enormous. And so you know, we--that was the
first round. There will be another round. But there is no way
that we will have enough money to fill the need that is clearly
out there, so we'd love to come back and make sure that this
particular program is in fact funded to the extent to meet the
demand that is out there because I think it is so vital for
schools, for schools that want to be making sure that they're
obviously teaching children in environments that are clean
environments, that are not causing asthma environments.
I was in Tennessee just quickly, and Memphis at one of the
schools that won and the school itself had windows that were so
dark from pollution that part of their renew grant was just to
replace windows so kids could see out. The--it was a 100 degree
day. Their air conditioning wasn't working. No kids can work in
an environment where they're forced to work at 100--in 100
degree heat boxes. The lighting was horrible. They didn't have
a science--they didn't have any science lab in the school. So
this school got some money to be able to do that.
It was overwhelming how moving it was to be able to see the
teachers and the students who were so thrilled that their
school was actually going to be some--a place that they wanted
to be able to learn about. So that's just one example. I know
it is happening all across the country, and this demand is
huge.
Mr. Bowman. Can you speak to a dollar amount? Like how much
do you think we are going to need to really invest in our
public school infrastructure over the next decade, let's say,
because you mentioned a few challenges, but they've been--
public schools have been falling apart across the country for
many, many years.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, 100 percent. Just on this, I mean,
were given $500 million under the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law. We did the first round, so $178 million. We did 24
schools. So you can imagine it is exponentially larger than
what we have.
Mr. Bowman. Got it. Thank you. I also wanted to bring up
the United Auto Workers on the verge of going on strike as soon
as tomorrow, which is--obviously can be devastating to the
economy in part as because the big three auto companies,
according to the United Auto Workers, are using the EV
transition and public subsidies as a weapon to slash wages and
labor protections. We are also seeing that across the country,
and certainly in my district in Westchester County in the
Bronx, New York, Black and Brown communities are struggling to
build the capacity and infrastructure to compete for climate
and R&D funding. What is your overall assessment of how we are
doing when it comes to centering workers in our most vulnerable
communities in the clean energy transition right now? Where are
we doing well, and where do we need to do better?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I think this is a really important
question because the tax credits that companies take advantage
of don't have the strings attached to them. The grants that we
can provide require these community benefit agreements, which
will--which we can negotiate with companies. So in some
instances, we have more leverage as a nation than in others.
But I think the whole point is that we want to create a clean
energy economy, which has good-paying, quality jobs for people,
and that all pockets of the country can benefit.
And that's why when I say there's all kinds of jobs for all
kinds of people, this energy economy does give an opportunity
for people to really have a job that can't be outsourced
because the energy is produced here. It's clean, it's
homegrown. This is the--for us, we have a whole Clean Energy
Jobs Office, and we are projecting in terms of job growth,
enormous job growth, but we want to make sure they're good
jobs. And that's why continuing to push and to pressure to make
sure that the wages--and frankly, with the low unemployment
rate, there is some incentive to raise wages. But we want to
make sure that these are good wages. We require prevailing wage
on our grants, which is very important. We require a pathway
for workforce, which is very important. There's an incentive
embedded in the bills for paid apprenticeships, which is very
important. So all of those are keys, I think, to remedying
inequality.
Mr. Bowman. Absolutely. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I yield
back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from my colleague from California. Mr.
Issa, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, these are never easy hearings, and I
appreciate your being here and your answering so many important
questions. Mine is typical of my history in oversight. As you
know, when you were going through confirmation, you agreed and
were granted special privileges for eliminating any conflict-
of-interest stocks. You did not do so in a timely fashion. And
as a result, it's reported that 240,520 shares of Proterra were
still in your hands until you were questioned by the press, and
then you sold them. Is that correct?
Secretary Granholm. No. I----
Mr. Issa. When did you sell them?
Secretary Granholm. I sold them within three months of my
taking office. I told--I signed----
Mr. Issa. And who did you sell them to?
Secretary Granholm. It was--I have no idea who's--who
bought them.
Mr. Issa. Were they sold onto a public market or onto a
private market?
Secretary Granholm. They were on a private market but
handled by a separate entity, so I don't know who they went to.
But I can tell you that I signed an ethics agreement when I
took on that I had to dispose of those shares and resign from
the board, which I did before I even took office within six
months, and I sold within three months.
Mr. Issa. OK. Just one quick follow up for the record. This
was under the Exclusion Act so they're--the $1.6 million that's
reported that you made on it is not taxable at this time. Is
that correct?
Secretary Granholm. I think we just paid some significant--
I'd have to get----
Mr. Issa. You can answer that for the record.
It is not the policy of this Committee normally to show
pictures, but I'm going to do it briefly just for one second
because I think the visual is worthwhile for you. These are
some of the appliances that, if you will, GE said brings good
things to life. They include window air conditioners, washing
machines, incandescent light bulbs, ceiling fans, and automatic
washers. The question I have for you--and I'm not going to
belabor the this because we don't usually use them here--but
only a few minutes ago you talked about the stifling
temperature of 100 degrees and the effect it has on children
trying to get an education, and yet your Department is calling
for the elimination of these products, not for a standard of
higher efficiency, but elimination. Can you explain why you're
calling for these products to be eliminated?
Secretary Granholm. So we're not causing any products to be
eliminated. We're not calling for any products to be
eliminated. I'm not sure what you're talking about.
Mr. Issa. Well, the products that are listed as to be
gotten rid of--let me just make sure I get it right. I
apologize if you've missed the reports the last few days of the
phaseout or the elimination of ceiling fans and so on. You know
nothing about this?
Secretary Granholm. What we do is provide for efficiency
for those products. We never call for the elimination of the
product.
Mr. Issa. Well, but if your efficiency request exceed the
current technology, then they go away. Let me ask you a follow
up question that I think is undeniable. These are all electric
appliances. You've called for an all-electric society. And I
appreciate the goals that have historically come with both you
and the EPA trying to increase efficiency. But when it's all
said and done, why is it that your goals are estimated to
eliminate these products completely? I understand the
incandescent bulb. I'll leave that one aside. But the ceiling
fans have no--you know, they're motors, they turn, they blow.
They are not likely to meet the standards that you've set, and
I'm sure you're aware of this?
Secretary Granholm. No, sir, they are going to easily meet
standards. In fact, this morning or yesterday, the American
Home Appliance Manufacturers reached an agreement with energy
efficiency advocates on six of the very products that you've
got on your thing, meaning the manufacturers believe they can
reach the efficiency standards. And so it is happening. It's
causing people to save money. I mean, it's--it reduces costs
for everyday citizens if they don't have to spend as much money
on their electric bill because their appliances are----
Mr. Issa. Madam Secretary, I might interrupt only to say it
reduces energy consumption, and I appreciate with that it
doesn't always reduce cost, as you know. Many products actually
cost more to operate because of the technical nature of them.
So you save money on energy, you spend money on maintenance----
Secretary Granholm. No.
Mr. Issa [continuing]. And capital cost.
Secretary Granholm. Well, I respectfully disagree with
that. Actually, the lifecycle of these products with energy
efficiency technologies added means it's much cheaper for
people to own and operate them.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from Illinois. Mr.
Sorensen, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. I want to thank the Chairman and Ranking
Member Lofgren for convening this hearing and Secretary
Granholm for your willingness to appear for us today. Also, I
wish Chairman Lucas a speedy return to our Committee.
Let's talk about science. I'm not here for the politics.
I'm not here for wedge issues. By training, I was a
meteorologist, and so I really appreciate the Department of
Energy focusing on the future of clean energy because this is
what we're going to leave for our kids and for our grandkids.
They're not going to remember an argument about ceiling fans.
They're going to remember that we did something and we did
something for them.
I'd like to talk about the auto plants for just a minute.
Since 2003, the big three automakers have closed or idled 61
plants. In February, Stellantis idled its Jeep plant in
Belvidere, Illinois, laying off 1,300 workers in the process.
The State of Illinois has been working diligently with
Stellantis in an effort to reopen the plant and bring the jobs
back. Various Presidential Administrations have provided loans
and grants to auto manufacturing companies that build
manufacturing plants here in the United States. However,
companies sometimes use those grants and the loans to establish
manufacturing presence in so-called right-to-work States,
making it less likely that the jobs created through the
government investment will be good-paying jobs with robust
benefits and worker protections. In fact, hourly wages in
right-to-work States are on average 15.8 percent lower than
States like Illinois, and the consumers, they never see this
discount.
So, Secretary, I'm a proud owner of an EV built in our
country by union workers. What steps can Congress take to
ensure that companies receive the Federal assistance they need
to keep manufacturing in the United States while still
incentivizing those priorities and those companies to provide
labor standards, high wages, and robust benefits?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you for the question. It is top
of mind for us as well, especially as we sit on the verge of a
potential strike.
At the end of last month--your question was what can
Congress do. Continue to support the funding of conversion
grants. So, for example, in the Inflation Reduction Act, we got
to--I think was Inflation--was it the--yes, so Inflation
Reduction Act, there was the $2 billion for converting existing
facilities in places that had long been manufacturing. So if a
company came, for example, in that Illinois plant you discussed
and there was some entity who wanted to convert it to a
facility, that grant would be available to them because they're
converting in a place that had high wages and that had been
there for a lengthy period of time. In the same way, our Loan
Programs Office is offering another $10 billion for those same
purposes. So we are trying to use the funding that we have been
given at the Department to encourage high-wage jobs and
conversion of plants in places where the community falls apart
if the plant goes away. I know this as former Governor of
Michigan is very near and dear to my heart, and so I completely
understand what you are saying, and we want to encourage those
high-wage jobs in places that have historically been making
them.
Mr. Sorensen. So my follow up question is a lot of this
funding goes to the companies versus the States. Is there a way
that we can focus it more on the States to be able to get these
companies versus just giving the loan to the company to go
somewhere else?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I think it would require a new
law, but I would be certainly open to that.
Mr. Sorensen. Great. Lastly, I'd like to talk about the
charging infrastructure. Even though I love driving my Chevy
Volt around the district, I still yet can't advocate for people
to buy one. I can't get across the district because in Peoria,
Illinois, we don't have DC charging stations. I've talked with
the Department of Transportation. What efforts are the DOT and
the DOE doing together to facilitate this infrastructure so
that we can get people on the road?
Secretary Granholm. Great, we have a joint office with the
DOT and the DOE, and that office is administering the national
electric vehicle charging infrastructure grants to the States.
Illinois got its grant. I'm happy to say that the funding for
the States in three tranches has already gone out. No. 1, the
tranche is to make sure that there is a charging station on
transportation corridors within 50 miles of one another and not
more than a mile off that transportation highway. The second
tranche went to urban areas that may not have--or areas in the
State that may not have charging infrastructure, rural areas,
urban areas where there may not be a large penetration yet of
electric vehicles to solve the chicken-and-egg issue. And the
third round went to go to States to replace the charging
stations that are broken, which there are a lot. And under the
grant program, you have to have charging stations that are up
98 percent of the time. So that's a requirement, app-enabled.
And so all of that is happening.
Now States--20 States have already put out their request
for proposals. I can't say--I don't know whether Illinois is
one of them, but you can always check.
Mr. Sorensen. I will do that.
Secretary Granholm. And we hope that 20 more will be by the
end of the year. So you should start to see additional charging
stations be populated by the end of this year to--so that you
can fully recommend people to be able to----
Mr. Sorensen. Great. You got it. I can't wait. For the
people and for our kids, thanks for your hard work, and I yield
back. Thanks.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back. We'll hear next
from the gentlewoman from New York. Ms. Tenney, you're
recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Chairman Obernolte, and thank you
for having this meeting. And thank you, Secretary Granholm, for
being here.
And I'm going to get into a topic which I know that's not
going to be popular, but I think it's really important. And so,
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert four articles
into the record detailing Secretary Granholm's various ethics
issues and two articles from the Department of Energy's website
concerning its ethical policies. First, I just want to----
Mr. Obernolte. Without exception.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is an article from Reuters, ``U.S. Secretary Energy
Secretary Granholm violated ethics laws, watchdog says.'' An
article from CNN, ``Biden touts electric car company
potentially worth millions for his Energy Secretary.'' From
Washington Free Beacon, ``Energy Secretary's husband held stock
in Ford as Administration approved billions in electric vehicle
subsidies.'' Next article from Fox News, ``Biden Energy
Secretary Granholm admits false testimony about owning
stocks.'' The next I want to just point out and put these for
the record, Mr. Chair, just so people have them, these are
``Ethics--14 principles of Ethical Conduct for Federal
Employees.'' That's right on the Energy website, ``Ethics,
Impartiality, and Performing Official Duties.'' I wanted to
share that----
Mr. Obernolte. Admitted without objection.
Ms. Tenney. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So since taking office, I know Secretary--or my colleague,
Mr. Issa, referred to some of these issues. But since taking
office in January 2021, Secretary Granholm has violated the
Hatch Act multiple times. She's owned Proterra stock while her
boss President Biden repeatedly promoted the company. We saw
this huge payout. She admitted three months after she took
office her husband owned Ford stock while she personally
promoted the company's work with official resources, and she
cashed in on millions of dollars after these illegal
transactions and failure to disclose obvious conflicts.
Conflicts were revealed. As you said, you--it took you three
months before you actually sold the stock. And most critically,
she lied under oath to Congress claiming she did not own any
individual stocks when in fact she did. Anyone disputing these
charges could consult these articles that I put in the record.
They're available for everyone.
And I just want to go to Madam Secretary. The DOE's ethical
rules or Federal--generally, Federal employee ethics laws
provide that, quote, ``Public service is a public trust.
Employees must place loyalty to the Constitution, the laws, and
ethical principles above gain,'' as I cited in the ethical
principles that are part of your own Department. Do you believe
that any Department of Energy or other Federal employee
violating this rule should resign or be removed from office for
this position?
Secretary Granholm. First of all, let me say that we take
ethics very----
Ms. Tenney. That's a yes or no question.
Secretary Granholm. We take ethics very----
Ms. Tenney. Do you think if someone violates the ethical
laws set forth in this, that you took--you said you signed a
statement, an ethical statement that you would comply with the
laws? Do you think that a DOE employee or other Federal
employee who violates these laws should step down from that
position? Is that--that's a yes or no. If they violate the
ethics laws set forth----
Secretary Granholm. I understand what you're trying to do
here.
Ms. Tenney. I'm asking you a specific question.
Secretary Granholm. No, but you have----
Ms. Tenney. OK. So you're not going to answer the question.
Secretary Granholm. You have made a number of allegations
that I feel----
Ms. Tenney. I've put----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Against me personally that
I----
Ms. Tenney. This is my time, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Granholm. I know, but you've made these out
there, and I feel it is important----
Ms. Tenney. Let me just----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. To respond----
Ms. Tenney. Let me just tell you this is what--you did not
answer the yes or no question. You obviously believe that it's
OK to violate the ethics rules, as you have done.
Secretary Granholm. Of course I do not believe it's----
Ms. Tenney. But let's just say----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. OK to violate ethics laws,
nor does anyone else in the----
Ms. Tenney. Right, so----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Department of Energy.
Ms. Tenney. This is my time, so what you're trying to say
is, afterwards, once I realized and I spoke to Congress that I
was not telling the truth about what's happening, I went back
and admitted, oh, I made a mistake. So admitting the truth
after being caught lying doesn't actually cure perjury. I don't
know if you know that legally. I know you're an attorney. So
you've admitted to testifying falsely and then came back and
said I corrected it later, but that doesn't cure the fact that
you actually committed perjury. We've actually impeached
Presidents over committing perjury, and this is actually
involved in your official duties, also, after signing an ethics
oath that you said that you signed and admitted to today, and
on top of admitting that it was three months after you took
office that you actually sold the stock on the private market
as Darrell--Congressman Issa put out. So to me, that's perjury,
and that's simple. That's perjury, period. Why should you not
resign? Or why should we not consider some kind of impeachment
inquiry into you for your perjury charges? We've done that with
Presidents of the United States in the past.
Secretary Granholm. No. 1, I made a mistake when I
testified saying that I had sold all stock. I honestly----
Ms. Tenney. So----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Thought we had.
Ms. Tenney. So wait a minute.
Secretary Granholm. But I was wrong.
Ms. Tenney. So I'll reclaim my time.
Secretary Granholm. So----
Ms. Tenney. You're a lawyer. You know that perjury, you
cannot go back----
Secretary Granholm. You don't take----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. And say I made a mistake. Perjury
exists when you give a false statement----
Secretary Granholm. Intentionally.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Under oath, which you did, did you
not?
Secretary Granholm. No, I did not intentionally. I thought
we had divested of all stocks. We had divested of all----
Ms. Tenney. Look, this is the colossal ego----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Conflicting stocks.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. Of this Administration, that
people--the American people are frustrated with. You serve the
American people. You don't serve President Biden. You don't
serve a special interest. You serve the American people, and--
--
Secretary Granholm. Of course.
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. We would appreciate you coming
forward on this.
Secretary Granholm. I am coming forward if you would let me
explain.
Ms. Tenney. Appointees----
Secretary Granholm. I made a mistake----
Ms. Tenney [continuing]. With lesser conflicts honestly
would have redrawn their nomination or they would resign from
office. Thank you. I yield back.
Secretary Granholm. There's no conflict. The OIG has
investigated the Proterra issue and then determined that there
was no conflict.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll go next to the gentlewoman from Oregon. Ms. Salinas,
you're recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank the Chair
and Ranking Member for holding this hearing today.
And like my colleague from Illinois, I too am not here for
the politics, but I do believe we need to set the record
straight. This is the Science, Space, and Technology Committee,
and facts are really important.
So, Secretary Granholm, thank you so much for being here
today. I think we've taken up way too much time, but--and I do
have some important questions to ask around gas prices. You've
been asked repeatedly about your connection to Proterra with a
lot of conjecture and speculation thrown in for good measure.
But let's again understand the facts before we go any further.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask for unanimous consent to
enter into the record a letter sent by the Inspector General of
the Department of Energy from actually the Trump Administration
on August 11, 2021, Ms. Teri Donaldson to Senator John Barrasso
on August 11. In the letter, the Inspector General Donaldson
responds to a request from the Senator to scrutinize and, in
quote, ``Secretary Granholm's financial interest in Proterra.''
The Inspector General's findings were definitive. And I quote,
``Secretary Granholm publicly disclosed her interest in and
position with Proterra. She complied with the terms of an
ethics agreement designed to prevent violations of ethical
restrictions while serving as Secretary. Our inquiries did not
identify evidence that Secretary Granholm violated existing
statutes or regulations with respect to her financial interests
in Proterra. We found no evidence indicating Secretary Granholm
worked on specific issues related to Proterra at the same time
she owned options for or shares of Proterra.'' Those findings
and the--end quote. Those findings remain true today. In fact,
the Department confirmed to Committee staff that DOE has not
directed any funding to Proterra during Secretary Granholm's
tenure. These are the facts.
And so, Secretary Granholm, I will only ask you one
question on this issue before we move to more important
matters. Can you assure us once again that you have complied
with all legal and ethical obligations in regards to Proterra
as the DOE Inspector General determined in 2021?
Secretary Granholm. I can assure you.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. And now to questions that is--
important to my district. Diesel and jet fuel prices have
climbed even faster than other fuels, and these heavy fuels are
more easily refined from Russia and Middle Eastern crude than
U.S. shale, making them even more susceptible to international
pressures. Since July, gas, as you know, is up 9 cents at the
pump, but diesel prices have risen 48 cents in that same amount
of time.
In Oregon, we have companies such as NEXT clean fuels,
which are planning large new biofuel facilities to produce
renewable diesel and jet fuels. However, these facilities take
time to build, and my constituents are facing high costs right
now. Can you provide an update on DOE's support for biofuel
infrastructure and the steps that we can take to bring these
fuels to market more rapidly and further reduce our dependence
on foreign oil?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thank you so much for this
question as well because, obviously, the infrastructure is
important and the fuel itself is important. So we have a whole
strategy on biofuels, especially as it relates to making sure
that people are aware of, for example, sustainable aviation
fuels and the tax credits associated with those, making sure
that we have got infrastructure that is not contributing to the
cost and that infrastructure, whether it's refinery
infrastructure or the uses of diesel itself inside of vehicles,
we want to make sure we have engines and biofuel--a biofuel
pipeline for--that is lower cost.
We've been working on both the transportation side as well
as the infrastructure side for a long time, and we will
continue to do so. But it has been propelled significantly by
the incentives associated with the Inflation Reduction Act, and
we're very grateful for that.
Ms. Salinas. And so, dovetailing off of that, the USDA
(United States Department of Agriculture) has also
traditionally provided significant support for biofuel research
and development. And as you roll out some of these programs
from IIJA and IRA, how are you coordinating with agencies like
the U.S. Department of Agriculture to maximize the impact of
these investments?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, we have--we definitely work with
the Department of Agriculture on this especially. I mean,
they're--they have been--they've got a series of funds that
they have been supportive of biofuel development, whether it's
refineries, making sure that we have the supply associated with
feedstock. And so we do--we have worked together with the
Department of Agriculture very closely.
We've also got--as far as our own strategy, I just want to
turn here, you know, we have some--we have an Earth shot that
is associated with this called Clean Fuels and Products where
we want to make sure that we are taking feedstocks that are
not--you know, that are all kinds of feedstocks to be able to
reduce greenhouse gases. We've got a whole series of pieces of
infrastructure like at the Idaho National Lab to be able to do
that. It's called BFNUF (Biomass Feedstock National User
Facility), the biofuel, the biofuel--the national biofuel--I
can't remember the acronym. But bottom line is it's a facility
that is an applied strategy on how you can have distributed
biofuel creation from various sources of feedstock. And we've
got biofuel resource centers, four of them across the country,
to be able to continue the research on biofuels. So there's a
strategy from the sustainable aviation fuel grand challenge to
the Inflation Reduction Act to the Earth shot of creating
fuels, to the biofuel centers and to the labs, all as part of a
continuum to be able to lower the cost and create more supply
of biofuels.
Ms. Salinas. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from Florida. Mr.
Franklin, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Franklin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here today.
Just a few questions. And I honestly, my--this is not
designed to be a political gotcha. It's just a reality of the
world we live in today. But--and also because a lot of times,
you know, the press gets things different ways. I would like to
hear from you. And I apologize if I missed it while I was out
in another hearing. But can you attest to the validity or the
veracity of the situation you had a few months ago with the
trip where you had a staffer that parked in a charging spot to
hold a position for you so that you and your entourage could
recharge your vehicles? Was that situation true?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I've seen the reports.
Mr. Franklin. Well, you were there. I mean, what----
Secretary Granholm. Well----
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. Regardless of the report----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. I wasn't saving the spot.
But let me just say I have a fantastic young staff, just
fantastic.
Mr. Franklin. Well, that's neither here nor there.
Secretary Granholm. Well, I just want to say that somebody
made a mistake.
Mr. Franklin. But is it true that you had a staffer----
Secretary Granholm. I didn't--I----
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. In a gas-powered--one of your--
--
Secretary Granholm. It is true that--yes, it is.
Mr. Franklin [continuing]. Representatives parked in an
electric charging spot to reserve the position for you so that
you could do it and not be deterred from your travels. Is that
accurate?
Secretary Granholm. It was poor judgment on----
Mr. Franklin. But it's true, correct?
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. The part of the team.
Mr. Franklin. Well, why do you think--and poor judgment,
but why do you think they did that?
Secretary Granholm. I can only imagine they wanted to
continue moving. But the bottom line is it's not going to
happen again.
Mr. Franklin. OK. Well, it is interesting that that would
happen. I will tell you, I don't have--personally have an issue
with electric vehicles. I think, you know, Teslas are kind of
fun. I've enjoyed--you know, as a former carrier pilot, I like
the acceleration you get from those. But the reality where I
live in Florida, there's not an infrastructure that supports
that. But I happened to be in California the week before last,
went to rent my car, go out in the garage, and they tell me you
can choose from any vehicle that's out there, pick what you
want to drive away, and the only vehicles that were there were
electric. And I went and asked the lady, I said, is this all
you guys have in your vehicle fleet? She goes, no, actually, we
have combustion cars, too, but those have all been chosen.
Because it's--not surprisingly to me, people would rather use
something that they're familiar with and something that they
know that they can get charged up pretty easily. I was there
for a day. I had back-to-back meetings the whole time, no time
built into my schedule. I wish I had a staffer who could have
parked a car in a spot and blocked a station for me.
But, you know, all these vehicles were charged--the most
charged one I saw was 85 percent. You have to return the
vehicle at more than 70 percent. So somewhere along the way, in
my 24 hours that I'm in California, I've got to go find a
charging station. I asked about that and was told, well, you
know, there's apps for that. You can go online and find out
where to go charge it.
The technology is not there to support what this
Administration is doing. But just, you know, to further bolster
that a little bit. You know, California now likes to fancy
themselves as a leader in the country, but God forbid the rest
of the country follow their way, that by 2035 or, you know,
we're going to have 100 percent electric vehicles. That's 68
percent by 2030. By 2026 it's going to be 35 percent. But the
reality today, China produces--of the batteries that are
required for these, China produces 95 percent of the manganese,
70 percent of the cobalt and graphite, 66 percent of the
lithium, and 60 percent of the nickel.
The Under Secretary of State--Secretary of State for
Economic Growth, Jose Fernandez had said in order to meet the
goals that we're going to have to do to achieve these targets,
we're going to have to increase our production of critical
minerals by six to eight times, the amount of lithium
production by 42 times, and the amount of graphite by 25 times.
With the hurdles we have with regulations to try to get that
stuff permitted and done, it's never going to happen, and
everybody knows that.
And we see--we read stories of the Western auto
manufacturers are concerned that this--these policies are
driving auto manufacturing into the arms of the Chinese. It's a
reality. They're out ahead of us on us. Good on them for that.
But the truth is--and we all know it--that we do not have the
ability to meet these timelines. So I'd like to hear from you.
What is the game plan to marry up our regulatory environment
with the requirements that are coming down the line to--so
that--give me some confidence that these are deadlines that
will be made.
Secretary Granholm. Yes----
Mr. Franklin. Well, and just with one other point, the
average used vehicle, the average age of a vehicle on the road
now is 12 1/2 years. So vehicles that are--you know, the folks
in California in just a few years aren't going to be able to
drive the cars that are being produced today. I mean, there'll
be able to drive them. But as we know, as more of these corners
that currently have gasoline available to them are converted to
charging stations, it's going to get harder and harder to find
fossil fuel to refuel the vehicles. But help assure me that
you've got a plan that we're not going to drive auto
manufacturing into the arms of the Chinese.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, this is exactly what the Inflation
Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law are all
about, which is to create and pull the full supply chain for
manufacturing electric vehicles into the United States. And
what we're seeing across the country is that it's happening.
We've got all these battery manufacturers now in the United
States, the supply chain moving to the United States. You're
right about extraction of critical minerals.
Mr. Franklin. But, excuse me, is that a clean--is that
clean? Because the data that I see would indicate that really
all you're doing is shifting the pollution from one source to
another. I mean, yes, you're going to cut ultimately the carbon
emissions coming out from those electric vehicles, but the
production of those batteries, the disposal of them is
absolutely as dirty as anything that's coming out of the
tailpipes of these combustion engine cars today.
Secretary Granholm. Well----
Mr. Franklin. Do you disagree with that?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I do. I do. Because there is a
whole overall strategy to make sure that these are industrial
facilities that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, that they're
built to have lower GHG emissions. And we want to make sure
that we are responsibly extracting minerals as well. We
obviously want to partner with our allies. We want to recycle
as much as we can. We want to find substitute materials. But we
also want to do sustainable extraction. We have an old mining
law. I think it needs to be upgraded for the moment. And
hopefully, we can do that----
Mr. Franklin. But I would love----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. In a bipartisan way.
Mr. Franklin. Pardon me. I know we're running short of
time, and I'm actually over. But I would love to hear more on
the plan on how you intend to work with EPA on that. But I will
tell you in Florida where electric vehicles explode, catch on
fire when they get wet, we have hurricanes, you cannot get out
of Florida when a hurricane is bearing down, and an electric
vehicle now simply is not possible. It just--it doesn't exist,
and we can show you the data. It may work somewhere else, but
it's not going to work in Florida anytime soon.
But thank you, Mr. Chairman, for indulging me, and I yield
back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentlewoman from North Carolina,
Mrs. Foushee. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this Committee hearing today. And thank
you, Secretary Granholm, for your testimony, and for appearing
before us this morning.
I am proud that my district, North Carolina's 4th, includes
the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory or TUNL, a DOE
center of excellence and partnership between UNC (University of
North Carolina) Chapel Hill, Duke, North Carolina Central
University, and North Carolina State University. In fact, about
eight percent of all Ph.D.'s in experimental nuclear physics
are educated at TUNL.
And I was pleased to see that North Carolina Central
University, an HBCU (historically Black colleges and
universities), was recently awarded funding through DOE's
Reaching a New Energy Sciences Workforce, also known as RENEW,
the initiative and effort from the DOE Office of Science to
support undergraduate and graduate training opportunities at
institutions historically underrepresented in the Office of
Science research portfolio. This opportunity will allow
students in my district and at nearby regional HBCUs and
minority-serving institutions to participate in accelerated
physics research and to be mentored by world-class TUNL
faculty. It will also support nearby Durham Technical Community
College instructors and students to take part in summer
research. These efforts greatly expand the reach of
experimental nuclear physics research to communities who are
not usually represented, and I applaud DOE's efforts through
RENEW and other programs.
Secretary Granholm, in your testimony you noted that DOE's
mission requires effective stewardship and promotion of diverse
and inclusive research environments and workplaces. With
efforts like DOE's RENEW initiative, can you please elaborate
on what you consider the agency's roles and responsibilities to
be in addressing our Nation's workforce needs?
Secretary Granholm. You bet. Thank you so much for the
question. We are not successful as a nation if we do not make
sure that we reach into all talent from all pockets, especially
places where we haven't been able to allow great talent to
flourish. So, RENEW and the other workforce strategies that we
have been engaged in really are intentional and focused in
reaching out to disadvantaged communities to make sure that
children there see what it's like to work in a lab, to be able
to have hands-on experience.
I note, for example, SLAC, the Stanford Linear Accelerator
Lab, they have a program where they reach into a disadvantaged
community nearby and get girls in high school who never were
thinking about being involved in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics), invite them in for a summer
program. And once they're there for the summer, 98 percent of
them chose a STEM degree for college because they just needed
to be exposed to it. And so we are a better society when we
make sure that we have access to all talent. And that is one
piece of the important part of workforce development that our
labs and the Department is doing.
Mrs. Foushee. How could the lack of fully funding your
budget request for the Office of Science impact programs like
RENEW's initiative and our Nation's ability to address our most
pressing problems?
Secretary Granholm. So clearly, cuts to what we have
requested would hamper research, workforce development,
deployment, you name it, across the board. We think it's very
important as we think to the future, and that's what this
Committee is all about is thinking about how we can ensure that
we have workforce, as well as science and technology
discoveries made. And, you know, cutting funding at this moment
would hamper our ability to be competitive globally.
Mrs. Foushee. Let's talk about cybersecurity for a moment.
In May the OIG released a report on DOE's unclassified
cybersecurity program and found that the Department had not
taken appropriate actions to address previously identified
weaknesses related to its cybersecurity program. Thirty-eight
of 61 of the OIG's prior recommendations remained open and
unaddressed. And in June, DOE informed Congress that it had
been affected by the MOVEit cyber incident. Can you please tell
us if the Department is implementing the OIG cybersecurity
recommendations now, how so, and what the Department is doing
to ensure it is protected from future cyber vulnerabilities?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, cybersecurity is a high priority
obviously for the Department and the energy sector. We--I know
DOE--the DOE IG released its annual Federal Information
Security Modernization Act evaluation. With every audit, the
report included multiple findings across the enterprise that
identify areas for improvement. It also, we note, realized a 40
percent reduction in the number of recommendations from 21 to
22. And we're taking those findings seriously. We're committed
to resolving the open issues using a risk-based approach, and
we're going to track through and remediate all of the findings
in a timely manner.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from Alabama. Mr.
Strong, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary Granholm, energy security is national security,
and the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) is a national
security asset. Would you agree?
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Strong. Why then did you discuss the release of our
Strategic Petroleum Reserve with senior Chinese Communist Party
officials?
Secretary Granholm. I discussed the release of their
strategic petroleum reserve, not ours.
Mr. Strong. Do you think that was a good move?
Secretary Granholm. It was part of an International Energy
Agency effort to get a number of countries to release from
their strategic petroleum reserves to create more supply in the
market in the wake of supply crunch globally.
Mr. Strong. Do you believe this jeopardized national
security----
Secretary Granholm. No.
Mr. Strong [continuing]. For America?
Secretary Granholm. No.
Mr. Strong. OK. Is it safe to assume that you consult the
CCP officials before major policy decisions? If so, how often
do you discuss American energy policy details with them?
Secretary Granholm. Absolutely not.
Mr. Strong. How often--what about Russia, Iran, or North
Korea? Are you also consulted--as part of your decisionmaking
process, do you consult with them?
Secretary Granholm. Absolutely not.
Mr. Strong. In March of this year, you released a statement
on the President's fiscal 2024 budget. In this document you
claim that the Biden Administration is increasing America's
energy and national security by building out reliable domestic
supply chains free of influence from adversarial foreign
nations like Russia. China is not mentioned once in this this
public-facing document. Does this Department of Energy not
believe that China's a threat to America's energy and national
security?
Secretary Granholm. We do.
Mr. Strong. As part of the Biden Administration's plan to
reduce emissions, the DOE has led efforts to accelerate the
broad adoption of electric vehicles across the United States.
This so-called revolution is dependent on our main adversary
China. They don't--they control over 60 percent of the
worldwide production of critical minerals and 85 percent of the
global processing capacity. What is the Administration's view
on mining of critical minerals right here in America?
Secretary Granholm. We support sustainable mining, and we
want to bring that full supply chain here. And that's what the
Inflation Reduction Act and the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
are all about, bringing supply chains home.
Mr. Strong. What role should the National Energy Technology
Laboratory (NETL) have to--have in advancing R&D in critical
minerals?
Secretary Granholm. They have an important role.
Mr. Strong. The President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget
proposes a reduction in funding for quantum information science
and technology. China has demonstrated secure quantum
communications and is currently developing a quantum
communication satellite network. Can you explain why the Biden
Administration is reducing funding in quantum information
science and technology? What is the--that is vital in
sustaining America's global competitiveness and innovation?
Secretary Granholm. I am not aware that we are reducing
quantum.
Mr. Strong. I can assure you, we are.
Secretary Granholm. In fact, we've asked for investment
in--we have five--DOE does--national quantum research centers
with an estimated annual budget each of $25 million that is
being retained, and we believe that quantum is a very large
part of--I just want to look to see if I can find the numbers--
of what we must be investing in going forward, so we agree on
that. Just looking to see if I can find the number.
Mr. Strong. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentlewoman from Florida--or, I'm
sorry, Colorado. Ms. Caraveo, you're recognized for five
minutes.
Ms. Caraveo. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to you and
Ranking Member Lofgren for holding this hearing. I also wish to
extend my hopes for a speedy recovery for Chairman Lucas.
And thank you, Secretary Granholm, for coming to speak with
us today.
Before I dive into my questions, I just wanted to express
support for Colorado's bid with our neighbors in New Mexico,
Utah, and Wyoming to establish a Western interstate hydrogen
hub. This is a group of States that is looking to participate
in the Regional Clean Hydrogen Hubs program, and I hope that we
can stay connected as the Department continues to review
applications for this program that was made available by the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law.
Now, you know, one of the things that I love about Colorado
is its interesting weather patterns. But late last year,
Colorado experienced a sudden cold snap when temperatures
dropped 37 degrees in one hour, one of the largest one-day
temperature changes ever recorded by the National Weather
Service. The already cold weather, combined with that
temperature drop caused Suncor, which is our only refinery in
Colorado, to experience an emergency shutdown, which then led
to a domino effect in my district. Because Suncor is--really
only started coming back online months later in March, my
constituents were hit with high costs as the gas prices jumped
about 50 percent in Colorado. And it didn't just stop there
because there were reports of multiple emission leaks well
above regulated levels during the shutdown of Suncor.
As a pediatrician myself who has seen children with
increased symptoms of asthma whenever there are similar
emissions, this was incredibly concerning. The Suncor shutdown,
I think, really demonstrated to Coloradans how climate change
can have an impact both on their pocketbooks and their physical
health.
And that's why I think we need to make sure our any energy
infrastructure, no matter what fuel we'll--we're looking at is
resilient to extreme weather events, which we have talked about
are increasing, caused because of climate change.
So, Secretary, what gaps do you think exist in our current
climate resistance research as it relates both to gas
refineries and renewable energy facilities?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, great, thank you. I think on the
refinery side in terms of resilience for weather events, the
traditional mechanisms apply like insulation, et cetera. And I
think the question is always what's the cost-benefit given the
frequency of the events? But as we are seeing greater
frequency, it is imperative that these facilities invest in,
you know, whether it is flood management or water management,
or conservation.
On the second part are on renewables but also on
refineries, we have done an industrial decarbonization roadmap,
which includes refineries and--petroleum refineries in
particular, but also all industries, heavy industries, which
lays out the specific R&D steps that are next for them to
decarbonize. You know, research is going to be development
for--you know, research and development is going to be
necessary for low capital solutions like energy and materials
and systems efficiency, but also, you know, reducing fugitive
methane, pursuing zero hydrogen strategies, you know, all of
the--carbon capture, all of the ways that the industrial
facilities overall can decarbonize. I'm happy to send you a
copy of that so you can see the--it's a longish document, but
there's a section there that refers specifically to refining.
Ms. Caraveo. That would be wonderful. I'm very interested
in your work in the area. What role does Congress need to play
in this so that we can be supportive of the work that you're
doing to protect constituents both from high prices and from
health consequences----
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean----
Ms. Caraveo [continuing]. As we see more of these events?
Secretary Granholm. Excuse me, I'm sorry. The--obviously,
Congress can continue to authorize and appropriate funding so
that we can ensure that these facilities have the means to be
able to install the resiliency measures that they need to be
able to continue to function.
Ms. Caraveo. Well, happy to continue working with----
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thanks.
Ms. Caraveo [continuing]. The Department on that as we see
these events, like we have both said, increase. And thank you
very much for your work and for your testimony today.
And with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We will go next to the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Williams, the Chair of the Energy Subcommittee. You're
recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, there's so much I love about your
Department and the interaction that I've had with your people
at the national energy labs. This is an area of particular
interest for me, as you and I discussed briefly, and I just
commend you for so many of the wonderful people that I've had
the privilege to meet and interact with.
Bear with me, but--there will be questions, but my concern
is for the rapidly rising costs of energy for the constituents
in my district in central New York. We pay an average of 51
percent more than the national average for electricity. Yet,
there's even move for even higher costs to be passed on to
consumers because of projects like offshore wind and solar
farms that require additional investment of backup sources to
make them actually usable. As one of my colleagues across the
aisle has pointed out, the wind doesn't always blow and the sun
doesn't always shine. And sometimes it snows a lot and covers
up everything. So this is having a very difficult effect, I
think an unfair effect on the 63 percent of Americans that live
paycheck to paycheck. Energy cost is literally impoverishing
working Americans.
Another issue though, is the resilience of our energy grid.
And it seems more precarious than any time in my lifetime. And
I've spent some time talking with many of your scientists about
this issue. But the--my question for you and line of questions
is really about rebalancing our investment in energy
infrastructure. You may have known recently that Europe learned
a very painful lesson in this regard with the invasion of
Ukraine by Russia, and their overreliance--Europe's
overreliance on renewables and overinvestment in renewables
caused enormous pain as factories had to shut down, potentially
putting people out of work. It happened to come in the winter,
which was unseasonably mild, thank God, but heating costs rose
significantly. And one of the wonderful things that came out of
it is that the EU actually discovered two new green
technologies for energy, remarkable. It was nuclear and natural
gas.
And so in this country, we don't seem to have learned
anything from this very visible and very large-scale reality
check on our investment in renewable power. In April, Goldman
Sachs estimated that we would spend--America would spend $6.6
trillion on renewables. I'm not talking about clean energy. I'm
talking about on renewables. And meanwhile, I noticed that
we're spending $1 billion on fusion. I'm very excited about
that and the work that you're doing on that. We're spending--
your Department's investing, you know, multiple billions of
dollars in advanced nuclear in the supply chain and uranium
enrichment, all these great things, but $600 billion invested
in renewables, $1 billion in fusion or several billion,
perhaps, in advanced nuclear, which is my expertise. This
country needs at least 200 gigawatts of new power generation
capacity. And I have been told that for just 1/4 of the
investment that we would make in renewables, the $6.6 trillion,
less than 1/4 of that, if we spent that on nuclear and natural
gas, we would actually have low-cost, low-emissions energy for
generations.
I'm curious, why is it that we are so unbalanced in the
face of the reality of what we've seen in Europe in the energy
investments we're making in this country?
Secretary Granholm. So I think we need it all. I think we
need the investment in nuclear. I think we need----
Mr. Williams. All the above, I agree, but it has to be a
balanced investment----
Secretary Granholm. Well----
Mr. Williams [continuing]. Wouldn't you agree?
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Here's what I would say is
that, you know, we follow where the private sector is going as
well. And there's huge amount of investment in renewables. That
is true.
Mr. Williams. It's led by incentives by your--by the
Administration.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, as is----
Mr. Williams. It's a distortion in the market----
Secretary Granholm. As is much of energy, there's
incentives across the board. But----
Mr. Williams. A huge distortion in the market.
Secretary Granholm. The great news is that in most places,
solar and wind are now the cheapest forms of energy. So now we
have to work on----
Mr. Williams. Then why would we limit----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Energy storage.
Mr. Williams. Why wouldn't we limit wind and solar
investment to those places where they are economically viable
instead of in the Adirondacks where it snows? Syracuse is the
second cloudiest city in America.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, as we know, we want to take this
to scale. And we're not going to prohibit a university or
anywhere else from investing in these technologies. But also we
know that advances in these technologies allow them to be
effective in many places where 10 years ago they were not.
Mr. Williams. I am 100 percent in favor of increasing power
density in solar, increasing the wonderful innovation that your
Department's doing in battery technology, for example. We have
distorted the market in a way that's dangerous for our grid and
is punishing to the working class of America. I invite a
conversation with you, a dialog with you on how we can
rebalance this. If your office would be interested, I could
certainly be available to that. Thank you so much for being
here.
Secretary Granholm. You bet. Thanks.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania.
Mrs. Lee, you're recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Lee. I know that this is not usually how this happens,
but the gentlewoman from Virginia asked if she can hop ahead of
me.
Mr. Obernolte. Certainly without objection, we'll hear from
the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania.
Ms. McClellan. Virginia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Obernolte. Virginia.
Ms. McClellan. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Lofgren, for planning this hearing. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for your work to ensure that the United
States is a leader in energy innovation and the clean energy
transition.
As a State legislator, I carried the Virginia Clean Economy
Act which put Virginia on a path to 100 percent clean energy by
2050. And I look forward to working with you and the Biden-
Harris Administration in implementing the historic investments
in that clean energy transition so we can hopefully speed up
that timeline.
But my questions today are more focused on my concerns
around the impact a government shutdown could have on our
research abilities, that a shutdown could jeopardize access to
essential Federal services and have a harmful economic impact
but would also, in some cases, irreparably harm our research
capabilities. The previous shutdown in 2019 disrupted the flow
of Federal science funding, forced researchers to put their
work on hold, interrupted time-sensitive studies. And due to
the nature of scientific research, some of those losses were
impossible to recover.
As a matter of fact, just this morning, I received an email
from a major research university in my district, Virginia
Commonwealth University, that said DOE projects that are
waiting for the next budget period funding will be shut down
temporarily if there's a government shutdown. And to start them
back up is not that easy, as it will cause additional expenses
and delays. Students and postdocs could be laid off, and to
find them back with the same skill level would be very
difficult.
So I wanted to ask if you could further address how a
government shutdown would impact the Department of Energy's
ability to carry out its science and technology mission, both
in the short term, but also in the long term.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you for the question and for your
leadership in this clean energy space. Obviously, a shutdown
would be terrible in many, many ways. But let me say this. Our
position is that the debt ceiling vote was a deal to fund the
government at a certain level. And we expect the Speaker to
deliver on that deal. And we know that with the end of the
Fiscal Year approaching, it's clear that we're going to need
some kind of short-term continuing resolution to provide more
time for the Fiscal Year 2024 appropriations process to unfold.
And we look forward to working with both sides to achieve that
deal.
Ms. McClellan. Me, too. But could you also address the
impact that a long-term continuing resolution or automatic
spending cuts could have on the DOE's ability to carry out its
research?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, when you think about it, a
cut that prevents scientists from being able to do their
research in any of the areas that we have discussed. A cut that
requires facilities to be shut down like user facilities, for
example, where you've got wait lists of entities waiting to do
fundamental research, these are not facilities that you can
just flip on a dime. These are not on/off switches. These are
massive facilities, and the scientific work that's being done
and the research that is being done, it must continue. So it
would harm in the immediate, and it would harm our ability--I
go back to this--globally. We are in a race on all of these
technologies, and to slow it, to stop it is going to impede our
ability to be competitive and to lead.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Madam Secretary. And earlier this
year, I was pleased to see the Department of Energy's
announcement of the HBCU Clean Energy Education prize, which
supports HBCUs in developing STEM programming for K-12 and
community college students and is part of the Biden- Harris
Administration's Justice40 commitment. I wonder if you could
give us an update on the program, either quickly in an answer
or on the record later, an update on this program and other
initiatives you're pursuing to increase equity in our clean
energy future.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, happy to provide you with
something additional. But just quickly, on May 8, we announced
this first version of the prize, clean energy education prize.
And since the launch, we've--we're launching a second version
of that as well. And I will get you the details in writing both
on that, as well as the other work that we're doing on
Justice40.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Madam----
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Ms. McClellan [continuing]. Secretary, and I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from New Jersey. Mr.
Kean, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for being
here, Secretary Granholm.
My question is on nuclear energy. And, as you know, it's
the most reliable and resilient form of electricity in many
ways. And in fact, on your website at the Department of Energy,
it says that nuclear power is the most reliable energy source,
and it's not even close.
The question that--with that in mind, in New Jersey, we
have--you know, nuclear power plants produce about 40 percent
of the electricity and accounts for more than 85 percent of the
carbon-free power. Given the success of this of this industry
and energy source so far, can you talk to me why you are
looking to seek a decrease of 11 percent, $210 million for the
Office of Nuclear Energy?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, the only reason why you see a
reduction there is that the demonstration projects were moved
over to a different part of the Department, to the Office of
Clean Energy Demonstrations. So it wasn't a reduction in the
amount of money that we're spending on nuclear in general. It
was just the office. In fact, it was by law that we moved it
over to the demonstration side of the equation.
Mr. Kean. OK. And would that include the virtual--excuse
me, the versatile test reactor?
Secretary Granholm. The versatile test reactor was not
funded last time, and so it--by Congress. They chose not to
fund it. And so this is a really important question because we
need to have a test reactor, and I'm hoping that in the next
couple of years, we can get back to funding it and that people
will see the importance of having a test facility for reactors.
Mr. Kean. Can you talk about that a little bit more here,
please, about the importance of it?
Secretary Granholm. It is very important because you--if
you don't have a facility to test, then you're not sure that
the next generation of reactors are going to be safe, are going
to be effective, et cetera. So that test reactor and the
testbed that was, you know, set aside for this, we had been
funding. You know, I know in budget times, there's always
negotiations, but we're hopeful that we can get back to funding
it so that we can make it available, especially for all these
modular reactors that are coming online.
Mr. Kean. Well, that's one of my points----
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Kean [continuing]. Is, in fact, if you're looking at--
many places are looking at nuclear and modular reactors and
they're getting safer and safer, and they're getting--it will
be reduced and done at a scale in which we can have a resilient
and reliable energy grid, and it's an important solution.
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Kean. And ensuring that this is--as part of a budget,
whether it's, you know, through the help of Congress and with--
obviously, with the support of the Administration, I think it's
one of the areas we need to be--continue to focus on because
there are many countries that are leading in this effort, and
we need to be more aggressive in that regard.
Secretary Granholm. I agree.
Mr. Kean. In others, can you talk about the importance of
public-private partnerships in the future of our energy
security and innovation in general and where you see the
Department's focus?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, public-private
partnerships are everything. In this country, we don't have
government-funded systems, we have public-private partnerships,
and so making sure that those pipelines are there. And we at
the Department of Energy start with funding, you know, it's
nascent, whether it's at ARPA-E (Advanced Research Projects
Agency--Energy) or technology transfer from the laboratories,
and then we take them to applied strategies. And then they
deploy and they--the bird starts to fly from the nest, and
that's what's really important. If we don't fund those early
stage efforts, then we're not going to see the later-stage
efforts because it's difficult for often those with great ideas
to get the funding to be able to do that. So that's why those
public-private partnerships are completely necessary.
And even for some of the initial large-scale demonstration
projects, so, for example, the hydrogen hubs will require a 50
percent contribution. We're not funding it all. It has to be a
partnership. So it de-risks the public-private partnership with
government funding, but eventually you want to make sure that
the private sector can run with it.
Mr. Kean. No, no, I agree. And if I can help in that
regard, let me know.
Secretary Granholm. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll go back to the gentlewoman from Pennsylvania. Ms.
Lee, you're recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Secretary
Granholm, for honoring this Committee's invitation to be here
today. It's not easy being at the forefront of implementing
massive change to shape the future of American energy
production and consumptions. We thank you.
The economy of western Pennsylvania has been reinvigorated
by the expansion of the technology sector. My district is home
to one of three Department of Energy--excuse me energy--
National Energy Technology Laboratory sites, NETL, that will
benefit from $150 million in funding through the Inflation
Reduction Act to improve lab infrastructure through DOE's
Office of Fossil Energies and Carbon Management. Just last
week, DOE's Loan Program Office issued a conditional commitment
of nearly $400 million to Eos Energy Enterprises' Project AMAZE
(American Made Zinc Energy), which will bring almost 1,000
green jobs and 50 union construction jobs to my region, the Mon
Valley. I'm glad that the work of our office has done behind
the scenes has come to fruition for the benefit of my district
in Pennsylvania.
I'm interested to hear more about how my district and this
region can be further aligned with your agency's priorities
toward the development of our Nation's renewable and clean
energy economy. Every Member of this Committee represents
families who are concerned or affected by the changes they see
and feel in their environment. It's vital that we continue to
push for new technologies and strategies, not just for energy
security, but for better welfare and living standards for our
constituents.
I fight every day to make sure the people I represent are
not left behind in the transition to a new economy. Green jobs
can and will be union jobs. Environmental protection and
addressing environmental injustices are not mutually exclusive
from supporting communities with resources and employment
opportunities. So I'm excited to continue working with various
offices in your agencies to make those jobs a reality.
I'm proud that my bill, the Abandoned Well Remediation
Research and Development Act, passed through this Committee and
will further support research and development to help reduce
methane emissions from abandoned mines across the country. Can
you tell us how we will applied research, development, and
demonstration programs prioritize historically disadvantaged
and environmental justice communities?
Secretary Granholm. Wow, that was great. I'm so glad you're
from that area because it's such an important area to
demonstrate. You know, I mean, Pittsburgh, for example, has
just been the phoenix that has showed other industrial areas
how to do it with smart planning and good strategy and great
leadership. And the Mon Valley and steel production and
transitioning to clean steel, it is--you can continue that work
of being the phoenix that rises from the ashes, so it's very
exciting.
The Justice40 initiative is about communities that have
been disadvantaged and left behind and making sure that in our
grant process, we consider in our community benefits plans
communities that have been at the back of the line and that
have been forgotten. We want to make sure that they are part of
this new energy economy. Super excited about Eos, super excited
about Nextracker, which is another company that opened up in an
old factory. The conversion of these old factories to be able
to produce the supply chains for the clean energy economy is
very exciting. Nearby in Weirton, West Virginia, they have Form
Energy, which is on the footprint of an old steel factory, and
they're doing iron-air batteries for long duration energy
storage. This area is going to benefit enormously, and we want
to make sure that the--that all pieces of the community, but
particularly those who've been left behind, have the best
advantage.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I'm very happy that you mentioned the
community benefits agreement. Eos, of course, as a part of this
grant or a part of their process, it had to implement one. And
they spent time very intentionally convening with different
communities around their site, community leaders and members to
come up with this. They call this a boon to their company, not
the bane of it. I'd love to know how community benefits
agreements process carried out by folks like them can ensure
that tools like--that these tools served not just as a
checklist, right, for entities who seek Federal funding, but
are indeed mutually beneficial.
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, it's critical because,
first of all, if a factory lands in a community and the
community was not consulted, then you're not going to be as
successful, not just from a workforce point of view, but just
from an acceptance. You're much better off going in and having
an open table and saying, here's--how can we construct this?
How can we do this in a way that actually benefits the people?
That definitely includes workforce. And in an era where we have
such low unemployment, this is an opportunity for communities
to really own the future, their future of this clean energy
economy. That's why the requirements for grants have a
community benefits plan. And 20 percent of that grant is graded
upon the community benefits plan and as quality, and we're
requiring that all across the board.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I had--I could go on and on and on. It
was worth it to not get all my questions to hear you call my
community the phoenix, so I'll leave with that. And I yield
back my time. Thank you so much.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from Texas. Mr. Weber,
you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you. And I appreciate my colleague not
going on and on and on.
So anyway, hey, listen, I want to correct something, Madam
Secretary, that you said for the record. You told Mr. Babin
that, quote, ``We're at record levels of production of oil and
gas. We're producing more than ever before. We're producing
12.7 million barrels per day or by the end of the this year,''
end quote. The research showed that according to the EIA,
Energy Information Administration, June 2023, the United States
produced 12.84 million barrels of crude oil. This is the
highest level of production oil for this Administration, but it
isn't the highest production, period. According to EIA, again,
the previous Administration, the United States produced 13
million barrels of crude oil in November 2019. And being from
Texas where we do a lot of that, I just want to set that
straight for the record. I appreciate the job of your being
here.
I saw the--I saw--I don't know if you saw the Ford CEO
(Chief Executive Officer) came out today, Fox News Business
said that electric vehicles are provoking charging anxiety. I
don't know if you saw that by chance.
Secretary Granholm. It doesn't surprise me.
Mr. Weber. It doesn't surprise you that the anxiety was
provoked?
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Weber. You've been there recently, I know. So you had
the trip. Of course it made news, obviously. And so I think you
mentioned range anxiety actually. And of course, he's calling--
the report here is calling it charging anxiety. But you went
and you had people in front of you and people behind you. And
of course, I guess you were supported probably by gas-powered
vehicles in some form?
Secretary Granholm. My security detail drives a gas-powered
vehicle.
Mr. Weber. Right. And you wouldn't want their battery to
fail, would you?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I'd be all about having big,
honking electric vehicles of large size. We're on the cusp, but
we're not quite there yet.
Mr. Weber. Yes, well, you got a ways to go. But what about
when you did that? I'm just curious because, you know, I own a
big F-350 diesel truck Ford. I'm from Texas after all. And--so
we drive long distances. I'm curious, did y'all plan out that
route? I guess your staff did. You had a particular route or
route, however you want to say that, that you wanted to take?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, we decided to do an EV road trip
through the South. And, you know, as I was saying earlier, I
have a fantastic staff, but an error of judgment was made. The
good news is that everybody was able to charge. But it
definitely underscored, which we knew it would, that we need
more charging stations in this Nation. And that's what the
North American Vehicle Infrastructure--the Infrastructure Act,
the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law gave us $7.5 billion to add
500,000 charging stations across----
Mr. Weber. Right. And so----
Secretary Granholm. It's going to get better.
Mr. Weber. Well, at taxpayer expense, of course. I would
argue that when gasoline cars were invented, turn of the
century 1900--I wasn't there. I just look that old. But I read
in that book where you know, when they invented the horseless
carriage is what it was called, how the government then went
out and put gasoline stations everywhere. Oh, wait. No, they
didn't. You're not near that old either, but you--surely you
read that book about the invention of the automobile?
Secretary Granholm. I am familiar with the start of the
automobile industry having been Governor of Michigan, yes.
Mr. Weber. Aren't we glad it was gasoline automobile, no
electric automobile. We'd really be in a meck of a hess.
Secretary Granholm. Well----
Mr. Weber. So let me continue. So you had an error of
judgment made. I know you ran into an untimely unfortunate
occurrence where there was a family waiting on a vehicle--or
charging station, I should say. Would you agree that before we
can really have a huge amount of electric vehicles on the
highway, we have got to update our electric grid? And I'm from
Texas where we have our own electric grid, ERCOT (Electric
Reliability Council of Texas). Eighty-five percent of the State
is in its own electric grid. Winter storm Uri, February 3 years
ago coming up, solar panels iced up, windmills failed, and we
had a problem. And so we need base load generation to be the
best, most reliable it can be. And I have to say that it's
going to be either nuclear or natural gas at this point. Does
that sound like it's a pretty good bet?
Secretary Granholm. I think nuclear is a very good bet. I
think we've got an awful lot of natural gas. I just want to
with respect say that I think Winter Storm Uri proved that the
natural gas infrastructure was also subject to----
Mr. Weber. There was. There was some more pipeline. I'm
glad to hear you're in favor of pipeline permitting updates.
I'm glad to hear that. So I was going to ask you what you would
tell the American public about that trip, but I'm down to 11
seconds. Unlike my colleague over there, I'm not going to go on
and on, so I thank you for being here.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Weber. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
And we'll go next to the gentleman from Florida. Mr. Frost,
you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Hello, Madam Secretary.
It's great to meet you.
The Inflation Reduction Act included $8.8 billion in
rebates designed to make Americans' homes more energy
efficient. For Floridians this could mean a new air
conditioner, a home solar installation, or even better
insulated windows. You know, by this summer but the summer,
Florida Governor Ron DeSantis vetoed funds to implement those
rebate programs in our State, depriving Floridians of over $340
million in Federal funding and ensuring that none of those
savings will be heading to my home State or my district. I'll
also say I heard one of my colleagues from Florida mention that
the infrastructure isn't there in Florida for EVs yet--or he
said that the infrastructure isn't there, that the technology
isn't there. The technology is there. The infrastructure isn't
there in part because our Governor refuses to accept funds
already appropriated and that are supposed to be meant for our
State. And so I put a lot of blame on the Ron DeSantis
Administration for Florida falling back in terms of technology.
Our office has heard from many of my constituents,
including seniors on fixed incomes and small business owners,
who are angry and stunned with the State's decision to deprive
them of these programs. Many Members of the Florida delegation,
including myself, sent a letter to your office regarding this.
And I wanted to ask, Madam Secretary, will the Department of
Education create a Federal managed--a federally managed program
to allow local governments and municipalities in places like
the State of Florida to access these rebates budgeted already
in the IRA?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thanks for this question. It is--I
can't imagine why a State would reject funds that would help
their citizens to be able to lower their costs. But the law
says that the money must go to States and that a State has
until August 2024 to be able to access that funding. And as
it's currently regulated, the--if a State does not, that money
gets reallocated to other States. So I would be eager to see
and to sit with you, and our team would figure out if there's
another solution. But at this point, States must apply.
Mr. Frost. Got you. Well, it's great to hear that, you
know, your team and our team and the Members that signed this
letter can get together and figure out how we can ensure that
this money already budgeted for the State of Florida can be
used by Floridians. And I can't imagine why the Governor
decided to reject it, too. Maybe it's too woke, I'm not sure.
JBT AeroTech has been in Orlando for over 40 years and is
now manufacturing electric cargo loading, pushback, and jetway
vehicles for airports across the entire world but also
specifically United States. It's a company that's in my
district. Something they mentioned is ever since the IRA came
out, they've seen exponential growth in the amount of electric
jet bridges, cargo pushing vehicles, pushback vehicles that are
being ordered by their clients. I asked, you know, how we can
up it even more. They said one of the largest problems they've
seen with airports is that they don't want the charging
infrastructure set up to take advantage of getting the
vehicles. And so they said if that infrastructure gap can be
met, then they would see it even more. So I wanted to see, is
this type of issue something that the Joint Office of Energy
and Transportation was created to address?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I will say it was created to
address the charging--electric vehicle charging gaps along
public transportation corridors and in areas, cities, et
cetera, where it doesn't exist right now. However, I do think
that if this is--if this piece of infrastructure gap for
airports, for example, exists, then I think I would put it back
to Congress to say there might be a way to plus up this--I
mean, the ideal is that we want to create charging everywhere,
including a grid that can handle the charging everywhere. And
the charging infrastructure right now is designed to go for
individual drivers and to replace the charging infrastructure
that's not working. That's what the three tranches are for at
the moment.
Mr. Frost. What are some of the ways that DOE is working
with other agencies to meet the Administration's vital goal of
net zero emissions by 2050?
Secretary Granholm. We're working all across the
government. It is a whole-of-government approach. We have a
Cabinet that is focused on this that includes a subcabinet,
which includes the Department of Energy, Department of
Agriculture, EPA, Treasury, I mean, all of the agencies that
have a chunk of this very important commerce, of this very
important part of our--you know, of our ecosystem. Whether it's
making sure that we're doing right on the regulatory side,
which is EPA, or doing right on the buildout of clean, which is
ours, or doing right for the agricultural community taking
advantage, all of the pieces of government are working in this
direction to get to net zero by 2050 and 100 percent clean
electricity on our grid by 2035.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Madam Secretary, for your years of
service. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
And, without objection, we're going to take a five minute
break to allow our stenographer to get a little relief. So we
will come back in five minutes.
[Recess.]
Mr. Weber [presiding]. The hearing is called back to order.
The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Baird, who rushed to get
over here, is next for five minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. And,
Madam Secretary, I do appreciate --I do appreciate you getting
here because I think energy is such an important aspect that we
need to address. And, you know, I am concerned, you know, right
out of the box, we closed the Keystone pipeline, and then we've
reduced oil and gas leases. We--and the environmental and
social issues are concerning. You don't want to put that--and
then we're talking about EVs and so on. But I have to tell you,
Madam Secretary, that when I go to--just my pickup--and I own
farmland and so on, but--and my farmer friends, but when I go
to fill up my pickup, two years ago it was $50 and now it's
$100. And those dollars that go into that fuel tank I think
could have gone to groceries for some of the people in my
district. I mean, you know they're struggling the way it is.
And so anyway, my concern is that we create so many
restrictions and we get so focused on carbon and so on when our
country is doing such a great job of reducing emissions. And
there's probably things that we could do better or cleaner or
whatever. But then that's contrasted with China going around
the world building fossil fuel power plants. And they're
capturing resources, and they're capturing civilizations
really, I mean, or cultures by being able to do that.
So I guess my concern is, how do you see that? How do we
counteract what China is doing around the world with how well
we're doing in efficiency and how we go from energy dependence
from our adversaries to go to energy independence?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you so much. I think we share a
lot of the same concerns. We all want to make sure that the
United States is leading rather than China, that we're not
reliant upon China, and that China's not amassing allies across
the globe because of their investments, no doubt about that.
It's one of the reasons why what we have seen over the past two
years with the amount of investments that have been made in the
United States, to bring those supply chains home has been
really remarkable. In fact, in Indiana I was just looking--we
put out today a map, an interactive map where you can see the
investments that are happening. And in Indiana, you've got 18
companies' supply chain announcing in this clean energy space
that they are coming and hiring people and setting up shop,
which is great. It's great news. And that's not just Indiana.
It's across the country, 23 in Texas, sir.
So we--you know, the bottom line is we've got to continue
to bring back investments. We want these products made in
America, stamped Made in America, with American workers. And
that's the strategy. I think we all think that's a good thing.
With respect--and with respect to continuing to be clean,
you know, this--there's--it's alleged that--by Bloomberg that
the market for these clean energy products by 2030 globally is
going to be about $23 trillion. And the question is, which
country is going to corner that market? Well, China has already
cornered a piece of it, and we're just trying to get it back.
And so we can do nothing, right, or we can be aggressive about
it. And I think what we are doing and what we're seeing is that
the United States is now leading, and that's good news.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you. And Indiana appreciates any of
the efforts in that direction, but I want you to know we're
very competitive with Texas, too, so--but I thank you for that
kind of investment and so on. And, you know----
Mr. Weber. The gentleman's time is expired. No, no, no.
Mr. Baird. You got to watch these Texans. I mean, there's--
I really like Texas. So--but anyway--but, you know, my
background is agriculture and we take a lot of fuel and we take
a lot--we've got a lot of machinery dedicated to using fossil
fuels. And I don't mind looking at alternatives, but I'd sure
like to have the opportunity to be able to move that in--in a
reasonable and respectful way.
So I guess my time is about up, and my Chairman just
canceled me out, so--but we got about 18 seconds if you don't
mind commenting about----
Secretary Granholm. Agree.
Mr. Baird. OK.
Secretary Granholm. Agree that we have to see this as a
transition.
Mr. Baird. Don't say anymore. We're good.
Secretary Granholm. All right.
Mr. Baird. Thank you.
Mr. Weber. The witness' time has expired.
Congresswoman Ross, you're up.
Ms. Ross. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Substitute
Chairman, and Mr. Substitute Ranking Member, for holding this
hearing. And, of course, thank you so much, Madam Secretary,
for joining us today and for the excellent work you're doing
for the people of this country.
I'm also appreciative of all the work the Biden
Administration has done to invest in the clean energy
revolution, along with Congress. And I would be honored to host
you in my district, the Research Triangle, to show you the
exciting work we're doing in North Carolina. My district is
home to a new EV workforce training program at Wake Tech
Community College, as well as the Research Triangle Cleantech
Cluster, a nonprofit organization that's worked with its
partners for over a decade to support efforts to bring new
clean tech companies to our region and to our State. And this
afternoon, I am meeting with nuclear engineering students at NC
State University, one of the top ranked universities for
nuclear engineering, so all good things. And you can drive
there if you want in an electric vehicle.
Secretary Granholm. Right.
Ms. Ross. I've been pleased to see the rapid investment
that the--in the renewable energy sector, including wind
energy, following the passage of the IIJA and the Inflation
Reduction Act. Building out our renewable energy production is
key to our clean energy future, but it also required--requires
us to solve the complexities that a diverse and diffuse
electric grid brings.
My home State of North Carolina is no stranger to the
dangers that extreme storms like hurricanes pose to our grid.
And a diffuse clean energy grid requires even more coordination
and intentional planning than traditional power sources. And I
know Representative Bonamici opened this discussion at the very
beginning, but we simply don't have enough money in the
Inflation Reduction Act and the infrastructure bill to deal
with all of the grid needs that we have. And you're going to
have to be partnering with States, particularly for distributed
generation to deal with upgrades for storms. And I'm interested
in knowing how you're going to make this work and how the
economics are going to work. Because FERC (Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission) has an entirely different way of paying
for grid modernization than many of our States. In my State of
North Carolina, it either is 100 percent on the ratepayers, or
if you're a new renewable energy resource, you pay 100 percent
for that interconnect. So what is the Department of Energy
doing on this front?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you for the question. Thanks for
your leadership. I look forward to coming to North Carolina to
your district and seeing all the great things that are
happening.
We know that the energy system overall in this Nation is
completely pocketed, right? It's like a mosaic, and it's
different in every district almost depending on the utility and
the spread of the jurisdiction. We--you know, the national grid
is really a pocket of 50 State grids and munis and co-ops and
et cetera. So what can we do to make sure that the grid works
together, that people are treated fairly, and that they can
take advantage of the lower forms of energy, cost of energy
like renewables coming on? FERC, I know, has a cost allocation
rule that they are contemplating. I hope that passes to sort of
even things out. We--but we all share the backbone, which is a
grid.
And even if it's--you know, we need to make sure that--
except for in Texas, which we hope that we eventually have a
handshake for, Congressman, but bottom line is we need to make
sure that the grid everywhere is reliable. And we don't have
enough funding in this--I mean, as much funding as existed,
there's a $10.5 billion slug for these grip awards, which are
all about making the grid more resilient. But--and we have a
grid facilitation funding as well to help build out some of the
new, but they're small compared to the need that is out there.
So we are going to continue to push on the innovation.
We're going to continue to push on resilience. We're going to
continue to push on the materials that would make it easier to
put more power along a single line like advanced
reconductoring, et cetera. But to be able to incentivize the
buildout of the transmission that we need, we would need
Congress to act again.
Ms. Ross. Great. And I know I only have 15 seconds left,
but I will ask you to submit for the record what you're doing
to deal with cybersecurity issues. I have a bipartisan bill
that came through this Committee, one of the first bills to
pass the House, that would create a grant program and more
investment in education and working with your Department on
cybersecurity, and----
Secretary Granholm. It will be welcome.
Ms. Ross. Great. Thank you so much.
And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman from Ohio is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for joining us today, and thank you for
your patience.
Madam Secretary, there are a few things on my mind today
that I would like to address with you. I represent an area
around Cleveland, Ohio, which has a rich history of
steelmaking. Today, our region is home to Cleveland-Cliffs,
which I believe you visited, the largest flat-rolled steelmaker
in the United States, headquartered in downtown Cleveland, and
with one of its integrated mills within city limits.
As you know, American steel producers are the cleanest in
the world, cleaner than China, India, and a vast amount of
other countries. And our steel producers like Cliffs are
working to make their operations even cleaner while still
remaining competitive. I have heard firsthand from Cliffs that
a component of its strategy includes the use of clean hydrogen
when it becomes economically viable. As part of that strategy,
Cliffs is very invested in the Great Lakes Hydrogen Hub, which
has an application pending with DOE. Cliffs and other northeast
Ohio businesses would be major off-takers of this nuclear-based
hydrogen hub, and it would make the technology extremely
economically viable immediately.
Secretary Granholm, I know you have more hub applicants
than can be funded, but I also understand decisions may be
near. What information can you provide Committee Members about,
one, how the Department is approaching these hydrogen hub
applications; and two, the timing for the announcement of these
awards? Thank you. And I really hope to see that that hub come
to Ohio, where it would be an important economic driver for our
communities and much needed.
Secretary Granholm. Great, thanks. Thanks for the question.
As you know, we're in the middle of the decisionmaking process.
Interviews were had. Concept papers have been submitted.
There's been a merit review panel of experts. This is all done
on a merit basis. So I'm not involved. It's all experts who
rank the hubs. So we expect that there will be an announcement
hopefully within the next few weeks, at least within the next
month. We want this announcement to be in the same ballpark as
the Treasury guidelines regarding hydrogen. Not sure if you're
familiar, but there's a lot of back-and-forth about that.
Mr. Miller. Yes.
Secretary Granholm. Today, we announced another $1 billion
for a demand-side strategy for hydrogen so we can make sure
that the hydrogen economy works in these hubs. So all--I would
say in the month--before the end of October, we'll have answers
to all of these, we hope.
Mr. Miller. OK. Well, thank you for that detailed response,
and it's really appreciated, but it's not hope. We want the
answers, and I want Cliffs to be booming because it helps our
area in Ohio's 7 so----
Secretary Granholm. I understand.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. Thank you very much, Secretary. As
you know, DOE and NASA (National Aeronautics and Space
Administration) signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) in
October 2020 to promote collaboration between the two agencies.
This MOU highlighted different areas of increased partnership,
including the high performance computing, planetary defense,
and space situational awareness, among other areas. Having NASA
Glenn Research Center in my district, I would like to know what
developments you can point to from the last three years
resulting from this MOU?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, let me see here. So I know the
collaboration obviously with NASA is really important to us.
You know, we've done space-based nuclear collaboration, very
important, and that is to deliver these radioisotope power
systems. And I'm going to have to get back to you on the--any
updates on the status of that component of the partnership.
We--the Office of Science has been working with NASA through
collaborative projects in astrophysics, space-based
astrophysics, and biological data sharing, which is important.
Our Office of Science High Energy Physics program is
collaborating with NASA's Science Mission Directorate on the
lunar surface electromagnetics experiment at night. I'm sure
you're familiar with that, which is a Pathfinder mission to the
ultra-low noise environment of the lunar far side to detect
signals. And then we've got a NASA-DOE Large Area Telescope
that we jointly work on primary instruments in NASA's Fermi
Gamma Ray Space Telescope. So we have a lot of cooperation,
super important, and we're going to continue.
Mr. Miller. Thank you. It's much needed, and----
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. You know, NASA Glenn Research
Center that we have in Cleveland, Ohio, is often overlooked,
and it shouldn't be, so please keep that in your mind.
I do have other questions I'm going to enter into the
record, but thank you for your patience today----
Secretary Granholm. Likewise.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. Madam Secretary, and I appreciate
you. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Weber. The--what was it she said, the surrogate chair?
Mr. Casten. I've been called worse.
Mr. Weber. And recently, if you're like me.
The gentleman from Illinois is recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Pleasure to see you,
Madam Secretary.
And just before we get started, I'd like unanimous consent
to enter into the record a recent report from the International
Monetary Fund. There's been some discussion about clean energy
subsidies, and this analysis showed that the United States
subsidizes fossil fuels by $650 million a year. That is 20
times as much as we incentivize through the clean--through the
IRA. And I hope my colleagues who are concerned about
distortions in energy markets will work with us on the bigger
fish and not the minnows.
Secretary Granholm, I want to--if you'll humor me with a
story quick, I was--two weeks ago was part of a congressional
delegation to Norway. And it was a fascinating place, and I
felt like I was time traveling five years forward in the United
States.
Secretary Granholm. Wow.
Mr. Casten. The--they have an almost--as I'm sure you know,
an almost 100 percent renewable electric grid, which gives
their citizens access to very cheap, very clean energy. It's
allowed them to electrify huge parts of their economy. You
know, we went to the ports in Oslo where all the boats are
electric and so people are swimming in the back of the boat
because there's no worry about diesel exhaust that's out there.
Eighty percent of all new vehicle sales were electric, and they
are justifiably proud of what they've done.
I then did my best not to cause a diplomatic incident by
beating them up over the fact that 10 percent of all the energy
they produce is for domestic consumption. Ninety percent of the
energy they produce is oil and gas that they sell to Europe.
And of course, they've gotten in some heat from some of the
Europeans about how much money they made on the back of the
Ukraine war, you know, essentially wartime profiteering if you
will. The Norwegian Government I think had their highest
revenue year ever and their highest margin on the tax receipts
from these oil and gas exports.
And I don't say that to beat up on the Norwegians. And in
fairness, I did say to them I would--I'm not criticizing you
for anything that I wouldn't criticize our own government for.
But I fear that we are on that same trajectory. The total oil
demand in the United States is about the same now as it was 10
years ago. Coal demand is down about 40 percent. Natural gas is
growing but growing much slower than the economy. And our oil
and gas sector is increasingly an export industry. And much
like Norwegians, Americans like having cheap energy. American
oil and gas companies also like making money.
And what I'd like to know is how you are thinking both with
the DOE and with a broader agency of what is our strategic
long-term plan for LNG export terminals? And I guess maybe
start just with a very narrow DOE question. We are not--the gas
industry is not building LNG terminals because they are
committed to the health and welfare of the Ukrainian people.
They're building because it's a fantastic arbitrage
opportunity. And has DOE or the Energy Information
Administration done any assessment of the degree to which the
construction of LNG terminals is increasing the exposure of
domestic gas consumers to European price volatility?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, actually, there have been a couple
of--there was a report done by--or is in the middle of being
done by the Energy Information Administration on this question.
And the impacts honestly are marginal in terms of what it means
for U.S. consumers because there's such an abundant supply.
However, to your--the first part of your question, which is
the LNG, what part of the mix should that be or at least what--
how do we think about that? Like every nation, we should be
thinking about what is happening to GHG emissions, and LNG
produces them. Even though it's cleaner than coal, we know
that. We know that we also--and even though our LNG may be
cleaner than from some other places, we still have to work on
cleaning it up, meaning getting--emissions abatement is
important. We've--so I'll just----
Mr. Casten. Well, and I guess just--I mean, just to say the
same thing I said to the Norwegians, they had the same
conversation. Our oil and gas is so clean because all our
refineries are on electric. Fine, until you burn it.
Secretary Granholm. Right.
Mr. Casten. And if we're framing this as a transition fuel,
then sell it at cost, right? Because otherwise, we're creating
this situation where our consumers want cheap and clean energy,
and we're giving it to them. But if our economy is dependent on
selling our oil and gas to somebody else at the highest
possible cost, we can talk a good game about transition fuels,
but we're creating an economic incentive for ourselves to keep
this--make this a permanent situation.
And, you know, maybe to get this to like, you know, a
meatier question, what steps are we taking to make sure that
those LNG terminals we're building are in our national interest
as required by the Natural Gas Act?
Secretary Granholm. Right, that's the--exactly the question
we should be asking. That's exactly what we're evaluating
inside of the Department of Energy, what's in our national
interest given all of the terminals that have already been
permitted. And, you know, we've got like 49 BCF that have been
permitted of exports. And we're currently exporting about 13
billion, so----
Mr. Casten. I see I'm out of time, but I would just close
with the same comment I made to the Norwegians, that if were
sending troops to Ukraine right now, we would have people up in
arms saying why are you allowing the gas industry to be in the
wartime profiteering business? And I think we need to have that
conversation before we send troops, not just because the people
who are over there don't have a U.S. flag on their uniforms.
I yield back.
Mr. Weber. Mr. Ranking Member Substitute, since you brought
up Norway, did you know on Norwegian ships, they have a
barcode. Did you know that? Do you know why that is? So that
when they come into port, they can scan-the-navy-in.
Secretary Granholm. Oh, my gosh.
Mr. Weber. The gentleman from California is recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. Garcia. Wow.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Secretary
Granholm, for your----
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Chair?
Mr. Lieu. I'm sorry, which gentleman from California?
Mr. Garcia. The good looking gentleman from California.
Mr. Lieu. I stand corrected.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Ted. Wow, interesting 30 seconds
there. We shouldn't--if you're transitioning out of your home,
you should sell it at cost to Mr. Casten by the way.
Madam Secretary, it's good to see you again. We last saw
each other in March, I believe, during the appropriations,
Energy and Water Subcommittee hearing. I represent a district
in southern California where we're getting crushed by energy
prices, not just gas prices. We have $5 a gallon gas, of
course. So I purchased an electric vehicle thinking I can avoid
that, but now I have power bills that are approaching $1,000 a
month in my house. So I don't have anything extravagant. I just
have an electric vehicle. We also have $200 natural gas bills
every month in California, and we've got solar panels now that
have been regulated and the cost have been driven up to the
point where they're also cost-prohibitive.
In this hearing earlier, you said that the Department of
Energy or, I guess, this Administration doesn't have any effect
on the price of oil. I don't understand that. You don't believe
that, do you?
Secretary Granholm. Meaning we don't set the price of oil.
Mr. Garcia. You have an effect on the price of oil though?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we are at record levels of oil
production. If that's what you mean----
Mr. Garcia. We are----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. You're talking about the
supply and demand issue?
Mr. Garcia. No, that's not what I'm talking about. I'm not
talking about----
Secretary Granholm. What are you talking about?
Mr. Garcia [continuing]. Production. I'm talking about the
price of oil right now. We are right now at $90 a barrel,
right? The Administration--you released--and President Biden
announced in November 2021 that to give relief to Americans at
the pump, you were going to release $50 million of--or, excuse
me, 50 million barrels from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. At
that time, the price of oil was at $79 a barrel. We are now at
$90 a barrel. Supply and demand is greatly affected by what the
government does. The release of the SPR, the release and
production of oil, but also the replenishment of it.
I've got a chart here, and I've got a copy at your desk
there if you want to look at it closer. This is a historic
chart really since the beginning of when we started the
Strategic Petroleum Reserve inputs. You can see we are here
right now in terms of what is in our reserves. We haven't been
at this level since 1983. And before that, we were actually
accumulating reserves at that point. In March during our
hearing you said you were going to bring us a plan on how you
were going to replenish the Strategic Petroleum Reserve. We
haven't seen that plan yet, and now we're at $90 a barrel for
oil. We're again at--close to approaching record oil--excuse
me, gas prices at the pump, especially in California. It's
back-breaking.
What are we doing to lower the cost of energy and
specifically to lower the cost of gas to the average consumer
who can't afford to transition to an exotic electric vehicle or
doesn't want to deal with the cumbersome, you know, headwinds
that electric vehicles provide some of us? It's not easier to
have an electric vehicle by the way. Even though I drive one,
it's not easier to drive it an electric vehicle than it is to
have a conventional internal combustion engine.
You've painted our country into a corner now where our only
option is to ask for help and a handout from Russia, the Middle
East, and China. So what is our plan to get us out of this
corner without actually buying more oil from those guys, which
is, by the way, a lot dirtier source of oil than the oil that
we produce in the United States? What is our plan for this?
We're at $90. I wish we--you know, you're good at trading
stocks obviously. We had that conversation about Proterra. We
have sold off oil, and now we are at $90 a barrel with no
reserves since--record low reserves since 1983. What's our
plan?
Secretary Granholm. Let me say, one, our Strategic
Petroleum Reserve is largest in the world. It still is the
largest in the world. And we do have a plan. No. 1, thank you
very much. We canceled the congressional sales which is 140
million barrels, which is great, so that means it we are not--
--
Mr. Garcia. When are you going to market to purchase more
oil for the reserves?
Secretary Granholm. We've gone one time. We got 6 million
barrels. The price went up because what OPEC did----
Mr. Garcia. Wait, just to give an example of the scale of
what we're talking about, we're at----
Secretary Granholm. I know, but let me finish.
Mr. Garcia. What is our current reserve level right now?
Secretary Granholm. Three--what have you got there?
Mr. Garcia. Three hundred and fifty million barrels.
Secretary Granholm. Three hundred and fifty.
Mr. Garcia. You just talked about 6 million----
Secretary Granholm. No, but I'm just saying we are
replacing----
Mr. Garcia. --2 percent----
Secretary Granholm. There's 180 million barrels that we're
talking about, canceled the congressional sales, that's 140
million. We're buying back when the price is advantageous. We
sold it at on average 94 million--$94 a barrel when the 180
were sold on average. We sold at 94. When we want to----
Mr. Garcia. When are we buying more?
Secretary Granholm. We will be buying more when we think--
feel like it is best advantageous for the taxpayer. So that's
on tack, and we're going to do exchanges----
Mr. Garcia. Are you comfortable with where our----
Secretary Granholm. --25 million----
Mr. Garcia [continuing]. Reserve levels are right now?
Secretary Granholm. I'm not worried about the reserve
levels at all. It is the largest reserves----
Mr. Garcia. Are you comfortable with where----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. In the world.
Mr. Garcia [continuing]. Our prices are right now?
Secretary Granholm. No, I'm never comfortable with where
our energy prices are.
Mr. Garcia. OK. I'm out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back. We'll hear next
from my colleague from California. Mr. Lieu, you're recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Senator
Granholm, for your leadership.
Within the Department of Energy is the National Nuclear
Security Administration that does a great job trying to prevent
nuclear proliferation. Also, within the Department of Energy,
you have the biological and environmental research program,
whose mission is to seek the underlying biology of plants and
microbes as they respond to and modify their environments. So
the Department of Energy has its hand in both nuclear and
biotechnology issues. And my question to you is about the
impact of generative AI, and I have a very specific question.
With the advent of generative AI, it's given individual humans
immense potential for power and knowledge in a way perhaps not
seen before. That also includes people who want to do bad
things. It includes terrorists. It includes criminals. If you
were to go on ChatGPT and ask, tell me how to make a nuclear
dirty bomb, the current version would say it would be highly
irresponsible to provide that answer, and that's because
ChatGPT is not open source.
Other companies have taken a different approach. So Meta
has put out Llama 2, which is a very large generative AI model
that also provides answers to questions. It is open source, and
there are lots of benefits to open source. It can also have its
guardrails removed much easier. And you could potentially have
a world where people could in fact ask these large generative
models with guardrails removed, hey, how do I make a nuclear
dirty bomb, or how do I make a virus that can cause the next
pandemic? And I want to see if you or the Department of Energy
has a view on whether these large generative AI models should
be open source at all.
Secretary Granholm. As you rightly note, we are responsible
for nuclear nonproliferation, so the example you give is a very
ripe one. We would be very concerned about open access to that
kind of information because it is utterly dangerous to the
world and to our citizens. Is there a--and I appreciate the
conversation that Congress is having on AI at the moment. We've
got a couple of efforts inside of DOE and with NSF regarding AI
and how we make sure that it's both accessible for good, but
that we have guardrails for bad, bad AI. And so we have the
very large exascale computers. We want to be the place where we
build these foundational models, but we do that with the
guardrails that are necessary to protect our citizens. That's a
general statement. It has to be worked through. Obviously, you
have to carve this with a scalpel and not with an axe. But I
think it's very important that for the safety of the planet we
do not put out information where nefarious actors can take us
to pieces.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. I'm glad you mentioned exascale
computers. As you know, the Department of Energy has a huge
role in increasing the speed of computing power, including as
well quantum computers. I know you have made a lot of grants to
various quantum computing applications. I don't know what the
world looks like in, let's say, 10 years where you have, you
know, ChatGPT version 12 and then you've got quantum computing
that can go a million times faster. But I do know I would like
the United States to be in the lead, and so I want to ask, do
you think you have enough money right now in terms of doing
research, R&D on quantum computing and other kinds of faster
computing applications?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, I guess that's an easy
answer. The answer is no because we do know that our
competitors are out there and investing a lot more than we are
and perhaps don't have the same kind of guardrails or thoughts
about the nefarious uses of either quantum or AI. And so we
need to buildup our defenses, and that means we need to be able
to hire the people, we need to be able to have the systems in
place to make that--make us safe.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you. And then my last question is more
simply a request. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology has done a great job coming up with a risk-based AI
framework that can be applied to governmental agencies and the
private sector and other organizations. And so I'd like to ask
you and the Department of Energy to look at that framework and
apply it to the Department of Energy. Zoe Lofgren and I and
others have written a letter to the Biden Administration
basically saying, hey, look, this NIST agency has come up with
this great framework. Why don't you then apply it to your
entire Administration? So if you could look into that, that'd
be great. Thank you.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentlewoman from Oklahoma. Mrs.
Bice, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for being with us this afternoon.
I want to start with a line of questioning that occurred
earlier in the hearing from my colleague from California, Mr.
Issa, talking about the efficiency standards that are being put
forward by the Department of Energy and the impact on
consumers. You indicated that there is no push for you to
eliminate any of these particular appliances or household
items. In fact, you just want to see the efficiency standards
increase. But I want to point out a couple of things to you
that I think are relevant. In the Federal Register, which
details out your review of the efficiency standards for ceiling
fans, it is noted that there is a $16.69 cent savings if the
efficiency standards that you are proposing are met, which
would have a simple payback of 4.1 years.
But what is not talked about in here--and, by the way, the
average ceiling fan lasts 10 years-plus, so you're talking
$1.69 for a consumer per year that they would save. But what's
not being talked about is the impact on the manufacturing of
these particular appliances. And in the document, it is stated
that it is estimated that the industry would occur conversion
costs of $107 million. That is an estimate. So what that
translates to is those costs, those increased manufacturing
costs are actually going to be passed on to consumers. So in
essence, you're actually going to cost consumers more money by
these efficiency standards, not reducing their costs, so I want
to point that out. I think this is just one example. It happens
to many of the other proposals that you put forward for energy
efficiencies on gas stoves and refrigerators and washers and
dryers, you name it.
I want to pivot to a comment that you made earlier about
the Office of the Inspector General. Is it correct that you
asked for an increase in the IG budget for 2024?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I think that this is what was
asked for. You know, we obviously support that. So the Fiscal
Year 2024 request included $165 million for the OIG, which was
more than double what the 2023 enacted was, which was $86
million.
Mrs. Bice. OK. Let me ask this question. Why was that
amount not asked for prior? And here's why ask. The IIJA and
the IRA, which were passed previous to this Congress, actually
had an incredibly small amount proportionately of money given
to the Inspector General for those two programs. And let me
give you a little bit of maybe background in numbers. Under the
IIJA, CHIPS, and the IRA, Congress authorized or appropriated
$127.5 billion dollars to the DOE and increased the DOE's
direct loan guarantee authority by $350 billion. However, those
three programs only appropriated a small amount of the money to
the IG to oversee these funds, and you've already begun doling
them out and plan to do so over the next five years. Why were
you not adamant--when these programs are being put together and
passed in the last Congress by Democrats, why were you not
insisting that more money go to the IG to be able to oversee
these programs so that when your organization is doling out
these funds, you can ensure that you're not wasting taxpayer
money?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, we want to make sure that we're
not----
Mrs. Bice. But you had the opportunity to do that with
these bills and didn't. As a matter of fact, IIJA, the
percentage of that particular bill going to the Department--to
the Inspector General is .1 percent, and the IRA is .05 percent
when the benchmark is .35 percent.
Secretary Granholm. The money has started to flow, and
we've requested double the amount of money and we want the----
Mrs. Bice. But why did you not ask for it previous to now?
Secretary Granholm. Well, we're asking for----
Mrs. Bice. These bills were passed----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. Double now.
Mrs. Bice [continuing]. A year or two ago.
Secretary Granholm. I mean, we're asking for double. We
support the--you know, the Inspector General.
Mrs. Bice. So you want to----
Secretary Granholm. The Inspector General comes and makes
their own case here, too, so----
Mrs. Bice. And they have based on these numbers. You have
the ability--let me also make one other, I think, note here
that there's actually been a request from the Inspector
General's Office to allow for some additional funding to be
transferred to them. House Energy and Water appropriations bill
has proposed a transfer of unobligated funds to the Department,
but you haven't supported that transfer. Why are you trying to,
you know, hide or not be transparent with taxpayer money?
Secretary Granholm. Can I just say, you know, we requested
last year an increase of 100--we requested $107 million, but it
was Congress that funded only at $86 million.
Mrs. Bice. But you also had the opportunity to actually put
money into these programs initially and didn't ask for that. I
think it's troubling that the Department of Energy doesn't want
to be transparent with taxpayer money.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentlewoman yields back.
We will go next to my colleague from California. Mr.
Mullin, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for your testimony.
My home State of California is no stranger to the impacts
of climate change or extreme weather events. This year alone,
unprecedented atmospheric rivers caused devastating flooding in
my district in the San Francisco Bay Area. And just last month,
the first-ever tropical storm watch was issued for southern
California. There is no question we need to urgently address
the climate crisis. One critical step we have to take is to
speed up our transition from vehicles that are powered by
fossil fuels to ones that run on clean energy sources like
electric batteries and hydrogen fuel.
Yet this week, the majority will be asking us to vote on
legislation, H.R. 1435, which would be very harmful to this
effort. This bill in particular would undermine California's
role in setting clean emission standards and eliminate its
ability to require by 2035 that all vehicles sold in the State
run on electric power. I was proud to fight for this and other
policies to speed our State's transition to clean energy when I
served in the California legislature.
I understand the complexities that this transition brings
in the research, development, and deployment of EV-supporting
technologies that are needed to make this switch a reality. And
I understand that DOE is leading this critical R&D work.
So my question, Madam Secretary, is can you please provide
an update on the work that DOE is currently doing to make our
transition to EV safe, reliable, and practical in the near
future, and what gaps currently exist that Congress might fill?
Secretary Granholm. Thank you for the question. Yes, we are
doing everything from supply chain work to make sure we have it
in the United States to the building of the vehicles in the
United States to the selling of the vehicles at a lower cost
because of the Inflation Reduction Act--it's less expensive if
it's made in the United States--to putting out charging
stations across the Nation so that we can address the issues of
range anxiety and everybody has access to it, to continuing the
research and development on battery costs, which is the main
reason why electric vehicles have been more expensive.
We--our goal is to get 50 percent of vehicles sold by 2030.
California is, I know, a little more aggressive than the Nation
is on this, but we do believe that the cost of electric vehicle
operation and maintenance will bring down energy prices for
people. It's certainly been true. My home is in California as
well. I have an electric vehicle. I know that it was said
before that it costs more money. Honestly, I drive on sunshine
and solar panels and electric vehicle. And it has reduced our
energy costs enormously in our family. We'd love to make that
available to everybody.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for that, Madam Secretary. And on the
question of EV batteries, addressing gaps in our R&D of
advanced automotive technologies is critical. One area that
you've cited and I understand faces particular challenges is
advanced battery systems and extending vehicle range, which is
necessary before we'll see widespread adoption across the
board. So how is DOE supporting the research, demonstration,
and deployment of advanced battery systems to overcome current
energy storage issues with EVs? And how is the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law supporting this vital work of the----
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, first of all, we are
financing the development and the--you know, the development of
critical minerals for batteries both on extraction, but also on
substitute materials and doing research and development on
substituting expensive materials like cobalt, for example,
lithium. We're also investing in recycling, recycling these
batteries and recycling the materials so they can be reused
again for electric vehicles.
That whole suite of research and development is happening
in the Department, but it's also happening out and around. In
California--I've got my list--has 23 investments in clean
energy, not just in batteries but in clean energy, but a lot in
the battery supply chain. Across the country this is happening,
and the Inflation Reduction Act is making that possible. So
we're excited to be able to produce the whole vehicle and the
charging stations and the experience of having low-cost driving
in the United States so that we can really address range
anxiety and get an electrified transportation system.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for your leadership, Madam Secretary.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back. We'll hear next
from Mr. McCormick from Georgia. Sir, you're recognized for
five minutes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm, for your testimony today. I appreciate you.
For the first time in over 30 years, nuclear reactors come
online in the United States in my home State of Georgia. As a
matter of fact, we have one plant that just came online. We
have another one that's supposed to come online before the end
of the year, which I'm very excited about, is producing a
significant amount of energy, and hopefully, it drives costs
down and it secures our network. The problem is how long it
took and how expensive it got. And if you compare us to a
country like France, who's been using nuclear power for quite
some time, it's safe, it's effective, relatively safe. Of
course, there's always going to be things that can happen, as
we've seen in Japan and in the United States, but hopefully,
those are just blips.
One of the things I'm concerned about if we're going to
look to something that's clean and efficient like this into the
future, what can we do to reduce the regulatory burden? Because
what I've found is we're not safer than France. But it's taken
us sometimes up to five, six times longer because of
regulation. That's not making us safer. It's just making it
slower and more expensive. How can we streamline this process
to help places--companies like Vogtle continue to produce
something that's beneficial to the community and keep the
environment clean?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, it's a great question. I know the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission is looking at its processes
because obviously they're the entity that regulates nuclear
power plants. And that's true, especially for these newer
reactors, the small modular reactors so that we can make sure
that they don't take as long--I mean, Vogtle was a first-of-
its-kind-in-decades kind of event and I think people have
learned a lot from what happened at Vogtle. As we move forward,
I think that, you know, Westinghouse, et cetera, are taking the
designs and marketing them across the world and taking lessons
from them. But I do think that we do need to look at the
regulatory side to make sure that we are safe, but that we can
do it in a more streamlined fashion. So I agree with you on
that. And I think that is actually--that process is underway
right now, I think, at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Mr. McCormick. So you think we'll have less regulation--
burdensome regulation?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I--nobody wants burdensome
regulation. I think having streamlined regulation that still
does the task of keeping us all safe is what we would strive
for.
Mr. McCormick. Yes, one of the things I worry about is when
government steps in and wants to take any risk out of it
whatsoever. And I understand risk. I mean, I'm--I've landed
aircraft on carriers for years at a time, and there's always
risks to everything we do, but we get better at it----
Secretary Granholm. Right.
Mr. McCormick [continuing]. When we when we allow ourselves
to actually forge into that community and do something--conquer
a challenge like that. You just mentioned the microreactors,
which I think are fascinating, especially when it comes to
space and how we generate power of significance, not just from
solar power, but actually nuclear power, something that can
actually weaponize, too, to get rid of other weapons if you
will. What is the regulatory burden on that community? How do
we free up communities inside of the civilian and government
relationship where we can actually advance that technology,
where we can actually look to the future in space travel and
what we have to do to come up with significant energy
production in outer space in small nuclear reactors?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, I mean, when you think about
nuclear power in submarines, for example, we've successfully
done that in a safe way, the Navy has, for decades and decades.
Can it be--can those reactors have social acceptance in a
commercial setting or for space? I mean, those--the defense
agencies would probably talk to one another about what the
propulsion systems look like for space travel. But I know that
we've been successful underwater, and I'm convinced that
nuclear, if it's done right, it can be safe in many
environments.
Mr. McCormick. So when it comes to marrying up--I will go
back to the government versus civilian because, obviously, when
you talk nuclear, everybody gets very worried.
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. But we're going to empower civilians. If we
look at SpaceX and what it's done around the world, let's look
at--there's several people that are coming up with small
nuclear reactors that are literally really small that can
propel all kinds of civilian aircraft or in spaceships. How do
we get to that point where we agree on what's safe to give up
to the civilian world in order to accomplish this mission?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, it's a big question, right? How do
we agree? I think that the notion of public acceptance comes
with experience, with people feeling like, OK, it's been done
there, I'm OK. Same--do we have a good regulatory environment
that protects us? I mean, that's what the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission is all about, safety. That's their No. 1, you know,
raison d'etre. And so I think people want that. And the
question is, how can we use this power, use it safely, and use
it with public acceptance. And I think having a strong
regulatory system but that is streamlined is important.
Mr. McCormick. It sounds like we have a little work to do.
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you. With that, I yield.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
We'll hear next from the gentleman from New York. Mr.
Tonko, you're recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. Let me begin by thanking the Chair
and Ranking Member for holding this important hearing. And
welcome, Secretary Granholm. And let me thank you, not only for
your excellent leadership at a premier department, DOE, but
also for your determination to implement what I think is
transformational policy and bills that have been signed into
law.
It is incredible to see the work that the Department is
doing to tackle the climate crisis with innovative science and
technology solutions. I'm deeply proud of what we accomplished
last Congress to bolster U.S. research and innovation through
the landmark CHIPS and Science Act, Inflation Reduction Act,
and of course, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. Now, we must
use every tool at our disposal to achieve our climate goals,
and carbon removal will be a vital part of this approach with
some very robust goals.
This is why I'm introducing the Carbon Removal R&D Act to
launch a 10-year multiagency program for carbon removal
research, development, and demonstration, which I believe is
complementary to the DAC hub funding that has been recently
awarded.
So, Secretary Granholm, what does the Department see as the
next steps in advancing carbon removal research?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thank you for your leadership on
this. Obviously, this is--you know, carbon removal is like
removing waste, right? And so having government involvement is
important because it may not be something that the private
sector just takes up on its own until it's proven out, until
there's a way to monetize it, if there is. But the technology
itself and advances in that technology are critical. This is
why the direct air capture hubs that were announced in Texas--
hello, you're back--in Texas and in Louisiana are going to be
great demonstrations of how we can do this and how we can do it
at scale. So we are looking at that, and we're looking at other
ways to sequester carbon, to capture carbon as well.
From a research perspective, we've got a $2.5 million
program under the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law for carbon
storage validation testing, which is important as well. We
recently announced nine selectees for $189 million for the
first tranche of funds under the carbon capture demonstration
program. So we're doing a lot of carbon management, a lot of
managing of carbon and trying to figure out the best way to
remove it from the atmosphere. And I thank you for your
leadership on it.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And I would assume that within that
context, there is an effort to ensure that these carbon removal
projects deliver robust benefits and avoid any harm to the
communities----
Secretary Granholm. Of course. As always, there must be a
community benefits plan that ensures that a community is
participating and benefiting from the investment.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you. And last week, I visited Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute in my district to discuss their plans to
become the first university in the world to house an IBM
quantum system. For the United States to be the global leader
in quantum computing we must not excel only at research, but at
deploying at scale. So, Secretary, what plans does the
Department have to build on our existing basic research efforts
and move toward deployment of quantum-centric supercomputing?
Secretary Granholm. Yes, thank you for this, too, because
quantum is something that, again, a lot of our economic
competitor nations are pursuing, and we cannot be eclipsed by
them. We've got five national quantum information science
research centers at our national labs. This summer, the centers
actually came together to put on a quantum summer school with
hands-on training, real-world experience for the quantum
community. A hundred and fifty people attended that. They
sponsor an annual quantum career fair that attracts this next
generation, super important to get young people interested in
this. Because of the exponential speed that these--that quantum
computing possesses, we want to make sure it's done in the
right way. We were just having this conversation with
Congressman Lieu about the combination of quantum plus AI. We
want to make sure it's done well and done for good. So the
importance of having public participation in this is critical
and investment in it is critical so that we have the guardrails
necessary to protect our society.
Mr. Tonko. Well, I thank you for that. I do know that these
bills that we did--the CHIPS and Science Act, the
infrastructure bill, the Inflation Reduction Act--are truly
transformational. And what I'm impressed by is how you have
implemented as an agency in a way that is colorblind. And I say
that because too many times we're referred to as red districts
and blue districts. And I'm hearing from so many that there's
investments made in all districts across this country. And this
is truly going to be a benefit to communities no matter what
zip code in this country, no matter what colored district they
may be defined as.
So with that, I thank you for your leadership and your
determination.
Secretary Granholm. Thank you.
Mr. Tonko. I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back. We'll hear next
from our colleague from Georgia. Mr. Collins, you're recognized
for five minutes.
Mr. Collins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary Granholm.
I usually like to start out by letting you know I am a
freshman here, been here eight months, been in private sector
all my life, never been elected to anything.
Secretary Granholm. Wow.
Mr. Collins. I'm a small business person, so I am very much
a marketplace person.
And that being said, I don't think the government should
pick winners and losers and manipulate markets. But it seems
that the Biden Administration is doing just that by dumping
billions of taxpayer dollars into electric vehicle initiatives.
And at the same time, they're restricting Americans from
accessing the critical minerals necessary to build electrical
vehicles. Further, you're all doing this under the guise that
electric vehicles are greener or cleaner. So with 60 percent of
American energy generated by fossil fuels, does subsidizing
electric vehicles just shift carbon emissions from cars to
power plants while forcing Americans to buy expensive vehicles
they don't want?
Secretary Granholm. Well, I don't think anybody's forced.
We all believe in choice, right? But if somebody wants to try
an electric vehicle, there is the subsidy, of course, to reduce
the cost. And I think that's good for the planet. I think it's
good for Georgia. Georgia has benefited enormously from all of
these investments in Georgia as a result of the Inflation
Reduction Act. I was just looking, I think it's 31 investments
have come to Georgia, $32 billion of investments, jobs coming
to Georgia.
Mr. Collins. And I would agree with that 100 percent.
Secretary Granholm. Yes.
Mr. Collins. But let the marketplace determine that, not
the government----
Secretary Granholm. Well----
Mr. Collins [continuing]. Determine that. But having said
that, there is initiatives out there to be--to have so many
electric vehicles by 2035. And that is a push, and that is
saying that we are going to manipulate and push.
The other thing I want to let you know, I sit on Natural
Resources Committee, too, and I've spent eight months traveling
this entire country, hearing after hearing with people that
just want to mine, mine critical minerals, and they're not
being allowed to by this government. And what you're seeing is
the few mine--people that are able to mine, since we only have
three smelters in this country, they're shipping that to China.
China's producing 80 percent of our critical minerals, and
we're shipping it over there on ships that use diesel, and then
we're bringing it back. It just doesn't make common sense
because you know, like I do, China doesn't have green
factories.
Secretary Granholm. Right.
Mr. Collins. They're big polluters. But the thing is--and
what I want to get to with these critical minerals is, as a
matter of fact, it was just yesterday in a hearing, one of my
Democratic colleagues stated that we should increase mass
transit to reduce our reliability on lithium. And we all know
that goes to batteries and electric vehicles. Now, that doesn't
really seem practical. And we're relying on China for all this
lithium. Is it your position that the government should spend
billions of dollars on mass transit that very few people can
use efficiently instead of just issuing these permits so that
we can have the energy sector mine here in our country and
drive down the price and have cheaper critical minerals so that
people can afford these electric vehicles that are being pushed
on them?
Secretary Granholm. I do agree that we should be doing
sustainable mining in this country, and I think that the great
news is that the Inflation Reduction Act incentivizes the full
supply chain----
Mr. Collins. Ma'am, I saw people that----
Secretary Granholm [continuing]. For batteries.
Mr. Collins. I sat face-to-face with people that their
generations are dying and their towns are drying up because
they've been trying to get permits for almost 20 years to mine.
And these people set the standards on global mining out there.
But I want to just finish, because I only have a minute
left, on what I see as an outsider for eight months. I don't
really think this Administration wants us to have EV vehicles
anyway because they're too expensive for the average public.
That young--that Democratic colleague yesterday hit the nail on
the head. They don't want you to have EVs. Y'all want us to
drive--ride in mass transit. You don't even want us to own a
car. You don't want us to own gas stoves, ceiling fans. You
want to regulate everything, AC, motors, and compressors. You
want the American public to--at one point, for every decision
we make in our life, that we look to you for the answer, to the
Federal Government to decide on what you want best for us. And
that's not the American way, and that's not right. But that's
what I've been seeing for eight months out there.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Obernolte. The gentleman yields back.
That concludes our Member question period. I'd like to
thank Secretary Granholm for her valuable testimony and thank
all the Members of the Science, Space, and Technology Committee
for their great questions and the wonderful dialog.
The record will remain open for 10 additional days for
comments and written questions from Members. With that, this
hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:22 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix I

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

Responses by the Honorable Jennifer Granholm

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Appendix II

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Articles submitted by Representative Claudia Tenney

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Letter submitted by Representative Andrea Salinas

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Report submitted by Representative Sean Casten

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
