- AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND
SPACE ADMINISTRATION FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 30, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-39

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-626 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              GABE AMO, Rhode Island
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois,
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York             Vice Ranking Member
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 PAUL TONKO, New York
VACANCY
C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

April 30, 2024

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman, Committee on
Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of Representatives..    12
Written Statement............................................    13

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    15

Witnesses:

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18

Discussion.......................................................    23

Appendix: Answers to Post-Hearing Questions

The Honorable Bill Nelson, Administrator, National Aeronautics
and Space Administration.......................................    56

AN OVERVIEW OF THE BUDGET PROPOSAL
FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS
AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2025

----------

TUESDAY, APRIL 30, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2318 of the Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Frank
Lucas [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. The Committee will come to order. Without
objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses of the
Committee at any time.
Welcome to today's hearing entitled, ``An Overview of the
Budget Proposal for the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) for Fiscal Year 2025.'' I recognize
myself for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Today, we'll hear testimony from Administrator Nelson about
the President's budget proposal for NASA for Fiscal Year 2025.
This Committee plays an important role in NASA's mission by
providing policy direction and authorizing activities for the
agency. While we make progress with language included in the
2022 CHIPS and Science Act, it's been more than 7 years since
the last comprehensive NASA reauthorization bill was signed
into law. I'm certain that everyone in this room, including the
Administrator, can agree that 7 years is far too long.
As many of our experts have highlighted in Committee
hearings this year, a lot has changed for NASA since 2017. We
must approach an authorization bill with these changes in mind
and address a few major topics. The first topic is Artemis. I
speak for Members on both sides of the aisle when I expressed
the strongest support for America's return to the lunar
surface, but support also means asking tough questions about
the planned architecture and execution of the program.
The second topic is NASA's role in low-Earth orbit (LEO)
when the International Space Station (ISS) is retired. We heard
several perspectives on this topic in February, and I look
forward to continuing this dialog as we move forward.
A third topic is NASA's management of science missions
within the agency's portfolio. We support NASA daring to do big
things, particularly in science, but how can Congress ensure
these projects, particularly flagship missions, remain on
schedule and within budget?
As we deliberate on these topics while we consider this
important reauthorization legislation, we must also keep in
mind recent budgetary issues. NASA doesn't lack plans for
future exploration efforts, whether it's returning astronauts
to the Moon, exploring our solar system, or developing new
aviation technology. However, these ambitions come at a cost.
In May 2023, President Biden signed the Fiscal Responsibility
Act capping Federal discretionary spending for Fiscal Year 2024
and Fiscal Year 2025.
One of our challenges will be to draft an authorization
bill that complies with that law while providing sufficient
support for NASA to execute these awe-inspiring missions.
Failing to do so will force NASA to take on more work than they
have the funding to accomplish, which will not only set NASA up
for failure by asking them to do too much with too little. By
providing proper oversight and clear direction and authorizing
language, this Committee can create the framework for adequate
funding for the agency's activities.
A common theme among the hearings this Committee held this
Congress is the importance of ensuring U.S. competitiveness in
research and technology development globally, and today is no
different. While the United States remains the global leader in
space exploration, we face increasing challenges
internationally. Just last week, China reiterated its
commitment to landing two astronauts on the lunar surface by
2030. Later this week, China intends to launch a mission that
will retrieve samples from the far side of the Moon. If they
are successful, China will be the first country to do so.
We cannot allow China to become the front runner in space
exploration. There are too many consequences for our
competitiveness, our national security, and our continued
ability to explore space. With clear direction from Congress,
NASA will ensure that the United States remains a global leader
in space and continues to inspire millions of people around the
world.
I want to welcome Administrator Nelson back to the
Committee where he served for many years. I look forward to
working with you as we move forward with our NASA Authorization
bill.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Today, we hear testimony from Administrator Nelson about
the President's budget proposal for NASA for Fiscal Year 2025
(FY25).
This Committee plays an important role in NASA's mission by
providing policy direction and authorizing activities for the
agency.
While we made progress with language included in the 2022
CHIPS and Science Act, it has been more than seven years since
the last comprehensive NASA authorization bill was signed into
law. I am certain that everyone in this room, including the
Administrator, can agree that seven years is far too long.
As many of our experts have highlighted in Committee
hearings this year, a lot has changed for NASA since 2017. We
must approach an authorization bill with these changes in mind
and address a few major topics.
The first topic is Artemis. I speak for Members on both
sides of the aisle when I express the strongest support for
America's return to the lunar surface. But support also means
asking tough questions about the planned architecture and
execution of the program.
The second topic is NASA's role in low-Earth orbit when the
International Space Station is retired. We heard several
perspectives on this topic in February and I look forward to
continuing this dialogue as we move forward.
A third major topic is NASA's management of science
missions within the agency's portfolio.
We support NASA daring to do big things, particularly in
science, but how can Congress ensure these projects,
particularly flagship missions, remain on schedule and within
budget?
As we deliberate on these topics while we consider this
important reauthorization legislation, we must also keep in
mind recent budgetary issues.
NASA doesn't lack plans for future exploration efforts,
whether it is returning astronauts to the Moon, exploring our
solar system, or developing new aviation technology. However,
these ambitions come at a price.
In May 2023, President Biden signed the Fiscal
Responsibility Act, capping federal discretionary spending for
FY24 and FY25.
One of our challenges will be to draft an authorization
bill that complies with that law while also providing
sufficient support for NASA to execute these awe-inspiring
missions.
Failing to do so will force NASA to take on more work than
they have funding to accomplish, which will only set NASA up
for failure by asking them to do too much with too little.
By providing proper oversight and clear direction in
authorizing legislation, this Committee can create the
framework for adequate funding for the agency's activities.
A common theme among the hearings this Committee held this
Congress is the importance of ensuring U.S. competitiveness in
research and technology development globally, and today is no
different.
While the U.S. remains the global leader in space
exploration, we face increasing challenges internationally.
Just last week, China reiterated its commitment to landing
two astronauts on the Lunar surface by 2030. Later this week,
China intends to launch a mission that would retrieve samples
from the far side of the Moon. If they are successful, China
will be the first country to do so.
We cannot allow China to become the frontrunner in space
exploration. There are too many consequences for our
competitiveness, our national security, and our continued
ability to explore space.
With clear direction from Congress, NASA will ensure the
U.S. remains a global leader in space and continues to inspire
millions of people around the world.
I want to welcome Administrator Nelson back to the
Committee, where he served for many years. I look forward to
working with you as we move forward with our NASA authorization
bill.

Chairman Lucas. And I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentlewoman from California, for an opening statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I join Chairman Lucas in welcoming Administrator Nelson
back to the Committee to discuss the President's budget
proposal for NASA. We appreciate your leadership at NASA and
that you are here again today.
Amidst what can be times of geopolitical, economic, and
environmental strife, NASA continues to be a bright spot, a
north star that sparks a sense of wonder and curiosity about
our planet, our solar system, and the universe. NASA's mission
to advance space and earth science, human exploration,
aeronautics, space technology, and STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) education continues to bring us
together, and that's something we need.
Here in Congress, there's broad bipartisan support for
NASA's mission. Beyond the United States, NASA continues to
lead us in activities that serve the peaceful exploration and
utilization of outer space. The value of these intangible
benefits cannot be underestimated, nor can we forget the direct
value that NASA R&D (research and development) has had on
societal challenges such as climate change, space weather, and
even on tracking and characterizing potentially hazardous near-
Earth asteroids.
Today's discussion provides an important opportunity to
examine NASA's progress toward meeting our policy goals for the
United States civil space program to identify opportunities for
improvement and to understand what NASA needs in budgetary,
workforce, and infrastructure resources to accomplish its
inspiring mission.
The President's Fiscal Year request for NASA is $25.384
billion, about a 3 percent increase from the enacted Fiscal
Year 2023 appropriation. I believe this request allows us to
keep the Artemis II demonstration on track, advancing Moon-to-
Mars activities, and investing in sustainable aviation, among
other activities.
However, last year's debt ceiling agreement does impose
caps on discretionary spending, and that presents challenges
for all our Federal research and development agencies. NASA is
no exception. Under the 2025 request for NASA, high-priority
science recommended in recent National Academy decadal surveys
cannot be initiated. The timeline for Mars Sample Return (MSR)
is to be determined. Previously selected science missions are
being pushed to the right or even canceled while other
productive science observatories such as the Chandra X-ray
Observatory are proposed to be phased out.
For human exploration and spaceflight, NASA's plans call
for transitioning from use of the International Space Station
to commercial low-Earth platforms at the end of the decade. At
the same time, NASA also plans to begin an annual cadence of
Artemis missions to the Moon. In short, a bow wave is building.
There's no sugarcoating the current budget proposal. I
recognize that tough decisions need to be made. It's essential
that this Committee understand what drove some decisions in the
proposal of others as we evaluate tradeoffs, and it's also
imperative that NASA has clear plans for action on the other
side of the present budget horizon. Lots is at stake. I'm
especially concerned, as the Chairman has mentioned, about
reductions in workforce, including those in my home State in
California, resulting from prolonged mission timelines. Losing
skilled talent is a further setback that cannot be erased. We
need to look holistically at the implications of the 2025
proposal on the health of NASA now and in the future. How will
we position NASA to meet the future? Or will we stay on the
tail as other nations that don't share our values advance, as
the Chairman has expressed?
As Ranking Member, I will continue to ensure we position
NASA for success and that the United States continues to lead
in the exploration of outer space.
I want to thank you, Administrator, for your extraordinary
leadership of NASA, and we welcome you back and thank you for
your service. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Good morning. I join Chairman Lucas in welcoming
Administrator Nelson back to the Committee today to discuss the
President's budget proposal for the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration for Fiscal Year 2025. We appreciate your
leadership of NASA and your being here today.
Amidst what can be times of geopolitical, economic, and
environmental strife, NASA continues to be a bright spot--a
North star that sparks a sense of wonder and curiosity about
our planet, our solar system, and the Universe. NASA's mission
to advance space and Earth science, human exploration,
aeronautics, space technology, and STEM education continues to
bring us together. Here in Congress, there is broad bipartisan
support for NASA's mission. Beyond the United States, NASA
continues to lead a strong and growing body of international
partners who join us in activities that serve the peaceful
exploration and utilization of outer space.
The value of these intangible benefits cannot be
underestimated. Nor can we forget the direct value that NASA
R&D has on societal challenges such as climate change, space
weather, and even on tracking and characterizing potentially
hazardous near-Earth asteroids.
Today's discussion provides an important opportunity to
examine NASA's progress toward meeting our policy goals for the
United States civil space program; identify opportunities for
improvement; and understand what NASA needs in budgetary,
workforce, and infrastructure resources to the accomplish its
inspiring mission.
The President's Fiscal Year 2025 request for NASA is
$25.384 billion, about a three percent increase from the
enacted Fiscal Year 2024 appropriation and essentially flat
from the Fiscal Year 2023 appropriation. The request enables
progress in keeping the Artemis II demonstration on track,
advancing Moon to Mars activities, investing in sustainable
aviation, among other activities.
However, last year's debt ceiling agreement imposed caps on
discretionary spending. That reality presents challenges for
all our federal research and development agencies, and NASA is
no exception. Under the FY2025 request for NASA, high priority
science recommended in recent National Academies decadal
surveys cannot be initiated. The timeline for Mars Sample
Return is TBD. Previously selected science missions are being
pushed to the right or even canceled, while other productive
science observatories such as the Chandra X-Ray Observatory are
proposed to be phased out. For human exploration and
spaceflight, NASA's plans call for transitioning from use of
the International Space Station to commercial low Earth
platforms at the end of the decade at the same time NASA also
plans to begin an annual cadence of Artemis missions to the
Moon. In short, a bow wave is building.
There is no sugar coating the current budget proposal. I
recognize that tough decisions need to be made. It is essential
for this Committee to understand what drove some decisions in
the proposal over others as we evaluate the tradeoffs. It is
also imperative that NASA has clear plans ready for action on
the other side of the present budget horizon.
A lot is at stake. I'm especially concerned about the
reductions in workforce, including those in my home state of
California, resulting from prolonged mission timelines. Losing
skilled talent is a further set back that can't be erased. We
need to look holistically at the implications of the FY2025
proposal on the health of NASA now and into the future.
Will we help position NASA to meet the bow wave? Or will we
stay on the tail as other nations that don't share our values
advance? As Ranking Member, I will continue to ensure we
position NASA for success and that the United States continues
to lead in the exploration of outer space.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Let me introduce our witness for today's hearing, Mr. Bill
Nelson, who serves as the 14th Administrator of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Administrator Nelson's
career includes over four decades in public service. He
represented Florida in both chambers during his 30 years in
Congress, and, I would most importantly note, including 6 years
of chairing the House Science Committee's Space Science and
Applications Subcommittee. That's a real resume item, Mr.
Director. Thank you for joining us today.
I now recognize Administrator Nelson for 5 minutes to
present his testimony.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE BILL NELSON,

ADMINISTRATOR, NATIONAL AERONAUTICS

AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman, with your permission to submit my
written statement in the record, and if I may just give you a
couple of thoughts, and then let's get to your questions.
Chairman Lucas. Without opposition, absolutely.
Mr. Nelson. NASA is a storied organization, and this agency
does amazing things. A lot of the things that we do is right on
the edge. And next Monday night about 10:30 we're going to
launch another vehicle. It's human-rated. This is the first
time that America has ever had three human-rated spacecraft,
the one that will go to the Moon, which is Orion on top of the
big rocket, the SLS (Space Launch System); the Dragon, which
flies on the Falcon 9 and is part of the commercial crew and
cargo services to and from the International Space Station; and
now the third one, the Boeing Starliner. This is the first test
flight. We have two test pilots, Butch Willmore and Sunny
Williams, that are flying this test flight, and if successful,
then we will have three, the first time this has ever happened.
It's all a part of us continuing to, in the human space
program, explore the heavens.
We're learning so much on the International Space Station.
It's an international station. Fifteen nations participate, and
there is science that is just coming of age. Some of the
pharmaceutical research is just going to knock our socks off.
We are also going back to the Moon after a half century.
We're going back not just to go to the Moon, we're going back
for the reason of learning enough so we can send humans to Mars
in the decade of the 2040's.
NASA's science program, you read about it all the time. I
mean, the James Webb Space Telescope, look what it is
discovering out in the universe. And I could go on and on.
The aviation program, we're going to fly that needle-nose
jet this year, proving a different design that we can fly
passengers supersonic across populated areas and not have the
big bang bang of the sonic boom, but it would be more of a
muffled roar. And so it goes on and on, and I will stop right
there well before the 5 minutes, Mr. Chairman, and be delighted
to try to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nelson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Lucas. Thank you, Director Nelson, for your
testimony, and the Chair recognizes himself for 5 minutes.
Administrator Nelson, it was recently reported that NASA is
considering changing the mission profile for Artemis III, the
mission scheduled for September 2026, which is currently
intended to land humans on the lunar surface. The potential
change in profile would result in a mission where astronauts do
not land on the lunar surface, but rather remain in low-Earth
orbit. Is NASA actively considering an alternative mission
profile for Artemis III? What's going on, Mr. Administrator?
Mr. Nelson. Mr. Chairman, this is part of our commercial
program, and SpaceX is signed up to land in September 2026.
Next year, September 2025, we are going to launch a crew of
four, three Americans and a Canadian, and they will test out
the spacecraft. And it will circle the Moon and come home. A
year after that, SpaceX is signed up to provide a lander where
we would go into a new kind of orbit, a polar orbit, a
irregular or elliptical orbit, and the crew will transfer into
the lander. Now, that is what is provided in the contract.
The article that you're referring to is speculation. Well,
what happens if they're not ready? Well, naturally, people
think about these things, but the plan is to land, and it would
be two astronauts of the crew of four that would get into the
lander and go down and land. And I might say, think about the
Apollo program and the Artemis program. Artemis III, the first
lander that SpaceX is contracted for, is the equivalent of
Apollo 9, Apollo 10, and Apollo 11, so it's a very accelerated
program.
Chairman Lucas. Very much so, Mr. Administrator. The 2023
Decadal Strategy for Planetary Science suggested a total cost
of $5.3 billion for the Mars sample return. Significant
increases to that estimated cost half triggered several project
reviews, including NASA's ongoing efforts to reassess the
program. As NASA reconsiders the approach for the Mars sample
return, is NASA still targeting a total project cost of $3.5
billion?
Mr. Nelson. Three-point-five is unrealistic, but I pulled
the cord on it, Mr. Chairman, about 2 weeks ago because the
independent review boards had said the cost was going up to $11
billion, and it was very possible that we were not even going
to get the sample back until 2040. And that's just simply
unacceptable.
And so what I did was I said I want to go out to all NASA
centers, which includes the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). I
want to go out to industry, which we now have done with a
request for information (RFI), to come up with new ideas. By
the way, I checked in yesterday with the head of the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory on how their ideas are, and they are
quite excited about coming up with new ideas that can bring
that cost down and also get that sample back earlier.
Chairman Lucas. Well, certainly, we wait with enthusiasm to
hear those.
One last question, Mr. Administrator. In October, the
President submitted a domestic supplemental request to Congress
requesting funding for a U.S. Deorbit Vehicle (USDV) to safely
decommission the ISS, as well as funding to help rebuild the
NASA facilities in Guam and at the Armstrong Flight Research
Center. Congress has not passed the supplemental appropriation
package yet to date. Is the funding for the Guam hurricane
package included in NASA's Fiscal Year 2025 budget request?
Mr. Nelson. No, sir. It is just like the Department of
Defense (DOD). That request for the Guam dishes is requesting
an emergency supplemental because that was as a result of a
typhoon. Our request is $400 million, of which we have been
cutting and pasting and chewing gum and baling wire as an
interim solution, and our request pales by comparison to DOD.
DOD is something like a $2 billion request, ours, $400 million.
But also in that request is the request for the funding for the
deorbit vehicle.
Why is it an emergency? And it shouldn't be in the regular
request for appropriations because we don't know what Vladimir
Putin is going to do. We built the International Space Station
with the Russians. We operate it with the Russians. We have
never had no hiccup whatsoever with the Russian cosmonauts, nor
Moscow Mission Control and Houston Mission Control, of which we
have both Russians and Americans in both. We do an integrated
crew on the Soyuz. There's an American astronaut on the Dragon.
There is a Russian cosmonaut, and--but we don't know what the
President of Russia is going to do, and we could be in an
emergency situation that we have to get this structure that is
as big as a football stadium down and down safely in 2031.
And that's why I'm making the request and I'm pleading to
you all and the Appropriations Committee to put that in the
emergency supplemental bill that will be coming up later.
Chairman Lucas. How much money are we talking about, Mr.
Administrator, for the deorbit vehicle?
Mr. Nelson. For Fiscal Year 2024 $180 million. For the
total cost over 6 years it's going to be a billion and a half.
Chairman Lucas. OK. My time has expired. I now turn to the
Ranking Member for her questions for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and
Mr. Administrator. You have to make some tough decisions given
the budget, and I don't envy you for that. It was interesting
to hear about the Mars sample return decision, and I understand
it better now that you've given us your testimony. But are
you--are we really starting over with a clean slate on this, or
what's the need for additional technical analysis? I mean,
where are we on this?
Mr. Nelson. We are not starting over. As a matter of fact,
I'm just saying, we can't do it at $11 million.
Ms. Lofgren. I'm not disagreeing with that.
Mr. Nelson. And a sample, not even at return until 2040. So
let me give you an example of what the director of the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory said. They're looking at, instead of this
huge Mars lander that would then have an asset vehicle, which
was the original concept and was one thing of many that was
running the cost way up, use existing legacy-proven techniques
and hardware, such as the sky crane that landed two landers,
rovers the size of a truck. We've got Perseverance up there
now, running around, digging. These samples are about the size
of a cigar sealed in titanium tubes. We want to get most of
those back.
So come up with new concepts, bring new ideas. In this
particular case, it was using a particular legacy. But we want
all those ideas to come forth, and then sometime this fall when
they're in on their deadline, we will evaluate them and, at
that point, make a decision going forward. And hopefully, it's
going to be much more in--what is in line with what the
independent review board said--and we've had about three of
those--and that was that the cost should not exceed somewhere
in the $6 billion range.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me go to another topic. In the NASA
Authorization Act of 2022, enacted as part of CHIPS in Science,
we extended the enhanced use leasing authority for 10 years.
For those not familiar with it, that allows NASA to lease
underutilized non-excess property owned by the Federal
Government and under NASA's jurisdiction to private sector
entities, State and local governments, academic institutions,
other Federal agencies.
I know, in terms of Ames this has been very successful.
We've got UC (University of California) Berkeley about to open.
We've had Carnegie Mellon there. We've had various other
entities, USGS (United States Geological Survey) that has come
in. There's a synergy that has been created. How has this
worked around the United States, not just at Ames?
Mr. Nelson. And Google----
Ms. Lofgren. And Google, yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. Is another major tenant.
Ms. Lofgren. Yes, they're maintaining the field.
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am. Well, it wasn't too long that--ago
that I was sitting on--up here on Capitol Hill begging to get
enhance use authority instead of doing this piecemeal one year
at a time, to get it for a number of years in the future in
order to do just exactly what you have just outlined at Ames.
And so another one would be, for example, at Stennis, we've
got this huge area because when you test rocket engines, you
want to have a buffer so that people are not disturbed by the
sound of the rocket test. So what we've done is we brought in
other agencies of the Federal Government there, and it becomes
a mixed-use space facility. Same thing at the Kennedy Space
Center. The Congressman Posey can tell you, I mean, that place
has come alive.
Ms. Lofgren. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. Those old rocket pads that had weeds growing on
them have come back to life. There's a lot of commercial
activity there that has allowed--because of--and--on--with
regard to NASA's Kennedy Space Center, the mixed-use with the
enhanced lease use.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me just, if I may, Mr. Chairman, make one
more comment. We--the Jet Propulsion Lab in California recently
had to lay off more than 500 skilled, talented employees as
part of the pullback on MSR. And I'm not disputing your
decision. I understand it, but it's really tragic to lose that
kind of talent. Do we have a plan to recapture that kind of
talent that we've lost, I mean, decades of experience? That's a
tragic situation. Do we have a way to recapture that?
Mr. Nelson. Well, let me try to set the table for you as to
why this occurred. Had we had our 2024 request and 2025
request, that wouldn't have happened. However, the Congress, in
its wisdom--and I can tell you that if I had been in your
seats, I would have voted for the bill because the alternative
was the Federal Government to go into default, and the
government--full faith and credit of the Federal Government to
be impugned. And the sacrifices, the tradeoffs, or the
compromise, if you will, in order to get the votes to pass that
in both houses was to cut the spending in both 2024 and 2025.
NASA was cut $2.5 billion in--almost in each of the years 2024
and 2025. Science, NASA Science, just in 2024, was cut a
billion dollars. So if I've got a smaller potato sack that only
holds 5 pounds of potatoes, and I've got 10 pounds that I want
to get, it's hard for me to get those 10 pounds in that 5-pound
sack.
Ms. Lofgren. I've gone over, and I appreciate your
comments. I think it's really we should look in the mirror, and
I appreciate that. Thank you very much----
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Ms. Lofgren [continuing]. Mr. Administrator, and I yield
back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr.
Nelson, good to see you back again.
Regarding the deferred maintenance we have on the aging
structures, how do we make sure that we prioritize the
infrastructure needs going down the road? And I know it's the
same problem slightly you just talked about but----
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir. You can't build infrastructure
without some money----
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. And so where do we cut in the
budget? I just gave you one example that we're trying to still
succeed with the Mars sample return at a cost of about one-half
of what it was going--projected to be.
Infrastructure is one of the biggest problems we have. It
is aging infrastructure. It's right there in your district, but
it's in every center and NASA facility in the country. And what
I'm hoping is when you all get through with the cycle of 2024
and 2025, then come 2026 with all of the fiscal other things
that you have to consider, that there might be some more
appropriations for NASA to address its facilities needs.
Mr. Posey. Thank you. Can you speak to the importance of
NASA's commercial partners in supporting the space station?
Mr. Nelson. Say that again, Congressman.
Mr. Posey. Can you speak to the importance of NASA's
commercial partners supporting our space station?
Mr. Nelson. Oh, absolutely, and they are. Look at all the
science with commercial partners that we have going on, not
only the science like pharmaceuticals, but the planetary
science that we have going on. Commercial partners, as we go
back to the Moon, we don't go back just as the U.S. Government,
we're going back with commercial partners. And the example is
both SpaceX and Blue Origin are developing landers, and once we
have both, then we'll make a choice between the two. So
commercial parts of NASA happen to go back to the 2010 NASA
bill, of which Kay Bailey Hutchinson of Texas and I had
something to do with.
Mr. Posey. Yes. Could you explain how China uses space as a
foreign policy tool?
Mr. Nelson. How China does or how----
Mr. Posey. How China does.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. All of us do?
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. Well, let me say that, you know, when we fly a
foreign astronaut, that certainly is a part of a foreign policy
tool. When we do a foreign experiment, when the University of
Edinburgh is a major principal investigator (PI) on the James
Webb Space Telescope, that's all foreign policy as well.
Likewise, China does, tries, but is not nearly as successful as
we are because they're much more secretive----
Mr. Posey. Yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. In their space program.
Mr. Posey. Yes. How do we counter their announcement that
they're going to invite international astronauts to fly in
their space station? We've already done that in many cases,
obviously, been there, done that, but----
Mr. Nelson. Well, we're not going to counter it. We'll see
if they do it and to what extent. It's just like they say that
they want to put international contributions into an
experimental place on the south pole on the Moon. Of course, my
concern is that they don't get there first and then say, this
is our area, you stay out because the south pole of the Moon is
an important part, we think, because we think that there is
water there. And if there's water, then there's rocket fuel.
And that's one reason we're going to the south pole of the
Moon.
Mr. Posey. Yes, they're not going there to study the
origins of man or collect rocks. They're going there to
colonize, and everything that they do has a military component
to it. You know that, I know that, a great, great concern.
I see I'm about to run out of time. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back. Thank you.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Oregon, Ms.
Bonamici, for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
Thank you for being here, Administrator Nelson. Nice to see
you. Welcome back to the Committee.
I thank you also for focusing your testimony on the many
ways that NASA benefits America, and one of those examples in
your testimony is NASA's climate and Earth science research,
which we know is so essential to, you know, the health of the
planet and really strengthening resilience in our communities
and ecosystems. Those NASA satellites are so critical with
giving researchers the data they need to monitor and forecast
extreme weather events, climate events. And we know the data
also provides wonderful educational opportunities to inspire
the next generation of scientists and engage them, engage the
public. And also thank you for the New Earth Information Center
at your headquarters here in Washington, DC, helping with that
critical piece of science--improving science communication.
So you stated in your testimony that much of what we know
about our changing planet is rooted in NASA's more than 40
years of Earth observations, and the suite of satellite
resources supports that Earth science mission and the
scientific community by providing an access of, you know, a
variety of measurement data, air quality, emissions, ocean
chemistry, surface biology, just to name a few. And I'm
especially excited about the contributions of the recently
launched PACE satellite--Plankton, Aerosol, Cloud, ocean
Ecosystem, PACE satellite--to improve understanding of ocean
health.
So NASA's budget for Fiscal Year 2025 proposes to
restructure the Earth science observatory program by breaking
missions into smaller elements. So, I wonder, how did NASA
arrive at this new strategy, and what effects could this change
have on NASA's long-term Earth measurements and climate
research?
Mr. Nelson. Our strategy is to understand very specifically
exactly what is happening to our Earth and its climate. We have
about two dozen spacecraft up there now that are bringing us
various pieces of technical information, and we are pulling
this together in a composite 3D understanding precisely what is
happening. You mentioned one that was more recently, the PACE.
PACE is able to look at plankton, and we're able to trace it in
the ocean like we've never been. The ``A'' in there is
aerosols, which clearly has an effect upon our climate.
We had another one, EMIT (Earth Surface Mineral Dust Source
Investigation). This is a spacecraft. It was supposed to just
look at dust storms and how that was affecting the climate. Lo
and behold, we got a big byproduct from it. It could identify
methane emissions, very specific emissions so that we could go
and try to stop those or, in the case that it might be an
industry, the industry might even not know that it had methane
emission. We can tell----
Ms. Bonamici. And, Mr. Administrator, I wanted to get to
another question. I certainly don't question the value of the
program. I just want to watch how the change in the budget and
this new strategy will affect it.
So you also talk about the work that NASA is doing to
decarbonize the aviation industry, and aeronautics research
programs like the Sustainable Flight National Partnership
supports projects to increase aircraft fuel efficiency, for
example. And investment in electrified propulsion research
could significantly reduce aircraft greenhouse gas emissions.
So considering numerous delays and cost overruns, what steps is
NASA taking to see these projects through to completion, and
how can Congress support that work that NASA is doing on
sustainable aviation?
Mr. Nelson. Well, we have a serious project that we
invested upwards of $600-700 million in a joint project with
Boeing on producing a midrange, single-aisle transport aircraft
that will reduce fuel consumption by 30 percent. That project
is underway, and that will be substantial. You take--like the
Boeing 737 is the most heavily trafficked commercial airliner.
If you can save 30 percent of fuel by a different design of the
wing, a high wing that's long and thin, and therefore, being
high can support higher--bigger fan jets, you can get 30
percent combination between the engine and the wing. That's a
substantial effort.
Ms. Bonamici. Sure.
Mr. Nelson. We started on electric aircraft, but that's
been overtaken by industry, so you're going to see a lot of
industry coming out with electric-powered aircraft. All of this
is to do exactly what the goal is that you stated very
eloquently, and that is--the word is sustainable. I call it
save energy in flying.
Ms. Bonamici. My time has expired. I yield back. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Weber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Administrator, good to see you again. I'm constantly
amazed by how much you know about even aircraft and stuff like
that. Where do you store all that stuff, up here, huh?
Mr. Nelson. Well, Congressman, it used to be--I'm kind of
like a bathtub. You fill the bathtub up, you drain it out, and
there's a residue on the side. You fill it up again, drain it
out, there's little more residue. So over the number of years,
I kind of get an accumulation in here.
Mr. Weber. I have the sinking feeling you've discussed this
before. So let me go to my questions.
Many of the employees at Johnson Space Center live in my
district. They're in Dr. Babin's--the actual facility is in Dr.
Babin's district. We're still trying to route Clear Creek
around it so it gets to be my district. So we've discussed the
deorbiting of the ISS at the end of the decade, but not so much
what that does to the people that are employed backing that up.
So what does NASA plan to do with that workforce that actually
currently supports ISS mission after 2030? Is there a plan?
Mr. Nelson. Well, we want to keep them, but a lot of that
depends on what you appropriate. As a matter of fact, the fact
that this 2 years, 2024 and 2025, that NASA has been cut
between the 2 years $4.7 billion from my initial request,
that's going to have an effect on some of the contracts at all
NASA centers. And I'm hoping that when you get to 2026, that
the Congress may see the wisdom of some of these programs. But
let me just assure you, you got a lot of folks at Johnson, you
got a lot of really good folks on good programs. You will never
have to face the situation that I had to face as a Senator for
the Kennedy Space Center when we shut down the space shuttle.
They had 15,000 employees, and they went immediately down to
7,000 employees. That's not happening anywhere in NASA now.
It's much more manageable, but a lot of it depends on the
wisdom of the Congress in the future.
Mr. Weber. Well, I remember the shuttle program going away,
and I know that that was heavy on people's hearts. And I'm
assuming that they're probably thinking right about now are we
facing a similar demise coming forward? Are y'all communicating
this to the employee group?
Mr. Nelson. Absolutely. And what we are also doing, since
you posited the question about the deorbiting of the
International Space Station, we want to do that only when we
have commercial space stations in low-Earth orbit in order to
do the research and the training and so forth that we need to
do in low-Earth orbit for our astronauts as they go further out
into the cosmos. We think that by 2031 that the business case
will have easily been made for low-Earth orbit commercial space
stations, and we have put seed money, significant seed money
into three commercial operations that are now developing
commercial stations.
Mr. Weber. Well, we appreciate NASA taking the lead on
that, so thank you for that.
China's--I'm not sure how to say it--Tiangong Space Station
is in orbit, and the CCP (Chinese Communist Party) would love
to whittle down on American dominance in space wherever they
can. Now, your previous comments about commercial are very,
very encouraging. With the coming deorbit of the ISS, what is
NASA's plan to maintain American competitiveness with China
when it comes to presence in low-Earth orbit? You said a little
bit about it, but extrapolate, expand on that some. We don't
want China to be in the lead. You remember the--you remember
Captain Kirk, the final frontier. Extrapolate, expand on what
you mean by that.
Mr. Nelson. And by the way, that not letting them be in the
lead means beyond low-Earth orbit also. It means----
Mr. Weber. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Nelson. It means also Moon, Mars, and beyond.
Mr. Weber. I agree.
Mr. Nelson. So, for example, we never want to give up this
incredible scientific research in LEO. We are on the cusp of
major breakthroughs coming up on pharmaceuticals for disease.
Let me give you an example of two. No. 1, Keytruda, a very
effective drug on certain types of cancer. But the cancer
patient has to take it intravenously, frequently, long periods
of time. They have, with that drug, found out how, through
protein crystal growth on the space station, to make that drug
into a shot instead of intravenous so that the patient can go
in, get a quick shot at the doctor. That's one example.
Stem cell research being used on a whole plethora of
diseases. What happens when you grow stem cells in zero-g, you
can grow a lot more of them. On Earth, when you grow them, they
all clump to the bottom and a lot of them die. In space,
they're suspended and they don't die as much. You then freeze
them and bring them back, and that is just in its infancy in
research, but there's a lot of promise there.
Mr. Weber. Well, thank you for that. I'm over my time, but
this is fascinating. We appreciate all the help.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms. Ross, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member
Lofgren, for holding this hearing. And to Administrator Nelson,
thank you for the fabulous job you are doing at NASA.
My State of North Carolina has contributed to NASA for
decades. It's the home State of James Webb, and then, of
course, Christine Darden, one of NASA's Hidden Figures who
broke barriers in the STEM industry and in gender and racial
equality is from North Carolina. We have three Members of the
Science Committee from North Carolina, including my colleague,
Congresswoman Foushee. But Christine was the first African-
American woman to be promoted into senior executive service at
NASA's Langley Research Center.
And just last week, I got to join Governor Cooper, a local
educator, and a third-grade class from the Exploris School in
my district to honor astronaut Christina Koch. And she's a
three-time grad of NC (North Carolina) State University and, as
you know, the only woman selected to join the Artemis II
mission. She was also a participant in an all-women spacewalk,
which we're still celebrating.
I want you to know that I will continue to fight for robust
funding for NASA so that we can keep doing the incredible
things that you have been leading and everything that makes
groundbreaking research possible.
So, to that end, I want to follow up on some of the
workforce issues that we've heard about today. So we hear a lot
from the burgeoning commercial space sector, and we know that
that benefits the Nation, exploration, our economy, and that's
good, but it also means that there's increased competition for
trained aerospace professionals. And I wanted to know from you
to what extent does that increased competition for science and
technical professionals affect NASA and your ability to fill
and retain experienced topnotch people?
Mr. Nelson. Congresswoman, you have put your foot--your
finger on the allure of private industry to bring NASA folks
into private industry because they can pay them so much more is
a real concern. However, there seems to be a mysterious pixie
dust at NASA, that people enjoy working there, and that's--the
proof is in the pudding about what some of these wizards do.
Now, certainly our--any success that we might have is due
to the commercial sector as well because the body that you
think of as NASA, which is about 60,000 employees, is basically
about 17,000 civil servants and 45,000 contractors. They all
wear the NASA badge, but they're all part of the NASA family.
And it's that combination that we've been able to be
successful. And, again, I tell you, everything we do is right
on the edge. And when we launch next Monday night, it's white-
knuckle time, but that's the business we're in. And these folks
really are rather incredible.
Ms. Ross. We--I absolutely agree with you. NASA's STEM
engagement programs are also important to building that
pipeline and to STEM students and learners of all ages, and
it's important to track the impact and efficiency of our STEM
investments. And I'm glad to see your progress in developing
and maximizing the use of STEM Gateway. That's the data base
that does--lets us know what's going on. Could you speak more
about the STEM Gateway and NASA's evaluation work in the Office
of STEM Engagement?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, ma'am. You've been generous with us in the
appropriations to keep this STEM effort going, reaching out
with grants to universities, colleges, community colleges all
over America. We particularly, for example, make an effort to
get into rural colleges and universities so that we're not
missing the talent that might be hidden out there like
Christina Koch.
Ms. Ross. Exactly.
Mr. Nelson. And so there is a very serious effort there. We
have a huge intern program at NASA that--we pay them. We end up
hiring 30 percent of our interns. I wish you could see some of
these interns and talk to them. Their eyes are big as this with
excitement telling what they're working on. STEM is very much a
part.
And, Mr. Chairman, let me just say, as a part of STEM, what
we learned from Apollo when we went to the Moon and did all of
that, it so excited two generations of students that they
became engineers and scientists and technicians. And we're
going to see the same thing come out of the Artemis program as
we go back to the Moon and then to Mars.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Lucas. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The Chair now turns to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Babin,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Mr.
Administrator, good to see you. I really liked your analogy
about the bathtub a while ago. After a few decades, you know, I
guess all of us have a little residue in there. I just need a
little bit more in mine, but thank you so very much----
Mr. Weber. Amen.
Mr. Babin [continuing]. For what you're doing and your
inspiration. And I say that very, very sincerely, talking about
STEM and the excitement and the inspiration that NASA instills
in our youth to go forward to create these wizards, so it's
very exciting. Thank you.
I'd like to start by keeping priority programs--talking
about this on track and submitting a Fiscal Year 2025 budget
request that largely complies with the Fiscal Responsibility
Act that the President signed in May. And as we work on the
Fiscal Year 2025 request, we also have to finalize the Fiscal
Year 2024 budget. I'd like to work with you to ensure that NASA
remains on track, despite the challenging budget environment
that we find ourselves in now.
As you work with appropriators to finalize the 2024
spending plan, I'd like to call your attention to a few
priorities of mine to maintain existing funding levels within
the space operations budget. Congress provided you with a great
deal of latitude, and we hope that you are able to use this in
a way to use this funding appropriated for space operations,
and I want to make sure that we're all on the same page.
While the final 2024 appropriations for NASA space
operations is $46.7 million below Fiscal Year 2023 levels, the
2024 request included $180 million for the deorbit vehicle, the
USDV, for ISS. The original schedule for awarding a contract
for USDV has slipped several times. Under even the current plan
to award a contract this summer, NASA could be challenged to
allocate funding for USDV within Fiscal Year 2024 based on
current schedules. And I believe that, within this given
timeline, NASA could maintain current ISS operations at 2023
rates.
It's critical now more than ever to maintain the full
functionality of the International Space Station that Mr. Weber
had mentioned in his questioning and support our current crew
and cargo missions because of the amazing things that are going
there. I was a healthcare professional myself, and your story
about cancer and creating drugs and things up in zero-g are
very, very fascinating.
I was pleased to see you mentioned on Capitol Hill 2 weeks
ago the necessity of keeping the ISS fully operational until we
have a follow-on CLD (Commercial LEO Destinations). It's
critical that we maintain our presence in LEO for the very
reason that he brought up a while ago, the Tiangong Chinese
craft is up there as we speak.
And so, Mr. Administrator, I know that you don't have this
information at your fingertips right now, but will you provide
us with the following information as soon as possible so that
we can understand the full range of options that NASA has in
implementing the 2024 appropriation so that ISS program can
continue to return the great science and advanced exploration
that's been coming back.
No. 1, the amount of funding obligated for the USDV in
2024; No. 2, an updated schedule for the award of the contract
for USDV; No. 3, a list of full-time equivalents and work-year-
equivalent personnel for the ISS program for each fiscal
quarter for the last 5 years; and No. 4, workforce costs and
contractor rates associated with the ISS program, including
contractors over the last 5 years; and last, No. 5, workforce
costs and contractor rates planned for the ISS program over the
next 5 years.
Mr. Administrator, I stand ready to work with you. You are
a joy to work with. I've always appreciated you and the great
work you've done in your capacity as our Administrator, but we
need to ensure that NASA has the necessary workforce and
funding to enable the continued success, amazing success, 22
years of the International Space Station. Can I count on you to
work with me on this?
Mr. Nelson. Of course. And I can tell you, the first
question that you asked, in the 2024 budget there is $180
million for the starting of a U.S. Deorbit Vehicle, which I am
begging the Congress in the next emergency appropriations bill,
the one that will address Guam and the typhoon for the
Department of Defense, as well as NASA, that you include within
that in the argument that I made earlier in the hearing that
that is an emergency because we don't know what President Putin
is going to be doing.
Mr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Nelson. And therefore, we cannot count that we will
have the cooperation all the way through the next 6 years in
order to be able to deorbit the station safely into--most of it
it'll burn up, but the big chunks that are left, to put them
safely in the graveyard in the southern Pacific Ocean. And we
desperately request that that $180 million and the rest of the
6-year total funding of a billion and a half for the U.S.
Deorbit Vehicle be put in the emergency supplemental
appropriations.
Mr. Babin. I understand very clearly. Thank you, Mr.
Administrator.
Chairman Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Sorensen, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Sorensen. Good morning. I join the Chairman and the
Ranking Member in welcoming Administrator Nelson back to the
Committee. Thank you for your leadership of NASA during this
important time and for our Nation's space program.
As a self-described science nerd, being a meteorologist and
now a Member of Congress, I often tell my neighbors back in
Illinois how important science is. I explain to them how
investing in science helps grow our economy, create good-
paying, sustainable jobs, and addresses problems our neighbors
face every day. And that is why I champion investing in NASA,
one of our Nation's leading science agencies, and why the work
that you and folks at NASA do is so important.
Just this month, millions of Americans were looking up
through their glasses at an eclipse. It's my hope that the next
generation is interested in science because of what happened.
But also, as we look up, we're learning more and more about how
solar storms on the sun bring us not only beautiful displays of
the Aurora Borealis, but recent events that disrupt technology
and infrastructure. Why is NASA proposing to cut so much of the
Heliophysics Division funding if we have such a need in
understanding?
Mr. Nelson. Well, we're not, Congressman. And, by the way,
as Congressman Babin is still here, I want to thank the two of
you for how you get along, you as Ranking and he as Chairman in
the Subcommittee. We wouldn't have had we not had to cut a
billion dollars from science.
Mr. Sorensen. Right.
Mr. Nelson. And that as a result of the compromises that
were made in order to--for the country not to go into default
on its debt. And I understand that, and I said I would have
voted that way, but it's a hard reality for us, and you have to
make some choices of where you're spending.
Now, the truth is we got a lot of good stuff going on in
heliophysics, and so we're going to continue. The President
proposes, the Congress disposes.
Mr. Sorensen. Right, right. And so, Administrator, if we in
Congress are forced to continually cut budgets year after year,
does that mean that there's going to be a growing gap in
funding because the public sector and the private sector move
farther away? And so I guess what I'm saying is, how do we meet
the objectives, for instance, of the ISS deorbit and the
Artemis missions if we have a forecast for a growing gap in
funding?
Mr. Nelson. Well, that's what I had been pleading for that
come 2026 when you get out from under the constraints of 2024
and 2025, that you will hopefully be a little more generous in
making sure that there's not that gap that you describe.
Mr. Sorensen. What do you think we need to do to make
sure--I'm going to go back to the young STEM student for a
moment. When we look forward to what we are going to learn, how
do we continue to build the workforce that we're going to need
to meet our objectives?
Mr. Nelson. Well, the enthusiasm is certainly there. We're
trying to steer them in a way by having them--and we have a lot
of interns. We send out a lot of grants. We try to distribute
that across the board so that you're finding talent wherever it
is and get them enthused.
Another thing we do, we have a secret weapon, and it's
called an astronaut in a blue flight suit.
Mr. Sorensen. Right.
Mr. Nelson. And we frequently have our astronauts go into
classrooms. And I'm telling you, there's nothing like getting
attention and suddenly excitement into the STEM field when they
start talking about spaceflight.
Mr. Sorensen. I always look forward to bringing NASA
astronauts to my district, and I hope we can do that again here
soon.
My time has expired. I'll yield back, but thank you so
much, Administrator.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Mr. Babin [presiding]. Thank you.
And I'd like to recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Administrator, good to see you again. It feels like it
was just last week because it was.
I've been losing sleep over this Mars sample recovery thing
for a couple of months now, and JPL, especially the--to use
your bathtub metaphor, the brain drain there right now is real.
We are losing critical national security talent and workforce
there.
I know the plan. I don't disagree with it. I get the
metaphor of, hey, you had a 5-pound bag and you got 10 pounds
of potatoes that you're trying to fit into that bag and you had
to make trades, but I would submit that this is no small
potato. And what I'm afraid of is that when we go to open that
bag up in Fiscal Year 2026 after we get healthy, back on track,
and you get responses from this RFI, that you're going to be
seeing just potentially, you know, potato chip crumbs at the
bottom that used to be JPL.
So what I'm worried about is the next 4 months, 5 months.
Is there something we can do collectively to keep them whole,
to not impart another significant impact to JPL's workforce?
Because I'm hearing it from adjacent domains, missions,
agencies that those layoffs are affecting not just, you know,
NASA science, but also DOD, NRO (National Reconnaissance
Office), national--true national security implications across
the board. And we don't need to get into specifics there. But
can we work together to look at potential options to bridge the
next 4 or 5 months somehow to prevent that bathtub from being
drained to the point where it's irreparable damage?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, I've been losing sleep over this,
too. The good news is what I reported earlier. You, I think,
were out of the room. I had a----
Mr. Garcia. I was here. I got you. I heard you.
Mr. Nelson. I had that conversation yesterday----
Mr. Garcia. Yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. With the head of JPL. And Dr.
Leshin feels that they're going to be able to come up with a
retrieval of the Mars sample, enough sample return, and get
that cost down by using new and creative ideas and old legacy
ideas that are much less costly. And so I approach this
optimistically. And certainly to get a sample back before
2040----
Mr. Garcia. Sure.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. That's just too long.
Mr. Garcia. That's way too long. So is it--what--I guess
walk me through the next--so from an acquisition timeline and
your acquisition strategy on this RFI, you're going to get
responses here in May, June, some ENs, I'm sure some questions
that are going to go back to JPL and other industry partners.
Is there an opportunity to fund before, say, October 1 and
start funding this new approach at some level that is not just
necessarily the $330 million that we ended up landing on?
Mr. Nelson. It's somewhere in the fall that we can take the
ideas that are generated and then put that into a contract.
Mr. Garcia. OK. So it may be enough confidence for a
vendor--and I'm not trying to put a finger on the scale on
source selection here. I want to be very clear. This is an open
competition. I'm assuming no one has the inside track, and this
is not prewired for anyone. But when you get the good ideas
back from all of the competitors, you may be able to instill
enough confidence in one of whoever the down-select folks are,
one or two, however many players are, to go ahead and do long-
lead investments on their own at risk, knowing that there's a
lifeline coming in a Fiscal Year 2025 line item that would
allow them to go execute this program with confidence?
Mr. Nelson. That's my hope, Congressman.
Mr. Garcia. OK. That's a--that's very encouraging, and
that's, I think, a very important thing for us all to be
aligned on so----
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, I had to do battle to keep this
thing from being canceled.
Mr. Garcia. No, I know you did. You did God's work, and we
didn't help you. The--I think it's the executive branch as much
as the legislative branch, and--but I think the key now is to
figure out how to make one plus one equal three and to get to a
lower price point, get the samples back before 2040, and then--
but more importantly, keep that center of the universe asset in
Pasadena whole, and if not whole, at least sufficiently so that
they're not--sufficiently staffed so they're not getting below
critical mass. So I appreciate everything you've done, Mr.
Administrator. Thank you for continuing to do that and looking
forward to that partnership over the next few months, so thank
you, sir, appreciate you.
Mr. Nelson. Thank you.
Mr. Garcia. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentlelady from North
Carolina, Mrs. Foushee.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Administrator Nelson, for being with us here today.
The safety of NASA's astronauts is always top of mind for
me and for everyone involved in overseeing our Nation's space
program. I know how deeply and personally you care about
safety, and I know how vigilant you are ensuring that NASA
maintains a robust safety culture, informed by the lessons of
Challenger and Columbia, with which we are all so tragically
familiar.
But the world of human spaceflight has changed dramatically
for NASA over the past decade. Through the commercial crew
program, the agency now regularly sends its astronauts to the
International Space Station on rockets that are designed,
built, and operationally managed by private contractors. The
agency is increasingly looking to use this commercial services
model for other human spaceflight programs as well. As a
result, NASA must be capable of conducting rigorous oversight
over the safety cultures of its contractors to prevent the
development of blind spots in its own ability to ensure mission
safety. I believe it is critical for the agency to have well-
crafted and targeted oversight procedures that can ensure its
contractors are every bit as committed to a culture of safety
as NASA is itself.
So my first question is what tools and procedures does NASA
possess to evaluate contractor safety culture?
Mr. Nelson. That is at the top of the list of everything
that we do. We evaluate them. We are all over the design. We
are all over the building of whatever the spacecraft or
instruments are. And at the end of the day, NASA, if it is a
human spaceflight, NASA has the veto.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you for that. If NASA makes
recommendations to a contractor about how they can improve
their safety culture, do you expect the agency to follow up
with the contractor to make sure that the recommendations have
been adopted?
Mr. Nelson. We do that, and we do it all the time.
Mrs. Foushee. OK. And finally, do you believe NASA's
ability to conduct safety culture oversight of commercial
service providers is impacted by the agency's reliance on those
providers for indispensable mission support?
Mr. Nelson. If that means are we letting anything slip, we
better not.
Mrs. Foushee. That's what it means. Thank you so much. Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Nelson. And may I point out to you, Congresswoman, that
one of the tragic results of inattention was the space shuttle
Challenger, and the pilot of Challenger was Mike Smith from
North Carolina.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Babin. Yes, ma'am, thank you.
And I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from Oklahoma,
Mrs. Bice----
Mrs. Bice. Thank you----
Mr. Babin [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Administrator, it
was great to see you in Oklahoma under a bit of sad
circumstances with the passing of General Thomas Stafford. We
celebrated his life a couple of weeks ago, and I was honored to
be a part of that. And thank you for recognizing and honoring
such an incredible Oklahoman.
Let me start by asking you--I am still fairly new to
Congress. This is my second term. And what I have noticed is
that there seems to be a lot of work being done in the space
arena, but we tend to, in some cases, be siloing a lot of that
work. How can NASA, the FAA (Federal Aviation Administration),
and the DOD strategically pull resources and expertise to
conduct essential research in an era of fiscal constraints that
ensures we'll have continued innovation crucial for maintaining
global leadership in civilian aviation?
Mr. Nelson. Well, aviation research is the first ``A'' in
NASA, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. So
where did the wingtips come from that improve the efficiency of
the wing? Where does the design of the wing--it--often these
things that make aviation safer, more efficient. And earlier in
the meeting I described, for example, the joint project that we
have with Boeing to try to have that single-aisle midrange
transport save 30 percent of fuel. All of this is a major part
of what we do. It's not just space, it's not just aeronautics,
it's also climate as well because we have the instruments that
measure the climate.
We're coming into a new era of air mobility, particularly
in urban areas, so the old idea of the Jetsons suddenly flying
around, that's right upon us. And we are researching that, and
what we found is that a lot of industry, commercial enterprises
are having major breakthroughs in that. And so I'm--we're all
over aviation, and that is clearly a very proud part of NASA.
Mrs. Bice. You sort of briefly touched on this, but I think
it's worth maybe diving a little deeper into it. As you look at
sort of what the next phase of space looks like, what keeps you
up at night?
Mr. Nelson. At the end of the day, defying the forces of
gravity with millions of pounds of thrust, putting human beings
up there in a very unforgiving atmosphere, and bringing them
back alive through the fiery heat of reentry. For the
astronauts coming back from the Moon, they'll hit 5,000 degrees
Fahrenheit. So that, hopefully, doesn't keep me up completely
all night, but I know that everything that we do like that,
we're right on the edge, but that's the part of discovery.
That's the part of adventure. That's the part of being in a
frontier mode, going out there and doing unusual things.
President Kennedy said it best at Rice University in the
stadium in September of '62. He said, ``We go to the Moon and
do other things, not because it's easy, but because it's
hard.'' And what we do is hard, but it's worth doing.
Mrs. Bice. Thank you. And I'll just maybe wrap up by
mentioning there's a lot of work being done, I think, by NASA
to encourage young people to consider getting into the sort of
aviation space, and I think we need to make sure that we
continue that and focus on it because I have been to, you know,
some of the facilities, and when you see these young people
walking through looking at astronaut suits and previous videos,
they get such excitement. And I think we need to continue to
foster that because they are the future of NASA.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Casten.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Acting Chair, and thank you, Mr.
Administrator, for being here.
I want to chat a little bit about the TEMPO (Tropospheric
Emissions: Monitoring Pollution) mission that you've got
underway, and if I understand this right, and correct me if
I've got this wrong, geosynchronous monitoring North America
and sort of hourly neighborhood-level granularity. Am I about
right on that of the monitoring capability it's going to have?
Mr. Nelson. Just 1 second.
Mr. Casten. This is the mission that's monitoring local
pollutants in the atmosphere.
Mr. Nelson. Well, it is one of the ones that is doing that.
And what we are trying to understand all these different things
that affect our climate such as dust, such as aerosols, such as
the changing of the elevation of oceans and freshwater, all of
these missions are designed on some particular aspect of then
putting it all together in a 3D composite.
Mr. Casten. Yes. And I'm totally supportive of the mission.
I guess my first question is just is that going to be the
highest temporal and spatial resolution we're going to have on
this level of monitoring, at least from a space-based system?
Mr. Nelson. Well, it is the next iteration.
Mr. Casten. OK.
Mr. Nelson. But we'll get even more sophisticated as we go
on.
Mr. Casten. And will the data that comes out of that be
publicly available, or is there any concern about--I mean, I
could think of national security reasons why you might not--we
might want to be a little cautious about a particular plume. I
could also imagine reasons why the private sector might be
reluctant. So what's going to be the process for that data
being made available to the public?
Mr. Nelson. It's available.
Mr. Casten. OK. In real time, as it's released?
Mr. Nelson. Well, there will be a lag of some seconds----
Mr. Casten. OK.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. You know, as it comes back to
Earth.
Mr. Casten. OK. That's cool. Is there the potential to do
that globally? And I'm thinking about things like several years
ago, there was this concern about hydrofluorocarbon leaks from
China that were violating international treaties. And I would
imagine from a national security perspective, if we had the
ability to pinpoint where that leak was coming from at a
specific point, it might be in our national interest. The
Chinese might have been reluctant. Is there the potential to
make this global, or does that create some diplomatic problems?
Mr. Nelson. Global.
Mr. Casten. Global? OK.
Mr. Nelson. Just like what I mentioned earlier. We have one
up there called EMIT. It was going to look at dust coming off
of the Sahara. Lo and behold, unexpectedly, it can pinpoint
very specifically methane leaks.
Mr. Casten. Oh, wow.
Mr. Nelson. And that's global.
Mr. Casten. So you are going to be monitoring methane from
this as well?
Mr. Nelson. Absolutely.
Mr. Casten. OK.
Mr. Nelson. It's already happening.
Mr. Casten. Well, you're reading my mind, and I'm
intrigued. And let us know how we can continue to help this.
I'm--a part of what I'm thinking about on this is that we are
going down the path to have global methane monitoring, global
methane tracking as a climate-forcing compound in the
atmosphere. We know that methane leak rates exceed what is
documented, right? You know, if you look at like the balance on
natural gas extraction and what's sold, we know there's a gap
that's bigger. And it's really hard to pinpoint exactly who is
responsible. To the extent that this has the ability to get
granular and temporal, I would assume that this starts to be
something where we can look and say, OK, this specific entity
at this time of day was operating in that location, and so we
have some accountability. Will that data then be--I guess,
what's the plan to coordinate with other agencies on the use of
this data?
Mr. Nelson. It is available, and it also is very specific.
This is what was such a pleasant surprise about the spacecraft
EMIT. We can pinpoint methane emissions now so specifically
that, for example, if there's a real polluter, we've got the
evidence. But what we find out is that some industries don't
even know----
Mr. Casten. Yes.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. That they are emitting methane,
and so this is valuable information for that industry to be
able to stop it.
Mr. Casten. Well, I----
Mr. Nelson. And methane, of course, is one of the major
greenhouse gases.
Mr. Casten. That's----
Mr. Nelson. And carbon dioxide.
Mr. Casten. No, it's precisely why I asked the question. We
were up in Alaska last year and looking at permafrost melt and
how you figure out, you know, where the global balance goes and
how to track all that. Well, it's fascinating. Happy to have
you here. Proud to have you here and look forward to working
with you to make sure that we can continue to expand these
programs.
I yield back.
Mr. Babin. All right, sir. Thank you very much.
Now, I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Dr.
McCormick.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And it's good to see you, Mr. Administrator, Senator,
Captain, Astronaut. There are seldom times where I get to see
somebody who has as many titles as I do and more, and actually,
somebody who I'm a little envious of as somebody who's actually
done something I want to do that I haven't been able to do. As
a matter of fact, if you have any advice for a guy who would
love to follow your tracks into space someday as a doc and
pilot, just let me know. I'll be happy to meet with you for
lunch.
Mr. Nelson. We need medical doctors to go to Mars.
Mr. McCormick. I'm sure a lot of my constituents would like
to send me there. Appreciate you being here today in all
seriousness.
NASA and space exploration are virtual--are vital for our
national security, economic growth, scientific advancement,
international prestige, and our inspiration as Americans. Just
recently, Venturi Astrolab, Incorporated, a startup founded by
a veteran spaceflight robotics engineer, has unveiled a
groundbreaking prototype of a lunar rover, the Flexible
Logistics and Exploration Vehicle, FLEX. If NASA integrates
FLEX into the Artemis program, it will mark the return of
passenger-capable rover to the lunar surface since Apollo 17 in
1972. It's this kind of discovery that inspires the future
generations of scientists, engineers, and explorers, and it's
pretty exciting to me, too.
With this being said, NASA has been plagued by the same
issues for years, constant deadline extensions, flawed cost
estimating processes, and poor financial management.
Administrator Nelson, in your testimony, you highlighted the
great success of the International Space Station and the
milestone of 22 years with continuous human presence in low-
orbit Earth. As NASA approaches its 2030 deadline to
decommission the International Space Station and aims to
transition to a commercially owned and operated platforms in
the low-Earth orbit, do you believe that NASA has an obligation
to ensure continued human presence in the low-Earth orbit?
Mr. Nelson. Yes.
Mr. McCormick. Great. And, you know, it's funny--I'm going
to get a little bit off track--we just recently talked about
some of the pollutants and how Earth might be warming, and I
agree there might be climate change. I think the one thing that
worries me is that we get away from science. In a Senate
article that was published back in 2007, it talked about the
heating of other planets in our solar system. This is back in
2007. It's continued. Would you say there's more concrete
carbon dioxide and vehicle emissions in Neptune, Jupiter, and
Mars during this period of time, just like there is in this
Earth?
Mr. Nelson. I don't know off the top of my head----
Mr. McCormick. I would say probably not because I don't
know of anybody who's building concrete or who has vehicle
emissions in those planets that are also heating. I would say
that's pretty much factual unless we know--unless you know of
some life that you haven't told us about so far.
Mr. Nelson. Well, what I do know is that we are seeing the
heating up of the Earth, and our instruments have indicated
that. And we've seen----
Mr. McCormick. I wouldn't discount that at all, sir, and
I'm just saying that it's happened to other planets in the
solar system, too, that don't have the same challenges we do.
Now I want to be scientific. You and I are scientists by
nature. We love facts. We love to talk about things that
matter, things that we can change, but I also don't waste time
and money on things we cannot change. Back in the 1970's we
were talking about global cooling during some of the highest
carbon dioxide emissions of all time. And we've seen decreases
in certain pollutants while the Earth is heating.
So I just want to have a scientific conversation with you
and I about what's really causing the heating, and can we
affect it? Or do we need to put our money elsewhere to help us
adjust for those while the Earth continues its natural cycle?
Because I am a scientist. I do understand how much carbon
dioxide and how much the United States produces as a global
percentage of that carbon dioxide. Would you agree that it
could be due to something other than methane and carbon dioxide
that's causing the Earth to heat?
Mr. Nelson. Well, there are multiple----
Mr. McCormick. There you go. Yes, sir. And that's what--I
agree with you 100 percent as a scientist, multiple factors,
some which we can and some which we cannot affect. I just want
to see our money go to the right place.
I know I'm almost out of time. I'm going to ask you one
more quick question. Commercial and international partners are
key to the success of the Artemis campaign. The Commercial
Lunar Payload Services, the CLPS program, housed within the
Science Mission Directorate, has resulted in the first-ever
landing on the Moon by a commercial entity and the first U.S.
landing in over 50 years. Are there opportunities beyond the
Commercial Lunar Payload Services where the Artemis campaign
and Science Mission Directorate have mutual interests in the
development of commercial capabilities?
Mr. Nelson. When we are going back to the Moon as a result
of--I take it back to the 2010 NASA authorization bill, we said
we're going to do it in a different way. We're going back with
commercial partners. The CLPS program that you just mentioned,
interestingly, is like we are sending scouts into the
wilderness ahead of time on the south pole to scout out for us
before we get our astronauts there on the surface so that we've
got a better idea.
One of the things that we're clearly looking for is water.
We've got a couple of instruments that are going this year on
CLPS missions, one call Intuitive Machines that is actually
going to be digging on the south pole to see if there's water
content. We know there's water there because we've seen the ice
in the crevices of the constantly shattered rocks.
But this is all a part of making the space program
something larger than just as we went to the Moon before. And
we're going to the Moon, by the way, not just to go to the
Moon. We're going to the Moon to learn how then we can go all
the way to Mars and beyond.
Mr. McCormick. Thank you, sir. I'm without time, so I
yield. Thank you.
Mr. Babin. Now I'd like to recognize the gentlewoman from
Virginia, Ms. McClellan.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Director, Senator Nelson, I actually am going to start
with a question from my 13-year-old son, who wants to be an
astronomer, who is a big fan of the great observatories. He
looks at, uses images from Hubble, Spitzer, and even the now
deorbited Compton telescopes. But he wants me to ask you
specifically about Chandra, the X-ray telescope that under the
current budget proposal looks like will be--could be ending,
and he's very concerned, as I know a number of astronomers are,
that this could leave a blind spot in the collection of X-ray
information in the future. So can you assure my 13-year-old son
Jackson that NASA is still committed to X-ray images in space
and the data that you collect in that way?
Mr. Nelson. Earlier, I had talked about how--the
compromises that you all had to make, which is certainly
understandable, caused 2024 and 2025 to have less money. In
science just in 2024 it's a billion-dollar cut, and so you have
to make some choices. Chandra has been phenomenally successful,
but we have new missions that are coming on. We're going to
keep it going as much as we can. You just can't sustain it at
the previous funding levels, and so we are having a senior
review during this year to get community impact on alternative
operational scenarios for Chandra and the Hubble Space
Telescope as well to move to a more cost-effective way. I can't
spend for NASA money that we don't have.
Ms. McClellan. I understand that. I understand that. And I
think that question that I just asked is an example of how
important it is that NASA make science fun and exciting for
kids because, again, the images that he has seen from these
telescopes have gotten him more interested and fascinated in
STEM subjects in school than anything else that his father and
I could have done.
Mr. Nelson. May I point out that Chandra is 25 years old,
and it's having operational issues with regard to thermal
problems, so we're going to keep it going as much as we can,
but we have to lessen the funding.
Ms. McClellan. And I understand that. But could you speak
to the--some of NASA's programs that are focused on our younger
students, particularly during the summer and time they spend
out of school, so that we can get more students as passionate
about space and science as my son is?
Mr. Nelson. Well, for example, the discoveries that we're
having with the James Webb Space Telescope is just phenomenal.
Every day almost it seems like there's a new discovery if he's
particularly interested in far reaches of this universe. It's
not too long. We're already discovering other planets with
that. The ones that we've found thus far are gaseous, but we've
got another mission coming that your son, as he grows up and
stays interested in this, is going to be interesting, and it's
called the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, followed by
Habitable World Space Telescope in the 2040's. We're going to
be able to find other stony planets that are just the right
distance from a medium-size star that has carbon and water on
them. And, lo and behold, that's beginning to be another planet
like planet Earth. I mean, there's so many possibilities out
there.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you. And going to more college
students, can you talk about how NASA's budget will continue to
support partnerships with HBCUs (historically Black colleges
and universities) and increase outreach efforts to students who
are currently underrepresented in the STEM fields?
Mr. Nelson. We specifically reach out to HBCUs and other
minority institutions. In the grants that we give out, we make
sure that we do that. And an example I gave earlier in the
hearing is that, for example, we give grants to rural
universities and colleges that otherwise might not--a student
there might not have the opportunity of receiving a grant like
that. So we're trying as hard as we can to distribute it across
the country.
Ms. McClellan. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
And now I'd like to recognize the gentleman from Alabama,
Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Babin, Ranking Member
Lofgren. Administrator Nelson, thank you and your staff for
being here today to discuss NASA's Fiscal Year 2025 budget
request.
I have the privilege of representing Alabama's 5th
Congressional District, home to NASA's Marshall Space Flight
Center. I'd like to take this opportunity to express my sincere
gratitude to all the hardworking civil servants and contractors
at Marshall. I would like to also note that I have full faith
and confidence in Marshall's newest Director, Joseph Pelphrey.
Mr. Administrator, following a successful uncrewed SLS test
flight in late 2022, your agency planned to launch a crewed
lunar flyby mission, Artemis II, in November 2024. Earlier this
year, your administration revealed that because of various
hardware issues, the Artemis II mission is now delayed until
September 2025, nearly 1 year behind schedule. Mr.
Administrator, what specifically led to this nearly 1-year
delay and what impact will this have on future Artemis
missions?
Mr. Nelson. Safety. We do not fly until it's ready, and we
never will as long as I'm around. I've seen seven of my friends
suddenly be killed in the Challenger disaster that was 10 days
after the flight that I was on. We are sending a whole new
spacecraft and a whole new rocket to the Moon. We're going to
make sure that that heatshield is functioning as it should be
because they are coming in hot and fast. They're coming in at
Mach 32, and it's 5,000 degrees. This new spacecraft Orion is a
very complicated machine, and we're just simply not going to
fly it until it's ready.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Thank you. Delays always lead to
need for more money, and in a fiscally constrained environment,
that concerns me. As the leader of NASA, what actions have you
taken to ensure the Artemis III mission and future Artemis
missions stay on schedule?
Mr. Nelson. Well, again, we're not going to fly them until
they're ready, but in this case, Artemis III is the first
landing on the Moon. We have contracted with SpaceX for
September 2026. That's the contractual date. But if they're not
ready, obviously, we're not going to fly.
Mr. Strong. OK. Marshall is home to the best propulsion
experts in the Nation. Marshall has also proven successful in
manufacturing projects such as the rapid analysis and
manufacturing propulsion technology. How is NASA leveraging
additive manufacturing to best optimize technology for future
Moon-to-Mars missions and deep space exploration?
Mr. Nelson. Marshall has a brilliant future in nuclear
thermal propulsion and nuclear electric propulsion, and I think
it's going to take that to get us to Mars because, right now,
it'd take us 7 or 8 months with conventional chemical
propulsion. Once you got there, you'd have to stay on the
surface a year or two until the planets realigned so that you
could get back in 7 or 8 months.
Mr. Strong. I totally agree. I think that's the only way we
can get there.
Mr. Nelson. I think we've got to go faster.
Mr. Strong. Absolutely. Marshall is partnered with Auburn
University's National Center for Additive Manufacturing
Excellence to improve the performance of liquid rocket engines.
Liquid rocket engines serve as the core stage for NASA's Space
Launch System also managed at Marshall. How can we--the--how
can advancements in additive manufacturing in liquid rocket
engine performance be leveraged by NASA to mitigate Artemis
mission delays?
Mr. Nelson. We're doing that all the time, all of those new
discoveries. We improve as we go. That's the whole point of the
development of the space program.
Mr. Strong. The President's budget request proposed funding
the space operations account below the level required for full
operational maintenance of the International Space Station and
the crew and cargo program, as well as future commercial low-
Earth orbit destinations. What strategies is NASA exploring to
ensure operational flexibility within the outlined budget while
maintaining its commitment to transitioning from the
International Space Station to commercial low-Earth orbit
platforms by 2030 and integrating commercial services without
interruption?
Mr. Nelson. Are you asking specifically about the end of
the International Space Station?
Mr. Strong. Yes, sir.
Mr. Nelson. OK. That's 2031. We want to keep it going for
the next 6 years. Why? Because look at all the science that's
on it, but we want to replace it with commercial stations so
that all the science, the training, all the things that we do
in low-Earth orbit can be done on a commercial station, which
at the same time has a business model that they can make money
on a commercial station, bringing business off the face of the
Earth up to LEO.
Now, we have put some serious incentive money into three
commercial companies to build a commercial space station, and
that is the intent by 2031 when we would deorbit the space
station, that there would be the commercial stations ready to
go.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Administrator.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. The gentleman's time has expired.
We're down to just a few minutes to go vote, and so if it's
OK with you, Mr. Administrator, we will reconvene as soon as we
get through with the last vote. OK?
Mr. Nelson. How many votes do you have Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Babin. Seven.
Mr. Nelson. Oh my.
Mr. Babin. But they're 2-minute votes.
Mr. Nelson. OK.
Mr. Babin. Two-minute votes. That OK?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, sir.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir. OK. Thank you very much.
Mr. Nelson. If you make 2-minute votes, you've done a
miracle more than I've ever seen.
Mr. Babin. Well, we're going to try. And now I've got to
run down there in 2 minutes, too. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Nelson. Thanks.
[Recess.]
Mr. Babin. I'd like to reconvene the SST Committee. Thank
you for indulging us while we had to cast nine votes, Mr.
Administrator, so thank you. It was good to see you on the
floor, too. I hope that brought back good old memories.
OK. Well, we're going to resume our 5 minutes of
questioning by our Members, and let's see. Mr. Tonko from--the
gentleman from New York, you're first for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Tonko. Well, thank you so much.
Mr. Babin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Tonko. I thank the Chair and the Ranking Member for
this important hearing today, and thank you to Administrator
Nelson for the work you do to ensure the success of the world's
preeminent civil space agency and your awesome leadership that
you provide.
Up in my district, New York's capital region, I'm deeply
proud of the critical research and tech development being done
at world-class academic institutions such as Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute. I'm particularly thinking about the R&D
there that relies on funding from the Biological and Physical
Science (BPS) Division within NASA's Science Mission
Directorate. The BPS Division funding provides novel
opportunities to better understand the impact of the space
environment on both life and physical sciences. Discoveries
made on the International Space Station with BPS funding have
advanced our understanding of quantum mechanics and helped
facilitate the advancement of semiconductor-based electronics.
The BPS has also enabled advances in immunotherapy,
regenerative medicine, osteoporosis treatments, and
neurodegenerative diseases.
Despite how important this research is, the BPS budget
within the Science Mission Directorate remains severely
underfunded and was acknowledged as such in the recent decadal
survey. In February--or, excuse me, in Fiscal Year 2023, the
BPS budget was 84 percent less than it was in 2004, and, as a
result, the number of investigators in the State of New York
has decreased by some 67 percent, causing significant
reductions in education and training and negatively impacting
the local economy.
Specifically at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, the BPS
Division currently funds approximately four PIs and over 25
graduate and undergraduate students. However, just a few years
ago, that number was closer to seven PIs. Without significant
reinvestment, labs funded by BPS will no longer be sustainable
as the number of grants awarded is reduced and be forced to
change research directions, threatening the success of NASA's
exploration goals.
So, Administrator Nelson, how is NASA attempting to be
responsive to the ambitions of reinvestment from the biological
and physical sciences community decadal survey in this
constrained budget environment?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, when John Glenn first flew, we
weren't sure what was going to happen to the physical body.
There was even concern that would the eyeballs stay in the
sockets. We had flown a chimpanzee prior, but you just think
when you don't know what's going to be the physical, biological
reaction and how far we now have advanced where we are
realistically getting ready to go back to the Moon in order to
prepare to go to Mars.
And so the function of the amount of grants that would go
to a university such as the very eminent one that you just
mentioned in your district is a function of the amount of the
budget that you give us. Just in sciences in this Fiscal Year
2024, because of the constraints that are upon you in 2024 and
2025 as a result of the compromise reach to be able to avoid
the default of the full faith and credit of the U.S.
Government. For example, just in science, it's a billion-dollar
cut in 2024, similar cut and 2025. Once you get to 2026 and
don't have the constriction that you have on the budget, I wish
that you would because the area that you have specified are
areas that we have to know what's going to happen in order to
send humans all the way to Mars.
The Moon is 4 days away. Mars is 7 to 8 months away unless
we develop the new technologies such as propulsion of nuclear
thermal, nuclear electric propulsion that could get us there
faster. If we go conventionally, 6, 7, 8 months, then we're
going to have to stay on the surface a very long time until the
planets realign to get back in 7 or 8 months.
So these are all a part of the challenges, but they're also
exciting problems to solve. And we will keep those grants going
to universities because that is a main source of the research
that we do at NASA.
Mr. Tonko. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chair, I have another question that I was going to ask.
I'm out of time, so I will forward that to the Committee. But
it's my hope that, through this budget process, Congress will
recognize the crucial importance of this research to help BPS
and NASA fully realize its mission.
And with that, I yield back.
Mr. Babin. Thank you very much.
I'd like to now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr.
Miller.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate it. And
it's good to see you again, Administrator. It's good to see you
in northeast Ohio just a couple of weeks ago after the eclipse,
and I really appreciate you coming out to Cleveland and
spending the afternoon with us. It really means a lot, and to
have you there was very special.
While you were out there, we had some great conversations,
including about the importance of NASA Glenn Research Center,
which is located right in my district and to NASA's mission.
Administrator Nelson, NASA's Space Technology Mission
Directorate (STMD) funds a lot of significant priorities for
NASA, many of which the Glenn Research Center is involved in.
However, funding for STMD has been relatively stagnant over the
last 5 years. The Fiscal Year 2025 budget request proposes
ramping up funding for STMD in large part to support the
development of fission surface power technology to create a
nuclear power system that could operate on the Moon.
Administrator Nelson, can you please talk about the
importance of fission surface power and why we need to invest
in it now and not just further down the line? And could you
please address the importance of Glenn's role within the
project?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, Congressman, and it was great seeing you
in Cleveland. And before I forget, for Congressman Tonko, our
commander going to the Moon, Reid Wiseman on Artemis II, he is
a graduate of Rensselaer Polytechnic.
So, Congressman, we've got to have more power on the Moon.
If we go to Mars, we've got to have more power, particularly as
you get further away from the Sun and you can't rely on all
solar power. And so fission surface power is going to be a
necessary element, and we're going to start this with the Moon.
So this is part of the reason we go back to the Moon, in order
to go to Mars.
The 2025 request is $113 million. Now, do you want me to
get into nuclear electric and nuclear thermal as well, or do
you want to keep it to fission surface power?
Mr. Miller. I'd like to keep it to fission just because----
Mr. Nelson. OK.
Mr. Miller [continuing]. Mainly that's what's up there that
we're working on.
Mr. Nelson. OK. Well, I certainly respectfully request that
you all grant our 2025 request of $113 million.
Mr. Miller. Yes. OK. We'll take a look at it. I understand,
and I get it. And as you have already acknowledged that it's
been a tough year working with the budget, and the last thing
that we want to do is to cut down anyone, but we have to make
sure that we're being responsible and efficient for the
country. But yes, Administrator, I'm with you a thousand
percent. And thank you for your earlier answer.
Additionally, as you know, NASA Glenn Research Center leads
the Communication Services Project, which leverages commercial
capabilities to provide next-generation data relay for NASA
satellites and to ensure that there's no data gap as NASA's
older communication satellites continue to age. Can you speak
to the importance of the work performed at Glenn? And do we
have your commitment possibly that you will provide the
resources to the center that needs to complete this project
quickly?
Mr. Nelson. You can't fly in deep space unless you can
communicate. Our deep space communication system ran into a
problem because we need to communicate with all of those
science instruments, including the James Webb Space Telescope,
bringing back all of that data from deep in space, and, lo and
behold, we had to have the capability of communicating to
Artemis I in the test flight of the rocket, and we didn't have
all of the bandwidth that we wanted, so we need to improve
that. And this is especially essential as we are going further
and further out into space. Right now in low-Earth orbit, we've
got enough communications. We can handle that. We need to
update it and modernize it, et cetera, but deep space is a
different thing.
Mr. Miller. Well, if there's anything that we can do to
work with you, especially at NASA Glenn, getting them the
resources or just getting the education or familiarizing us
with how we can make it more efficient or to get to the next
step, I would really appreciate it. And what makes me just
really glad to hear is, you know, your acknowledgement of how
important NASA Glenn is not only to our region, but to the
country and more so the world and the capabilities that we have
there. And I just once again want to thank you for your time.
It's been truly a pleasure to work with all of you and your
staff, and so just thank you again, and anything we can do in
the future to work together to make sure we can continue to
evolve and progress in the right way, you have a friend in me.
So thank you, Administrator.
I yield back.
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, if I
may, another example of the deep space communications that we
just reestablished with Voyager 1, which is outside of our
solar system, approaching interstellar space, and it came back
to life. And, lo and behold, we got it. And where it's located,
so far away at the speed of light, the transmission takes 22
hours, and we just reestablished that.
Mr. Babin. What--if you don't mind my asking, Mr.
Administrator, what caused that to come back in force?
Mr. Nelson. They--again, these wizards, they do all kinds
of things.
Mr. Babin. OK.
Mr. Nelson. And this is a spacecraft. It's a very old
spacecraft.
Mr. Babin. Right.
Mr. Nelson. Voyager 1, I think it was launched back in the
1970's, and----
Mr. Babin. Amazing.
Mr. Nelson [continuing]. So it is still perking.
Mr. Babin. Wow. OK. Thank you. That's great information to
know.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Frost, 5 minutes.
Mr. Frost. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good afternoon,
Administrator Nelson.
With the goals of returning Americans to the Moon and
aiming for Mars, the Artemis program has private partners in
all 50 States and over two dozen in Florida's 10th
Congressional District, which is my district. Artemis is a
significant contributor to NASA's $4.7 billion economic impact
on central Florida alone and has partnered with the University
of Central Florida--go Knights--on several research projects to
support lunar landing and living. This is why my colleague
Congressman Posey and I are leading a bipartisan letter to the
CJS (Commerce, Justice, Science) Appropriations Subcommittee
calling for additional Artemis funding to overcome delays and
technical complications.
Mr. Administrator, with all the challenges of such a
complex and cutting-edge program, what can NASA do to minimize
further delays in the Artemis mission cadence?
Mr. Nelson. Well, first of all, we can have Congressmen
like you that help us make an additional request. Understand
that we're not going to launch until it's ready, and that is
because safety is our first--when we put humans on an explosive
bomb called a rocket, we're going to do everything possible to
make sure it's as safe as possible, realizing that everything
is cutting the edge of the envelope that we do. But especially
when humans are in the loop, we're going to make it that much
safer.
So we're on schedule next year to have four astronauts
circle the Moon and check out the Artemis spacecraft. We are
under contract with SpaceX for September 2026 to have a lander,
of which we would go into lunar orbit, and they would transfer
in and go down to the surface for 6 days. Obviously, if that
lander is not ready, we're not going to fly at that time, but
that is the schedule, and that's what the contract calls for.
Mr. Frost. Thank you. And the most recent success in the
partnership of NASA and private space industry was a soft
landing on the Moon's south pole as part of the Commercial
Lunar Payload Services program. How does the work of the
Commercial Lunar Payload Services program complement the work
of the Artemis program?
Mr. Nelson. They are scouts for us, just like sending
scouts out into the wilderness. So, for example, one of them
that is going on Intuitive Machines at the end of the year is
going to start digging in the south pole to see if there is
water underneath the surface. If there's water and it's in
enough abundance, then we have rocket fuel.
Mr. Frost. And, overall, what can we as Members of Congress
do to support the nationwide economic and scientific impact of
NASA's work, especially when it comes to the Artemis program?
And we know that I think any day now China will be sending--
will do the first mission to bring back things from the far
side of the Moon. We know this is--funding these programs are
the best--in the best interest of our national security, you
know, the work that we do. But what can we as Members of
Congress do?
Mr. Nelson. There's the old saying, the President proposes
and the Congress disposes. You're in--you're our partners. You
make it possible for authorizing us to do this stuff and then
appropriating the means by which to do it.
Mr. Frost. And lastly, can you briefly describe some of the
scientific highlights of the commercial missions in terms of
the Commercial Lunar Payload Services program?
Mr. Nelson. Oh, yes, sir. For example, this last one, it
was an Intuitive Machine. It caught its leg on a rock as it was
coming down, and it tipped over. The fact that it tipped over,
it didn't have its antenna pointing in the right direction to
receive, but we--it was still faint enough that we could get
enough to know that it was alive. There were six NASA
experiments on board.
Now, this is an incredible story of the Chairman of the
Full Committee, Hal Rogers. In his district is a university,
Morgan State. They have big dishes that can support the
commercial program. But in this case, the CLPS wasn't able to
communicate. They didn't have enough power from their
commercial communications. But Morgan State was uniquely
positioned that it could also communicate with our government
deep space communications that had the power in order to
receive that weak signal. And therefore, most of the objectives
of the mission were successful with a connection there made
through Morgan State. That is a--an example of a daring do that
suddenly the NASA scientists and the commercial community and a
university were able to figure out real time.
Mr. Frost. Got you. Well, thank you so much for your time,
Mr. Administrator, and I yield back.
Mr. Babin. OK. Thank you very much.
I'd now like to recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Williams.
Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Administrator, great to see you again. And I'm sure
being on Capitol Hill and testifying in these Committees is
among your favorite things to do.
We have a hometown hero that is in orbit right now on the
International Space Station. Dr. Jeanette Epps is beloved by
her hometown of Syracuse and really has inspired a whole
generation of young kids in school, and she is the talk of the
town and the toast of the town. She's only been up there now
for almost 2 months. Can you give us some insight in the
importance of her work and in her mission while she's up in
space?
Mr. Nelson. Jeanette is an example of the extraordinary
ability of our astronauts, their capability. In her case, she
had to wait a long time to fly, and yet, she is there on orbit
for 6 months performing great science and maintenance of the
International Space Station. Sometimes, our astronauts have a
great disappointment. The best example that I can think of is
Deke Slayton. He was one of the original seven, John Glenn,
Alan Shepard, et cetera. Deke was one of them, and they
discovered a heart murmur, and Deke was not qualified to fly.
And yet Deke then took the role as the chief of the astronaut
office through all of those years of Gemini and Apollo.
Mr. Williams. For Dr. Epps, if I may, can you talk about
how her mission is helping us get back to the Moon
specifically?
Mr. Nelson. Well, everything that we do on low-Earth orbit
is in preparation for us to have the understanding and the
preparation so that we can go further, and that's what we're
starting to do, to go back to the Moon, not just for the sake
of going to the Moon because we did that a half century ago,
but we're going back to the Moon to learn in order to go to
Mars, just like we are doing things in low-Earth orbit on the
International Space Station to go further.
In addition, we're doing serious science on board the
International Space Station. Earlier in the Committee hearing,
I had testified about things going on on cancer research with
the drug Keytruda and with stem cell research. All of that's
going on. And although I don't know Jeanette's specific science
project that she's working on today, she will be working on a
lot of that science.
Mr. Williams. Well, we look forward to having her back, but
not too soon. She's got a lot of work to do while she's there.
I'd like to spend the last little bit of our time talking
about the DRACO (Demonstration Rocket for Agile Cislunar
Operations) project and the cooperation between NASA and DARPA
(Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) with nuclear energy
and propulsion. Are we still on track for a 2026 test launch?
How is the DRACO project progressing?
Mr. Nelson. DRACO is a--primarily a DARPA project. We are
working with them on nuclear thermal, it's a joint NASA DARPA
project. Yes, it's my understanding that it is on schedule. It
is testing out nuclear thermal propulsion. That's not the only
nuclear propulsion. There's also a nuclear electric propulsion,
and I hope to get this cranked up and going. Why? Because we
need to go faster to Mars.
Chemical propulsion will get us there in 7 or 8 months.
Nuclear thermal, nuclear electric can get us there faster. The
reason that's important, if we can go fast, we don't have to
stay on the surface for--on the first time, second time, a year
or two until the planets realign. We'd have a chance of getting
back so that we go for a short visit, test out what we needed
to with all the systems, the equipment, the spacecraft, the
landers, et cetera, and get back. And I think nuclear thermal
and nuclear electric is the propulsion of the future.
Mr. Williams. Great. Well, if we get nuclear propulsion,
sign me up. I'd be happy to go. Thanks very much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Nelson. And I want to say also, Congressman, that the
end of the story about Deke Slayton is he ended up flying. He
did an experimental medical procedure, and it worked on a heart
murmur, and he was able to fly years later, and that was a good
thing. But just think of all the time he had to wait.
Mr. Babin. It's a very good thing, sure was.
OK. The gentleman from California, Mr. Mullin, 5 minutes.
Thank you.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Administrator Nelson, for your testimony today.
As you know, the International Space Station is authorized
to operate through at least 2030, after which time, NASA plans
to use commercially developed space stations to support its
low-Earth orbit research and development. We're nearly halfway
through 2024, leaving just 5 1/2 years to ensure that
commercial stations are ready and certified for NASA's use.
I'm particularly concerned about the risk of losing access
to low-Earth orbit for research. There are so many important
discoveries and innovations that have been developed thanks to
NASA providing this platform to do it in space. So could you
just share with the Committee what the risk might be of a gap
in sustaining how low-Earth orbit R&D activity should
commercial space stations not be ready? And then how might a
gap affect our preparedness for Artemis and the development of
low-Earth orbit ecosystem in general?
Mr. Nelson. Congressman, we don't intend there to be a gap
for the reasons that you just articulated. It is so important
that we keep this continued presence of being able to not only
research on fantastic things like pharmaceutical discoveries
that benefit us here on the face of the Earth, but also in
preparation for going further to the Moon and to Mars. For
example, we would be training our astronauts in zero-g in low-
Earth orbit on a space station before we would send them to the
Moon or to Mars. And so those are just a couple of examples of
why it's important.
And we do not intend for there to be a gap, and thus, it's
all the more reason that, as you all give us direction in the
authorization bills and as you partner with your Appropriations
Committees in getting us the financial means in which to do
this, that we continue to have the development of this
commercial space stations that will take the place of when we
want to deorbit the space station because it's getting old, and
we want to deorbit it in 2031.
Mr. Mullin. Thank you for that. I appreciate your optimism,
and thank you for your testimony, sir.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Williams [presiding]. I now recognize Ms. Lee for 5
minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Last year, I had the pleasure of meeting with Deputy
Administrator Pam Melroy and was really taken by her passion
for expanding opportunities in space exploration and STEM. When
I chose to serve as a Member of the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee, I envisioned opportunities to work with
my colleagues to expand the realm of STEM education and
workforce beyond those who have traditionally had access to
them. I hope the work we do and the funding we are advocating
for here today will make dreams of so many students from
underserved areas--I think of Trayvon Martin before he passed,
who wanted to be an astronaut. I think and hope that the
funding that we advocate for here will make some of those
dreams become a reality around our Nation.
While NASA has no physical infrastructure in my district,
Pennsylvania's 12th, the businesses in my district are crucial
to the work that the Administration does. For Fiscal Year 2023
my district won over $58 million in contracts across 19
businesses and universities, including small and women-owned
businesses. Proposed budget cuts to NASA, 22 percent or more
below the Fiscal Year 2023-enacted level, is an attack on the
brilliant minds and our innovative, industrious business owners
who fuel American leadership in space exploration and
technological development.
NASA has extensive partnerships in western Pennsylvania,
partnerships that it relies on to carry out its various
missions and mandates. This current Congress continued to find
new, innovative ways to shortchange or take away from the
American people, especially the amazing scientists, students,
and workers in my district who are helping to fuel NASA to
discoveries and technological developments that will vastly
improve the human conditions here on Earth. I will continue to
ensure my region thrives around this space economy.
Administrator Nelson, I congratulate NASA for the two
Commercial Lunar Payload Services missions that have flown this
year. These missions have fostered national pride in our
Nation's space program and produced considerable momentum for
the future. I know there are more missions on the way this year
and next, including some missions that promise truly
groundbreaking science and exploration opportunities. Some of
these missions will also demonstrate important infrastructure
for improved renewable energy generation, such as space-based
solar power. Can you just please discuss some of these
missions, as well as outline your commitment to the lunar
discovery and exploration programs in CLPS?
Mr. Nelson. Right from western Pennsylvania, Pittsburgh, is
a company that's Astrobotic.
Ms. Lee. I know them well.
Mr. Nelson. They are going to have a mission later this
year with a huge instrument on it called VIPER (Volatiles
Investigating Polar Exploration Rover), and it is scheduled,
upon landing, to drill down in the south pole underneath--maybe
go down that far and to see if there is water in abundance. We
know that there is ice because we've seen that in the crevices
of rocks that are in constant shadow. So if there is water,
then there's rocket fuel, hydrogen and oxygen.
The CLPS missions that are going, as I described earlier,
are like scouts. They go out and they scout the wilderness
before the humans get there, and that's exactly what we're
doing. We will have the south pole of the Moon characterized by
a lot of these commercial landing missions, usually with NASA
instruments. We will have it characterized much more in depth.
At the outset of your remarks you mentioned something about
your admiration of Pam Melroy. I want you to know that is very
mutual admiration. Pam Melroy is the real deal. She's the third
woman in the Air Force to be a test pilot, and she is the
second woman in NASA to be a space shuttle commander, and so
your recognition of talent is certainly right on the mark.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I appreciate that.
And while I do have two other questions, I'm happy to
have--let you go with that one, and I'm happy to yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Williams. Well, Mr. Administrator, thank you. Thank you
for your valuable testimony and for the Members for their
questions.
The record will remain open for 10 days for additional
comments and written questions from Members.
And this hearing is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:31 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Answers to Post-Hearing Questions
Responses by the Honorable Bill Nelson
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
