- UNLEASHING AMERICAN POWER: THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEXT GENERATION ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNLEASHING AMERICAN POWER:
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEXT GENERATION
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE,
AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 23, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Science, Space, and Technology

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://science.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
51-880PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, SPACE, AND TECHNOLOGY

HON. FRANK LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BILL POSEY, Florida                  ZOE LOFGREN, California, Ranking
RANDY WEBER, Texas                       Member
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   SUZANNE BONAMICI, Oregon
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                   HALEY STEVENS, Michigan
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
MIKE GARCIA, California              DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
JAY OBERNOLTE, California            ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina
DARRELL ISSA, California             KEVIN MULLIN, California
RICK CRAWFORD, Arkansas              JEFF JACKSON, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             EMILIA SYKES, Ohio
RYAN ZINKE, Montana                  MAXWELL FROST, Florida
SCOTT FRANKLIN, Florida              YADIRA CARAVEO, Colorado
DALE STRONG, Alabama                 SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     JENNIFER McCLELLAN, Virginia
RICH McCORMICK, Georgia              TED LIEU, California
MIKE COLLINS, Georgia                SEAN CASTEN, Illinois
BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York           PAUL TONKO, New York
TOM KEAN, New Jersey
VACANCY
------

Subcommittee on Energy

HON. BRANDON WILLIAMS, New York, Chairman
RANDY WEBER, Texas                   JAMAAL BOWMAN, New York
JIM BAIRD, Indiana                       Ranking Member
STEPHANIE BICE, Oklahoma             SUMMER LEE, Pennsylvania
CHUCK FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee         DEBORAH ROSS, North Carolina
CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York             ERIC SORENSEN, Illinois
MAX MILLER, Ohio                     ANDREA SALINAS, Oregon
TOM KEAN, New Jersey                 VALERIE FOUSHEE, North Carolina

C  O  N  T  E  N  T  S

March 23, 2023

Page

Hearing Charter..................................................     2

Opening Statements

Statement by Representative Brandon Williams, Chairman,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................     8
Written Statement............................................     9

Statement by Representative Jamaal Bowman, Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Energy, Committee on Science, Space, and
Technology, U.S. House of Representatives......................    10
Written Statement............................................    11

Written statement by Representative Frank Lucas, Chairman,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    12

Statement by Representative Zoe Lofgren, Ranking Member,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, U.S. House of
Representatives................................................    14
Written Statement............................................    14

Witnesses:

Mr. Spencer Nelson, Managing Director--Research and New
Initiatives, ClearPath
Oral Statement...............................................    15
Written Statement............................................    18

Dr. Richard Boardman, Directorate Fellow, Idaho National
Laboratory, Energy and Environmental Science & Technology
Oral Statement...............................................    28
Written Statement............................................    30

Mr. Cliff Johnson, President, Pipeline Research Council
International
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Written Statement............................................    43

Dr. Arvind Ravikumar, Co-Director, Energy Emissions Modeling and
Data Lab Research Associate Professor, Department of Petroleum
and Geosystems Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin
Oral Statement...............................................    49
Written Statement............................................    52

Mr. Jason Fuller, Chief Energy Resilience Engineer, Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory
Oral Statement...............................................    58
Written Statement............................................    60

Discussion.......................................................    68

Appendix: Additional Material for the Record

Grid Security Discussion Draft...................................    90

Hydrogen Discussion Draft........................................   125

Pipelines Discussion Draft.......................................   155

UNLEASHING AMERICAN POWER:
THE DEVELOPMENT OF NEXT GENERATION
ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2023

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Energy,
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology,
Washington, D.C.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:30 p.m., in
room 2318, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Brandon Williams
[Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Good afternoon. The Subcommittee on
Energy will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recess of the Subcommittee at any time.
And welcome to today's hearing entitled ``Unleashing
American Power: The Development of Next Generation Energy
Infrastructure.'' I recognize myself for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.
Good afternoon. Today, the Energy Subcommittee will examine
the Department of Energy's (DOE's) role in accelerating next-
generation energy infrastructure research and development (R&D)
activities in areas like grid security, pipeline innovation,
and hydrogen research and development. This hearing will also
serve as a legislative hearing for three bills that would
update Department of Energy's R&D efforts in these areas.
Recent Science Committee legislation such as the Energy Act
of 2020 and the CHIPS and Science Act have authorized programs
at the Department of Energy to meet the growing challenges of
our time. But there are some serious gaps left specifically in
energy infrastructure research and development. Without
comprehensive authorizations by Congress in these areas, the
U.S. may risk falling behind our global competitors. From
powering our homes and businesses to fueling transportation
systems, the U.S. power grid and pipeline systems are integral
to our long-term economic success, as well as our national
security. This infrastructure connects producers to consumers,
powering our homes and businesses, but it was built decades ago
in many cases, and this aging system wasn't constructed with
modern challenges in mind, such as cybersecurity and the
surging electrification of our economy.
Grid security is national security. The DOE's Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, known
as CESER--a bit ominous, I think--is tasked with modernizing
and securing our grid. CESER's partners--partners with the
National Labs, universities and nonprofits, as well as
industry, to identify potential vulnerabilities, to create
processes to detect cyber incidences, and to develop
technologies that strengthen the grid. DOE also supports
testbeds at national laboratories that provide researchers and
industry unique opportunities to test different tools, methods,
and technologies, including distribution automation, smart grid
devices, and communication tools, all without impacting
existing customer service. As our energy sector faces increased
threats and hazards, it is imperative that Congress provides
DOE with updated guidance to ensure the Department can meet the
challenges of tomorrow, providing better service for customers
and reducing blackouts.
Working in tandem with the electric grid pipelines are the
vital arteries of the U.S. energy system, providing cost-
effective and reliable power to Americans across the country.
The Department of Energy's Office of Fossil Energy and Carbon
Management and the Department of Transportation's Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration are leaders in
fundamental pipeline research and innovation. Their work
includes but is not limited to developing advanced materials,
coatings and sensors, testing different blends, and improving
leak detection and pipeline repair technologies.
Despite these efforts, Congress has yet to pass a
comprehensive authorization of DOE's pipeline R&D activities.
Future legislation, which is part of what we're covering today,
should build on efforts that improve safety, increase
efficiency, and particularly extend the lifespan of existing
miles of pipelines across the United States.
For example, in my home State of New York, we have over 500
miles of natural gas transmission pipelines, and we should have
much more. We also have 1,100 miles of crude oil products and
natural gas liquid lines, which allow my constituents to access
reliable, resilient, and affordable energy. However, in recent
years, New York State officials have stifled at least three
pipeline development projects. And as a result, New York
consumers and households pay 51 percent more for electricity
than the national average. Further direction from Congress
would ensure pipeline resources that are available for
generations to come.
Another area of investment for our energy infrastructure
future is hydrogen, a potential source of low cost energy.
Hydrogen is an abundant element that may prove useful to power
our economy and store excess energy. Currently, hydrogen is
used in industrial applications to produce common chemicals
such as ammonia, but it's primarily produced by fossil fuels.
Hydrogen has a wide range of potential uses and can be
generated from other energy sources, such as renewables and
nuclear. We will talk about some of that today. Importantly,
hydrogen could prove useful in carbon sequestration of methane
and thus help America achieve our emission goals.
This month, Nine Mile Point Nuclear Station in Oswego
neighboring my district became the first nuclear facility to
produce clean hydrogen through a Department of Energy
demonstration program. Codifying these kinds of public-private
partnerships in law is key to the development and cost-
effectiveness of hydrogen. DOE's hydrogen and fuel cell
activities have not been fully reauthorized in over 15 years.
There is an urgent need for updated congressional direction in
this area.
With reauthorizations of grid security, pipelines, hydrogen
R&D, I am certain that the DOE along with partners at the
National Labs, universities, as well as industry, will lead us
toward a path that unleashes American energy and delivers
prosperity and affordable energy for all citizens.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony and look
forward to our conversation.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Williams follows:]

Good afternoon. Today, the Energy Subcommittee will examine
the Department of Energy (DOE)'s role in accelerating key next
generation energy infrastructure research and development
activities in areas like grid security, pipeline innovation,
and hydrogen R&D. This hearing will also serve as a legislative
hearing for three bills that would update DOE's R&D efforts in
these areas.
Recent Science Committee legislation such as the Energy Act
of 2020 and the CHIPS and Science Act have authorized programs
at the DOE to meet the growing challenges of our time, but
there are some serious gaps left specifically in energy
infrastructure R&D.
Without comprehensive authorizations by Congress in these
areas, the U.S. may risk falling behind our global competitors.
From powering our homes and businesses, to fueling our
transportation system, the U.S power grid and pipeline systems
are integral to our long-term economic success and national
security. This infrastructure connects producers to consumers,
powering our homes and businesses. But it was built decades
ago, and this aging system wasn't constructed with modern
challenges in mind, such as cybersecurity intrusions and the
surging electrification of our economy.
Grid security is national security. DOE's Office of
Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response, known
as CESER, is tasked with modernizing and securing our grid.
CESER partners with the National Laboratories,
universities, non-profits, and industry to identify potential
vulnerabilities, create processes to detect cyber incidents,
and develop technologies that strengthen the grid. DOE also
supports test beds at National Laboratories that provide
researchers and industry unique opportunities to test tools,
methods, and technologies including distribution automation,
smart grid devices, and communication tools--all without
impacting existing customer service.
As our energy sector faces increased threats and hazards,
it is imperative that Congress provides DOE with updated
guidance to ensure the Department can meet the challenges of
tomorrow, providing better service for customers and reducing
blackouts.
Working in tandem with the electric grid, pipelines are the
vital arteries of the U.S. energy system, providing cost-
effective and reliable power to Americans across the country.
The Department of Energy's Office of Fossil Energy and
Carbon Management and the Department of Transportation's
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration are
leaders in fundamental pipeline research and innovation. Their
work includes, but is not limited to, developing advanced
materials, coatings, sensors, testing blends, and improving
leak detection and pipeline repair technologies.
Despite these efforts, Congress has yet to pass a
comprehensive authorization of DOE's pipeline R&D activities.
Future legislation should build on efforts that improve safety,
increase efficiency, and extend the life span of the existing
miles of pipelines across the United States.
For example, my home state of New York has over 500 miles
of natural gas transmission pipelines and 1,100 miles of crude
oil, products, and natural gas liquid lines, which allow my
constituents to access reliable, resilient, and affordable
energy.
In recent years, New York State Officials have stifled at
least 3 pipeline development projects. As a result, New York
consumers and households pay 51 percent more for electricity
than the national average. Further direction from Congress
would ensure pipeline resources do not fall by the wayside.
Also essential to the future of our energy infrastructure,
hydrogen, a potential source of low-cost energy, is a light and
abundant element that can be used to power our economy and
store excess energy. Currently, it is primarily produced from
fossil fuels, and used in industrial applications and to
produce chemicals such as ammonia. But it has a wide range of
potential uses and can be generated from other energy sources
such as coal, renewables, and nuclear.
This month, Nine Mile Point Nuclear Station in Oswego,
neighboring my district, became the first nuclear facility to
produce clean hydrogen through a DOE demonstration program.
Codifying these kinds of public-private partnerships in law
is key to the development and cost effectiveness of hydrogen.
Despite these efforts, DOE's hydrogen and fuel cell activities
have not been fully reauthorized in over 15 years. There is an
urgent need for updated congressional direction in this area.
With reauthorizations of grid security, pipelines, and
hydrogen R&D, I am certain that the DOE, along with partners at
the National Laboratories, universities, and industry, will
lead us towards a path that unleashes American energy and
delivers prosperity for all citizens.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony and look
forward to our conversations.

Chairman Williams. I now recognize the Ranking Member
from--the gentleman from New York, Mr. Bowman, for your opening
statement, sir.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, Chairman Williams, for
convening today's hearing. While I would like to give attention
to each topic, I must first celebrate my home State of New York
for leading the way by enacting legislation this past December
that will create the strongest-in-the-Nation cybersecurity
protections for my State's energy grid. This action, taken
during a global surge in cyber attacks against critical
infrastructure, will help ensure New York's grid remains
reliable and secure as we move quickly to 100 percent clean
energy.
I also want to recognize the bipartisan grid security bill
led last Congress by my colleague Congressman Bera, which
supports Federal R&D to advanced solutions to protect our
Nation's electric grid systems from a range of attacks. I hope
that my Republican colleagues will continue to support Mr.
Bera's important legislation this Congress.
Now, I'll turn my attention to the other two topics for the
hearing, pipelines and hydrogen. I chaired our Subcommittee's
hearing on hydrogen last year, and my cautiously optimistic
stance has not wavered. Today, I restate my view that green
hydrogen produced with 100 percent clean energy has the
clearest potential to help meet our climate goals in certain
sectors. And when hydrogen is made from fossil fuels, we should
not call it clean. Grassroots communities and experts are
sounding the alarm about the fossil fuel industry's overreach
here, and we in Congress should listen. To be an effective
climate solution, hydrogen must be produced cleanly and used
wisely.
I recognize that hydrogen could significantly decarbonize
heavy industry like steel and cement production and may have
some other important applications. However, this energy source
is not a climate solution if it harms local communities. Most
of the hydrogen available today is made from methane or coal,
and blended hydrogen methane gas is proving to be more
dangerous than methane alone. Yet, across the country,
utilities and gas companies suggest this is a part of their
near-term decarbonization strategy, apparently ignoring the
continued energy and health burdens on low-income communities.
Research has established that the transportation of
hydrogen and hydrogen blends by pipeline has unique risk,
particularly in the distribution lines that connect to the
buildings we live and work in. We're also just learning that
hydrogen generally has more significant warming potential than
is typically recognized and is easily leaked. These facts
cannot be overlooked by hundreds of billions of dollars in
public and private investment, are primed to fund nearly 700
global proposed hydrogen projects.
No one believes in the urgency of providing climate
solutions more than myself, but I encourage my colleagues to
proceed with caution. We must seek to understand better the
impact hydrogen may have on our atmosphere and chart a path
forward where hydrogen is deployed as a safe, strategic, and
truly clean energy solution. Better understanding not only the
technical gaps but also the environmental impacts is absolutely
necessary. That said, I hope you'll join me today in asking the
difficult questions that we should be asking about this
emerging industry and on the best ways to ensure that we
minimize and ultimately eliminate the negative impacts of
current and any future pipelines' use for these and other
purposes.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. Thank you so
much for being here. And I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bowman follows:]

I thank Chairman Williams for convening today's hearing.
While I would like to give attention to each topic, I must
first celebrate my home state of New York for leading the way
by enacting legislation this past December that will create the
strongest-in-the-nation cybersecurity protections for my
state's energy grid. This action, taken during a global surge
in cyberattacks against critical infrastructure, will help
ensure New York's grid remains reliable and secure as we move
quickly to 100% clean energy.
I also want to recognize the bipartisan grid security bill
led last Congress by my colleague Congressman Bera, which
supports federal R&D to advance solutions to protect our
nation's electric grid systems from a range of attacks. I hope
that my Republican colleagues will continue to support Mr.
Bera's important legislation this Congress.
Now I'll turn my attention to the other two topics for the
hearing - pipelines and hydrogen. I chaired our Subcommittee's
hearing on hydrogen last year, and my cautiously optimistic
stance has not wavered. Today, I restate my view that ``green
hydrogen,'' produced with 100% clean electricity, has the
clearest potential to help meet our climate goals in certain
sectors. And when hydrogen is made from fossil fuels, we should
not call it clean. Grassroots communities and experts are
sounding the alarm about the fossil fuel industry's overreach
here, and we in Congress should listen--to be an effective
climate solution, hydrogen must be produced cleanly and used
wisely.
I recognize that hydrogen could significantly decarbonize
heavy industry--like steel and cement production--and may have
some other important applications. However, this energy source
is not a climate solution if it harms local communities. Most
of the hydrogen available today is made from methane or coal.
And blended hydrogen-methane gas is proving to be more
dangerous than methane alone. Yet, across the country utilities
and gas companies suggest this is a part of their near-term
decarbonization strategy, apparently ignoring the continued
energy and health burdens on low-income communities.
Research has established that the transportation of
hydrogen and hydrogen blends by pipeline has unique risks,
particularly in the distribution lines that connect to the
buildings we live and work in. We are also just learning that
hydrogen generally has more significant warming potential than
is typically recognized and is easily leaked. These facts
cannot be overlooked as hundreds of billions of dollars in
public and private investment are primed to fund nearly 700
global proposed hydrogen projects.
No one believes in the urgency of providing climate
solutions more than myself, but I encourage my colleagues to
proceed with caution. We must seek to understand better the
impact hydrogen may have on our atmosphere and chart a path
forward where hydrogen is deployed as a safe, strategic, and
truly clean energy solution. Better understanding not only the
technical gaps, but also the environmental impacts is
absolutely necessary. That said, I hope you'll join me today in
asking the difficult questions that we should be asking about
this emerging industry, and on the best ways to ensure that we
minimize and ultimately eliminate the negative impacts of
current and any future pipelines used for these and other
purposes. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I
yield back.

Chairman Williams. Thank you, Mr. Bowman.
Unfortunately, the Chairman of the Full Committee, Mr.
Lucas, could not attend the hearing today for personal reasons,
but I would like to submit his opening statement for the
record.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Lucas follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Williams, for holding this important
and timely hearing.
This afternoon, we will examine several of the Department
of Energy's cross-cutting research and development initiatives
that are critical to the success of next generation energy
infrastructure technologies. We will also have an opportunity
to consider three draft bills that would provide critical
support for these activities.
Safeguarding and upgrading our nation's energy
infrastructure is essential to our national security, economic
prosperity, energy independence, and international
competitiveness.
Our current energy infrastructure, while impressive, is
aging. In recent years, this infrastructure has faced an
abundance of new threats, as well as challenges in modernizing
the system for evolving energy needs.
These difficulties require the delivery of effective long-
range scientific solutions. As a global leader in energy
technology development and science innovation, DOE leads the
way in addressing key energy infrastructure research challenges
in areas like grid security, pipeline innovation, and hydrogen
R&D.
In these areas and many others, DOE and its national
laboratories work side by side with industry, academia, and
utilities to modernize and secure the U.S. energy sector
through both fundamental research initiatives and large-scale
demonstration projects.
There is an urgent need for Congress to provide updated
policy direction for these critical activities. Despite recent
key reauthorizations of DOE programs through the Energy Act of
2020 and the CHIPS and Science Act, Congress has never fully
authorized DOE's cross-cutting pipeline R&D activities and has
not provided a comprehensive reauthorization of DOE's grid
security or hydrogen R&D activities in over 15 years.
This is particularly concerning since some of these
activities have recently received billions of dollars in
additional appropriations through the Biden Administration's
spending bills like the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
It is now more critical than ever that these programs
receive proper guidance and oversight to ensure taxpayer
dollars are being spent appropriately and that the next
generation of American energy can be unleashed.
The first challenge we need to address is grid security and
reliability. According to the DOE, last year the number of
direct attacks threatening grid reliability rose an incredible
seventy seven percent. This impacted almost one hundred
thousand taxpayers across multiple states.
As the lead agency for grid security of the energy sector,
the DOE has many programs operating across the country to
combat these threats. Idaho National Laboratory operates the
Critical Test Range Complex (CITRIC) which is designed to test
large-scale grid technologies. This type of capability is
crucial to protect industry-scale infrastructure systems from
increasingly complex assaults.
It is equally critical that DOE coordinate with other
federal agencies in developing a strategic plan that can
identify crosscutting research and identify long-term goals. We
also need to ensure that DOE is integrating with stakeholders
to support workforce training and development.
Our draft legislation will update these activities and help
ensure that the government and industry are prioritizing
science and technology for grid security that will maintain our
strategic advantage.
A second opportunity to strengthen our energy
infrastructure lies with hydrogen. For a clean and resilient
energy future, we must take an all-of-the-above approach that
embraces a wide range of energy sources and technologies that
support integrated energy systems.
Hydrogen must be in that mix. It has the potential to
greatly reduce emissions coming from the industrial sector,
which accounts for a quarter of the world's total emissions.
Hydrogen can also be paired with other fuel types to increase
efficiencies across the larger energy landscape. A
reauthorization of hydrogen R&D activities would target
challenges like fuel cell development and the utilization of
hydrogen in industrial and agricultural applications. These
technologies, given the right investment, mean hydrogen can be
clean, plentiful, adaptable, and exportable. This would be
beneficial to national security and the resilience and
independence of the U.S. energy sector.
Finally, the backbone of our energy infrastructure is the
oil and natural gas pipelines that crisscross our nation.
Although these pipelines are ageing, it would be irresponsible
to the taxpayers to not maintain and, in some areas, improve
these assets since they are among the most reliable ways to
bring affordable energy into Americans' homes.
There is a need for legislation to outline where DOE can
coordinate with industry and other partners in the federal
government to develop key pipeline technologies. These range
from improving materials science research so that pipelines are
more durable to creating centers of excellence that increase
cost efficiency through collaboration.
As the emerging technology and hazard landscape continues
to evolve, the health of the U.S. energy sector relies on an
infrastructure that is reliable, resilient, cost effective, and
secure. It is our job in Congress to deliver effective
solutions that take a long-term and big picture approach. This
includes supporting early-stage research that will spur
innovation over a broad range of energy applications and
provide for R&D to modernize and defend our critical energy
infrastructure.
I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony today,
and I look forward to a productive discussion.
Thank you Chairman and I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Williams. I now recognize the Ranking Member of
the Full Committee for a statement.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Chairman Williams, for holding
today's hearing, and thank you to our panel of experts. We look
forward to hearing your testimony.
We're here to discuss several important energy technology
areas, but I'd like to focus my remarks this morning--or
actually this afternoon on grid security, resiliency, and
capacity. Now, this topic is one that hits close to home. We're
near the 10-year anniversary of the Metcalf transmission
substation sniper attack that was in my district--is still in
my district. At the time of that sniper attack and the cutting
of transmission lines, the then-Chairman of the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC), Jon Wellinghoff, said that the
attack was, quote, ``the most significant incident of domestic
terrorism involving the grid that has ever occurred in the
United States.''
Since then, we've been able to integrate advanced
technologies into the grid, which widens the realm of
possibilities for physical attacks on the grid, not to mention
cyber attacks. I know everyone here thinks of the Colonial
Pipeline ransomware attack less than 2 years ago. We can
fortify the grid through the deployment of existing
technologies and via standards development and implementation,
but there's a gaping research and development need here as
well.
As was mentioned by the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee,
Mr. Bera has introduced legislation in the last three
Congresses to address the research needs. Not only would
advancing grid security R&D help prevent physical and cyber
attacks on the grid, it would help address a need to fortify
the grid against other types of physical damage, such as caused
by wildland fires.
More broadly, we need to be doing everything we can, not
only to ensure the security of our grid but also the capacity
of the grid as we expand its capacity to harness the next-
generation of clean energy technologies, like fusion energy.
There's bipartisan support on this Committee and in the
Congress for expanding and supporting the science on fusion so
that we can eventually get to the energy production of fusion.
If we don't address the capacity of the grid, that energy
source, along with all the other energy sources that are clean,
will not be efficiently distributed.
So I look forward to listening to all of the Members. As
was mentioned, Mr. Tonko introduced important bipartisan
legislation with Mrs. Bice late last year to advance the next
generation of hydrogen technologies, and I welcome any thoughts
any of you may have on that bill. I'm interested to learn if
there's more research needs in that area, which was the subject
of the--another bipartisan bill by another Member of the
Science Committee, Mr. Casten.
So thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for recognizing me, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Lofgren follows:]

Thank you, Chairman Williams, for holding today's hearing,
and thank you to our panel of expert witnesses for joining us.
We are here today to discuss several important energy
technology areas, but I'd like to focus my remarks this morning
on grid security. This topic is one that hits close to home, as
we approach the ten-year anniversary of the Metcalf
transmission substation sniper attack. At the time, then
Chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Jon
Wellinghoff, stated that the attack was ``the most significant
incident of domestic terrorism involving the grid that has ever
occurred [in the United States].'' Since then, more advanced
technologies have been integrated into the grid, which widens
the realm of possibilities for physical attacks on the grid.
Not to mention cyberattacks--I know everyone here remembers the
Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack from less than two years
ago. We can fortify the grid through the deployment of existing
technologies and via standards development and implementation,
but there is a gaping research and development need here as
well.
My good friend from California, Mr. Bera, has introduced
legislation in the past three Congresses to address these
research needs. And not only would advancing grid security R&D
help prevent physical and cyber attacks on the grid--it would
also help address needs to fortify the grid against other types
of physical damage, such as damage caused by wildland fires.
More broadly, we need to be doing everything we can to
ensure the security of our grid as we significantly expand its
capacity to harness the next generation of clean energy
technologies, like fusion, to tackle the climate crisis and
meet the future energy needs of every American.
So I look forward to the discussion ahead of us this
afternoon on not only grid security, but on hydrogen and
pipeline technology research as well. My colleague Mr. Tonko
introduced important, bipartisan legislation with Ms. Bice late
last year to advance the next generation of hydrogen
technologies, and I welcome any thoughts on how this bill could
be further improved in this new Congress. I am also interested
to learn more about research needs to help reduce methane
emissions from the oil and gas sector, which was the subject of
a bipartisan bill by another one of my Science Committee
colleagues last Congress, Mr. Casten.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, and to our witnesses for
being here today. I yield back my time.

Chairman Williams. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
Well, we're very pleased to have distinguished witnesses
here today. And again, thank you so much for taking the time,
making the effort to prepare and help us with these difficult
issues.
Let me just take a moment to introduce our witnesses. Our
first witness today is Mr. Spencer Nelson, Managing Director
for Research and New Initiatives at ClearPath.
Our next witness is Dr. Richard Boardman, Directorate
Fellow at Idaho National Laboratory's Energy and Environmental
Science and Technology Directorate.
Our third witness is Mr. Cliff Johnson, President of the
Pipeline Research Council International.
Our next witness is Dr. Arvind Ravikumar, Co-Director at
the Energy Emissions Modeling and Data Lab and Research
Associate Professor at the University of Texas at Austin,
Department of Petroleum and Geosystems Engineering.
Our last witness is Mr. Jason Fuller, Chief Energy
Resilience Engineer at Pacific Northwestern National
Laboratory.
I now recognize Mr. Nelson for 5 minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. SPENCER NELSON,

MANAGING DIRECTOR--RESEARCH

AND NEW INITIATIVES, CLEARPATH

Mr. Nelson. Good afternoon, Chairman Williams, Ranking
Member Bowman, and Members of the Committee. My name is Spencer
Nelson. I'm the Managing Director of Research at ClearPath
Action. We advocate for clean energy innovation, modernized
permitting, and American leadership. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
I'll cover three key themes: First, how innovation leads to
lower costs and lower emissions; second, the need for more
research and development for grid resilience, hydrogen, and
pipelines; and third, opportunities for industrial
decarbonization and carbon dioxide removal.
American ingenuity has driven down the cost of natural gas
and renewable technologies over the last decade, all of which
now provide affordable, clean energy. None of these would have
been as cost-effective today without U.S. investments over the
last 50 years. The shale gas boom in America is a perfect
example of successful public-private partnerships. In the
1980's, Texas entrepreneur George Mitchell figured out how to
break up shale rocks to release the natural gas stuck inside.
This process, called hydraulic fracturing, initially got off
the ground with support from DOE, which cost-shared research
and development and demonstrations in the 1970's and 1990's, as
well as tax credits into the early 2000's. Now, we have $100
billion annual shale gas market in the--in America, which is
not a bad return on DOE's initial investment.
The U.S. is uniquely positioned to lead global action on
emissions reductions, creating jobs and new industries, and
reasserting America's global leadership over our rivals. One of
the best policy examples is the Energy Act of 2020. The Energy
Act, which came through this Committee, refocused DOE's R&D
programs to scale up clean technologies like advanced nuclear,
long-duration storage, carbon capture, and geothermal. Many of
these programs were later funded in the bipartisan
infrastructure law and are now being implemented by DOE. So
far, DOE has awarded over $7 billion across 37 demonstration
projects, and there's still $55 billion remaining to be
awarded.
Another important bipartisan law was the CHIPS and Science
Act, which invested in basic science, technology transfer, and
low emission steel research and development. And while the
Energy Act and CHIPS and Science are each significant, today's
three important topics of grid security, hydrogen, and
pipelines still require additional legislation.
The power system in the United States consists of more than
7,000 power plants with millions of miles of power lines, which
ultimately connect 145 million customers. The bulk of that
system is over 40 years old, and threats to the system continue
to grow. The Grid Security Discussion Draft before us today
addresses the need to secure our Nation's energy systems from
cyber and physical attacks, as well as extreme weather events
through a comprehensive research and development program.
Another crucial technology area is clean hydrogen. When
developed responsibly, hydrogen produced from renewables,
nuclear, or fossil energy with carbon capture can play a key
role in reducing emissions while strengthening our energy
security. Earlier this month, the Nine Mile Point nuclear plant
in upstate New York in Representative Tenney's district started
producing clean hydrogen onsite. In Louisiana, Air Products
announced a $4.5 billion clean hydrogen project that will
sequester over 5 million tons of CO2 per year. The Clean
Hydrogen Discussion Draft would fully authorize research and
development programs for the first time in 15 years. With
additional research and careful project development, hydrogen
does have the potential to be an affordable, abundant, and
clean energy source.
Finally, there's the discussion draft on next-generation
pipelines. Pipelines are an essential part of the U.S. economy,
transporting over $45 billion of U.S. GDP (gross domestic
product) in 2021. Transporting products by pipeline has over 40
percent fewer emissions than by rail and has a better safety
record. If enacted, this discussion draft would improve public-
private partnerships and increase R&D and demonstrations of
next-generation pipelines.
In addition to today's bills, this Committee should also
consider policies for industrial processes like cement and
concrete, as well as novel carbon dioxide removal technologies.
Globally, emissions from cement production are higher than the
entire Nation of India, so smart new R&D policies could be a
win-win, creating jobs here at home while positioning the U.S.
as one of the most carbon-efficient cement producers in the
world.
Recently enacted policies like the SUPER ACT will develop
low emission steel, and similar legislation would help the
cement and concrete sector as well. Since cement naturally
releases carbon dioxide during the production process, its
emissions cannot be eliminated through renewable energy alone.
We need new legislation to explore the full variety of R&D
options available.
And even with these exciting innovations, most climate
projections still call for carbon dioxide removal from the air.
Globally, that could mean that we need more than 10 gigatons of
carbon dioxide removed per year by 2050. One bill that would
help carbon removal is the CREST Act, which was introduced last
Congress. The CREST Act includes R&D expansions into new areas
of technology, as well as a carbon removal commercialization
program.
To conclude, this Committee has an incredible record of
bipartisanship in clean energy innovation. ClearPath Action
appreciates this Committee's accomplishments, and we look
forward to supporting your efforts in the months ahead. Thank
you for this opportunity, and I look forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nelson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Thank you. I now recognize Dr. Boardman
for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DR. RICHARD BOARDMAN,

DIRECTORATE FELLOW, IDAHO NATIONAL LABORATORY,

ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY

Dr. Boardman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Williams. Chairman
Williams, Ranking Member Bowman and Members of the Committee,
I'm a chemical engineer and a Directorate Fellow at the Idaho
National Laboratory, the Nation's applied laboratory supporting
nuclear research, sustaining our existing fleet, and developing
advanced reactors.
I believe the draft bills under review today have important
bearing on our national security by providing greater energy
security, greater economic strength and stability, while taking
a significant step toward environmental sustainability in a
manner that will bolster business, create jobs, improve the
quality of life for many living in urban communities and for
those living near large power generation and manufacturing
facilities.
Related to all three bills, INL's mission is focused on
securing our Nation's critical infrastructure and ensuring its
cyber and physical resiliency. INL's technical experience--
expertise in cyber-informed engineering and critical function
assurance are a vital part of a national cybersecurity
strategy. In the last decade, DOE has invested nearly $40
million, establishing one of the Nation's most comprehensive
electric power grid testbeds at the Critical Infrastructure
Test Range Complex in Idaho. The complex is being used to prove
new concepts and technologies to protect the Nation's most
critical electric infrastructure. Cyber-informed engineering is
an important aspect of building secure hydrogen plants,
especially those that will be closely coupled to nuclear
plants.
I believe four conditions must be in place for clean,
emissions-free hydrogen systems to be established and then
expanded without subsidies. First, we must have low cost
hydrogen production technology. I'm confident the U.S. is on a
path to reduce the cost of electrolyzers, as well as blue
hydrogen produced from natural gas with carbon emissions
mitigation to reach the goal of producing clean hydrogen for
under $2 a kilogram by 2026 or in just 3 years, and approaching
the Earth shot goal of $1 a kilogram by 2031. With continued
support from DOE, electrolyzer costs will be reduced through
higher performance and longer durability. The BIL (Bipartisan
Infrastructure Deal) will help establish high volume U.S.
manufacturing on a scale that is necessary to reduce the cost
of the electrolyzers. High temperature electrolysis is
particularly well-suited to nuclear energy because it can take
advantage of heat and electricity that can be generated by
nuclear reactors. Idaho is helping industries like Nexceris,
OxEON, Cummins, FuelCell Energy, and Bloom Energy, all American
companies, validate high temperature steam electrolysis with
stack and integrated systems performance testing.
Blue hydrogen will be competitive as long as the price of
natural gas remains low and carbon sequestration costs are
minimized. Hydrogen produced by water splitting electrolyzers
will be competitive when it is coupled to inexpensive renewable
power that will be available during periods when there is
excess generation. Idaho National Lab has shown that the
electricity from an existing nuclear plant can also be used to
produce competitively priced hydrogen. I'm sure that most of
you are aware of the three industries DOE cost-shared projects,
one of them referred to Chairman Williams, just started
producing hydrogen at one of the constellation nuclear plants
in upstate New York. Next year, Energy Harbor in Ohio will
start producing hydrogen at the Davis-Besse plant. Xcel Energy
in Minnesota will be the first to send both thermal and
electrical energy to a commercially provided steam electrolysis
module.
The virtue of nuclear reactors are they are--reliably
produced clean power through all hours of the year. With the
advent of advanced microscale in small modular nuclear reactors
(SMRs), hydrogen can be produced on location for process
industry users. This will eliminate hydrogen delivery costs and
infrastructure.
Industry is enthusiastic about the potential for low cost
hydrogen. I could mention many companies who have now come
forth, whether they are the petroleum industries, the steel
industries, power generation industries, including GE that's
working on a hydrogen-burning turbine which could site as many
as 1,500 land-based, several more in aviation-based
applications of this hydrogen. They're--all have an eye on this
clean source of hydrogen coming. So it will move still fuels,
ammonia, and power generation and energy storage. And I think
it is critical to how we will be able to store energy and allow
renewables to be built up and coordinate that use with other
clean energy sources.
So with that, I wish to thank you for my time to be able to
speak to you today.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Boardman follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Thank you, Dr. Boardman.
I now recognize Mr. Johnson for 5 minutes to present his
testimony.

TESTIMONY OF MR. CLIFF JOHNSON, PRESIDENT,

PIPELINE RESEARCH COUNCIL INTERNATIONAL

Mr. Johnson. Thank you very much.
Chairman Williams. Sir.
Mr. Johnson. Good afternoon. Whoops. Sorry about that. Good
afternoon, Chairman Williams, Ranking Member Bowman, and the
Members of the Energy Subcommittee. My name is Cliff Johnson.
I'm the President of the Pipeline Research Council
International, and I'm very excited to be here today to testify
and comment on these bills.
PRCI was founded in 1952 to solve key challenges that face
the safety and integrity of the energy pipeline network in the
United States. Over the past 70 years, we have grown into the
global nonprofit that performs research needed to advance the
safety and integrity of our global pipeline systems. Our
mission is to collaboratively develop and deliver relevant,
innovative applied research to continually improve the global
pipeline systems. PRCI is recognized around the world as a
unique form within the industry for delivering great value
through the development, deployment of research solutions to
improve pipeline safety and performance.
We've worked closely with the U.S. Department of Energy,
the Pipeline Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA),
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST), also our partners in
Canada, the Canada Energy Regulator, Natural Resources Canada,
and most recently, the Environment and Climate Change in Canada
as well to begin working across the industry and government
together in a public-private partnership to advance integrity
and safety. We also have very strong partnerships with sister
organizations in Europe and Australia. One thing I have to say
is that pipelines don't care where it is. Steel is steel. We
need to make sure the safety is there globally.
Today, though we're at a really unique crossroads. Both in
the U.S. and globally, we are working aggressively to develop
the next generation of fuels. As we begin looking to this next
opportunity--today, it's hydrogen--we need to think about the
safety and the integrity of the systems that we will be doing.
With that mind, we need to remember that the most important
asset here is the pipeline infrastructure, still the safest,
most efficient transport mode there is in the world. Pipelines
will continue to be the backbone for our industry to move this
vital resource. The members of PRCI and the industry continue
to innovate this network toward zero emissions and 100 percent
reliability.
I'm excited to say that PRCI has been at the forefront for
a number of transitions throughout our life. We were founded in
1952. We were some of the earliest researchers on hydrogen,
looking at ethanol and other biofuels as well. Our industry has
continued to look for the other sources of energy that we need
to have as part of our mosaic of energy to fill the various
demands that we have. In 2020, PRCI created the Emerging Fuels
Institute to enable the oil and gas industry to begin exploring
how can we move hydrogen in the systems that for so long we
tried to maintain out of our systems? Hydrogen has a negative
impact on the steel, and how do we get this new process moving
forward?
PRCI has also taken a leadership role and brought in 20
companies from around the world to be part of the Emerging
Fields Institute. We also partner with four international
organizations to support our mission and our vision in this
space.
We're at a point where the research needs to progress
further, faster. We are unique in that this time around, we
aren't driving the conversation of when we need the next energy
source. We're going to actually have some real-world
expectations soon. As was mentioned briefly a minute ago, 2026,
2030, 2050 are those deadlines. To achieve that, we need to
move much more rapidly and in a partnership approach, a
collaborative approach through a public partner--public and
partner--private partnerships.
As was mentioned earlier, there are some challenges with
moving hydrogen in our current systems that we need to be very
mindful of, and we need to make sure that the research is there
as we began to move this new product in our systems. It is
doable, but the research is definitely needed. Some areas, just
to give an example, one is the equation of State, some of the
technology around, what does it look like when we put hydrogen
together with natural gas and what is the impact on the steels?
We're looking for new ideas of how do we understand the
material properties, which is one of the key limiting factors
of putting hydrogen in our system is how does it impact the
steel?
As we continue to look at our steel production and the
opportunities, we need to think about our current assets. Much
of our systems today are long--older than 60 years old. How do
we maintain those into the future as we continue to need those
assets to be there for us when we need to?
PRCI has begun to aggressively move to this space, and we
have a technology center that we developed in Houston, Texas,
the first of its kind in the world to really drive this
conversation. So as the pipeline build today considers this new
center, let's look together, how do we work together to really
elevate and execute this opportunity?
Again, today, we're excited about the opportunity to talk
about collaboration, how the industry and the government can
work together to improve the safety and integrity of this vital
network. Thank you again for this opportunity to present. I
look forward to answering any questions you may have and look
forward to the opportunity to learn more about where you're
going and how we can help. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
I now recognize Dr. Ravikumar for 5 minutes for your
testimony, sir.

TESTIMONY OF DR. ARVIND RAVIKUMAR,

CO-DIRECTOR, ENERGY EMISSIONS MODELING

AND DATA LAB RESEARCH ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,

DEPARTMENT OF PETROLEUM

AND GEOSYSTEMS ENGINEERING,

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

Dr. Ravikumar. Thank you. Chairman Williams, Ranking Member
Bowman, and Members of the Energy Subcommittee, thank you for
this opportunity to testify today on these critical topics. I'm
Arvind Ravikumar. I'm a co-Director of the Energy Emissions
Modeling and Data Lab at the University of Texas at Austin.
Over the past decade, I've led several large-scale field
campaigns in the U.S. to measure methane emissions from the oil
and gas supply chain. In addition, our research group has
evaluated many innovative technologies such as drones,
satellites, and aircraft-based systems for detecting emissions
from natural gas infrastructure. Throughout my research, I
worked in close collaboration with the industry, State and
Federal agencies, and nongovernmental organizations.
The United States by far leads the world on both technology
innovation and direct measurements of carbon emissions from oil
and gas infrastructure. Voluntary industry efforts, Federal
research programs, and other field campaigns have all
contributed to a significant body of work on supply chain
carbon emissions. This matters for three reasons. First, we
know the gaps in research that need to be filled across both
the natural gas supply chain as well as emerging areas such as
hydrogen. Second, as the largest exporter of liquefied natural
gas, or LNG, transparent information on supply chain carbon
emissions gives U.S. exports a significant advantage over other
suppliers. Third, our continued and long-term investments in
research related to methane emissions measurements have
supported dozens of new startups and small businesses that have
created high-paying jobs across the U.S.
While we have made tremendous progress on understanding
methane emissions broadly, direct measurements from the
pipeline network, especially gathering lines and transmission
pipelines, are still lacking. Recent evidence from the Permian
Basin in Texas suggest that gathering lines are a significant
source of emissions and can be fixed cost-effectively. Regional
basin-specific studies on pipelines would close the gap in
their supply chain emissions measurement portfolio.
The Department of Energy has been historically successful
in supporting technology innovation in leak detection. Many of
the early stage technology supported through the agency over a
decade ago are now some of the fastest-growing companies in the
emissions detection space. We are now in a new phase of
technology development that will focus on network continuous
monitoring systems, autonomous drone surveys, and inline
measurements that will make use of advances in machine learning
and data analytics. The Department of Energy, in collaboration
with NIST and PHMSA, should fund research on these next-
generation sensor technologies and develop comprehensive
multiscale modeling and data analytic capabilities.
In addition, the U.S. also needs expanded test facilities
to evaluate new sensor systems that will operate across a wide
variety of facilities, geographies, and weather conditions.
This will ensure that we continue to lead the world in
technology development, evaluation, and deployment.
Furthermore, these test facilities could be designed to
simultaneously evaluate infrastructure for the growing hydrogen
economy. Now hydrogen is a key element of the U.S.' future
energy system. A key area of research is understanding how we
can use existing natural gas pipelines for transporting
hydrogen. Repurposing existing infrastructure reduces costs,
lead times, and enables rapid deployment for hydrogen end
users.
However, several open questions remain. Hydrogen leaks pose
a safety as well as an environmental risk. Understanding how
hydrogen leaks occur in natural gas pipelines, how different
blends of hydrogen natural gas affect transport properties, and
how the presence of hydrogen impacts materials used in
pipelines are all critical areas of research.
Research should also focus on funding new technology in
sensor development, new materials that can withstand the
corrosive effects of hydrogen, and innovation centers that
identify and solve challenges associated with integration of
hydrogen with conventional energy systems.
A key aspect of hydrogen production is a variation in cost,
emissions, and storage and transportation infrastructure across
the U.S. For example, blue hydrogen production has a
significantly lower emissions profile if produced in Marcellus
basin in Ohio and Pennsylvania compared to the Permian Basin in
Texas. Furthermore, pipeline capacity limits in the Permian
Basin favor production of methanol as a hydrogen carrier, which
is a liquid, instead of hydrogen gas that would require
additional pipelines. Permian production could also benefit
from abundant solar and wind resources in the region. Thus the
form of hydrogen production, transportation, and end uses will
vary across the U.S. and must be tailored to unique regional
strengths. The Department of Energy should support research on
geospatial and region-specific studies to identify regionally
optimized approaches for hydrogen production, transportation,
and end use that maximize benefits to the region's economy.
Finally, the success of these efforts will rest on our
ability to develop effective and trusted carbon accounting
systems across energy supply chains. As the largest exporter of
LNG and potentially of hydrogen, the U.S. has a vested interest
in demonstrating the environmental and economic benefits of
U.S. energy supply chains over other suppliers. Carbon
accounting that is not transparent with measurement data or
analytical systems will make it challenging to build trust on
the global stage. The Department of Energy has a key role to
play in supporting public-private partnerships to collect,
interpret, and make public supply chain admissions information
across U.S. energy infrastructure.
In summary, continued investments in our pipeline
infrastructure and hydrogen technology will ensure that the
U.S. continues to lead in energy research and development, the
broad-based benefits to the industry, consumers, communities,
and the environment. Thank you for your time, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ravikumar follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Fuller for 5 minutes to present your
testimony, sir.

TESTIMONY OF MR. JASON FULLER,

CHIEF ENERGY RESILIENCE ENGINEER,

PACIFIC NORTHWEST NATIONAL LABORATORY

Mr. Fuller. Good afternoon, and thank you, Chairman
Williams, Ranking Member Bowman, Ranking Member Lofgren, and
Members of the Subcommittee for the opportunity to speak on
behalf of basic and applied research objectives and how they
relate to the protecting of cyber and physical security of the
Nation's electrical grid. My name is Jason Fuller. I've been a
Power System Research Engineer at Pacific Northwest National
Lab for 14 years focused on power system modeling. Over the
last years, I've had the opportunity to serve as the
Infrastructure Modeling Lead for DOE's North American Energy
Resilience Model, analyzing cross-sector dependencies in
electrical resilience and the impacts of natural and manmade
threats to electrical operations.
Today, I'd like to focus on two comments. First, the
evolving nature of the Nation's electrical infrastructure and
the increasingly complex threats it faces requires continued
investment in cutting-edge research, development, and
deployment to maintain both our Nation's competitive advantage
and its overall security. But our electrical industry is facing
a number of changes, all simultaneously. Our electrical system
is transitioning from an earlier simple--simpler era, dominated
by large-generation stations and passive energy loads, to an
active, intelligent, and distributed system often driven by
customer- or third-party-owned assets that are outside of the
traditional utility control network. This includes such
technology as energy storage, solar photovoltaics, electric
vehicle (EV) chargers, or smart thermostats. These devices are
introducing new uncertainties in the system, but also new
opportunities. New control methods and grid architectures, new
incentive structures, and secure communication systems to
support these are needed to ensure our system continues to stay
reliable, resilient, and secure.
Changes associated with our climate have resulted in
prolonged droughts, devastating wildfire seasons, and more
intense storms and hurricanes and extended cold and heat wave
events in areas that have never seen them before, requiring
utilities to change their planning criteria. New capabilities
are needed to translate climate prediction models into
localized extreme weather impacts and then into actual
decisionmaking for utilities and regulators with a particular
focus on how to evaluate cost versus resilience tradeoffs and
how those tradeoffs impact individual customers. Continued
development of technologies that minimize outages, prevent
damage, or create additional system flexibility with an eye
toward these future extreme weather patterns are essential.
And on top of this, foreign actors are well aware of the
critical nature of our power system and has long been
considered a logical target for major intrusions, whether
physical or cyber. This battle is an ever-evolving conflict
with defenders constantly needing to adjust and create new
defenses. Public-private partnerships are needed to strengthen
and protect our supply chains, provide tools for utilities to
assess system vulnerabilities and risks, advance our human
machine intelligence for detection, discovery, and situational
awareness, and enhance our automated responses. The Federal
Government also has a role to prepare tomorrow's workforce for
these challenges and support smaller utilities that may not
have access to the necessary resources.
My second comment is both--is that both basic and applied
research are an integral part of innovating new methods to
predict, monitor, and defend against potential threats and then
mitigate the impact of those challenges. Federal investments in
research drive innovation and advancements in next generation
of technology to protect our system from these ever-evolving
challenges.
So let me give you a couple of examples to illustrate my
point. Developments in linear solvers and optimization
algorithms from predecessors of the Office of Science's
Advanced Scientific Computing Research Center are at the core
of current software running in electric control centers across
the country, providing enhanced visibility and accelerating
necessary calculations to better understand the real-time
behaviors of the system. But as I mentioned, the system is
changing, so new developments utilizing exascale computing
under five-lab ExaSGD project, are testing algorithm on Oak
Ridge National Laboratory's Frontier exascale computer to
incorporate the initial uncertainty brought by millions of new-
edge devices and variable generation while thinking about
thousands of threat scenarios to ensure continued integrity,
security, and economic operation of the power system across a
wide range of future challenges.
The new Grid Storage Launchpad is a critical facility to
accelerate the development and deployment of grid-scale storage
to continue the enhancement of reliability, resilience, and
flexibility. Stewarded by the Office Electricity, this facility
aims to secure domestic supply chains, independently test and
validate grid-scale storage, and link basic material research
to advanced prototyping, accelerating the testing and time to
deployment of new energy storage chemistries.
These are just a couple of examples to highlight the return
on Federal investments when utilities, academia, and national
labs are able to collaborate and capitalize on the advances
provided by fundamental research. And as our electrical system
further digitized and we become ever-more reliant on
electricity, it remains critical to continue to support
innovations that protect our system from cyber and physical
threats. Continued advancements through Federal fundamental
research combined with public-private partnerships to deploy
advanced technology will enhance our ability to securely
operate our Nation's power system in real time, enable our grid
operators to better avoid or reduce outages, and provide
analytic tools for faster response, better mitigation, and more
efficient planning for resilient operations.
Thank you, and I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fuller follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Williams. Thank you, Mr. Fuller.
I have to tell you that just from my background, I'd wish
that we--this could go on for 6, 7, 8 hours. I would enjoy
every second of it, but you probably wouldn't, and we'd never
get anybody to come back and testify. So we will keep it within
the allotted time. But very excited to have this today. And
just to kick off, I recognize myself for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Nelson, I spoke about Nine Mile Point. On my nuclear
submarine, guess what, we had a nuclear reactor, we produced
electricity, we had electrolysis machines, electrolyzers. But
we took the hydrogen and pumped it overboard because it's
explosive. But I have 500 days at sea breathing that oxygen
that we created. I'm very thankful for it. So it's ironic we're
now flipping that equation. Would you say what's happening at
Nine Mile Point would qualify for the Inflation Reduction Act
tax credit under section 45(v)?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, thank you for that question. We think that
nuclear and hydrogen is a great pairing for reducing emissions,
as well as providing value to plants that might otherwise
close. I can't speak specifically to Nine Mile Point. But in
general, I think that plants should absolutely be looking at
hydrogen as a way to provide more flexible operation when there
are high renewables and as a way to provide greater income for
a plant.
Chairman Williams. Great, thank you. That's good insight.
Dr. Boardman, of course, your facilities trained a lot of my
colleagues, and it's well-noted, can't wait to visit. It sounds
like what we should do is build some small modular reactors to
kick off the hydrogen economy. Can you talk just briefly about
the connection between advanced nuclear and the hydrogen
economy?
Dr. Boardman. I sure can. And it's a great subject because
the advanced nuclear reactors is a game we can get into as a
country. And those who get into it and succeed early will be
the captors of the benefits that come to us. I could remark
that States like Wyoming and Alaska are already considering
frontiers where they see and want to implement these advanced
reactors, and so it will be coming soon enough. And to pair
those with hydrogen, many of the oil companies and other
industries are looking at how this can be an onsite source of
generating hydrogen because you have this concentrated intense
energy source 24/7, 365 days of the year that you can count on,
and it's clean. So yes, we're in the process of understanding
how those advanced reactors can couple to hydrogen generation,
whether it's low temperature or high temperature electrolysis.
Chairman Williams. Thank you. I look forward to learning
more about that.
Mr. Johnson, we are challenged in our State of New York on
pipelines. I'm thankful for what we have and wish that we had
more. But your organization and the research that you've done,
could you give us some ideas of how that's benefited consumers,
the R&D and the pipelines? Could you quantify that or describe
that in a way that you think could resonate with average
Americans who rely on pipelines to give them power?
Mr. Johnson. Well, thank you very much for the question.
It's a great idea to think about is how does research really
give the benefits back to the public and the industry as--at
large. What you may be able to see through the work that PRCI
has done is that we've been able to evolve the efficiency of
the systems. Today, quite often, you'll hear the numbers of the
five 9's, 99.99 percent safe is our Nation's infrastructure.
What PRCI is about, though, is continued to get that last 100th
of a position and get to kind of be 100 percent safe. As we
continue to do that, the safety and the integrity of these
systems for most Americans is phenomenal. And if you think
about it, most of us, let's be honest, don't think about where
natural gas comes from, where our liquid comes from. We're just
happy to go to the gas station or turn on our lights. That's
the resiliency of our current pipeline network through the
research that we've done at PRCI to keep this keep this moving
forward. So can I give you a quantifiable numbers, Chairman?
Unfortunately, I cannot. But I can tell you that we've seen a
dramatic increase in improvement in safety and where we can be
going in to enhance the quality of life for many Americans
around. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Williams. Yes, sir. Thank you. I'm afraid I have
time just for one more question.
Mr. Fuller, you talked about a number of the technologies
and techniques of cybersecurity for the grid. I've looked at
that in the--for the industrial controls market, which is
adjacent to what you do because of FERC and some of the FERC
requirements. But other than technology and techniques, if you
were to look at specific elements of our electric distribution
grid, what areas would you say need our attention? What would
you focus this Committee's attention on? You know, is it
transfer stations, is it power gen, is it you know,
transformers? What is the--where should we focus? Where are you
most concerned if we were prioritizing?
Mr. Fuller. Yes, fair enough, and that's a challenging
question to answer because there's a lot of challenges
simultaneously. I think supply chain of either transformers or
cyber equipment, both understanding what the root of those are
and where they're manufactured and understand what that means
to the system. I think anything that has to do with control
systems and control networks and how we look at a more
distributed control network rather than a big, centralized
plant I think are all areas of concern right now.
Chairman Williams. Looking back from like the SolarWinds--
and I see my time's up, but we'll continue, like I said. Thank
you very much.
I now recognize Mr. Bowman, sir, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My first question is for Dr. Boardman. Electrolysis has
long been identified as a primary way to produce clean
hydrogen. This process is commercially available, and
currently, billions of dollars are being spent on its
advancement. What other promising methods have been identified
to produce clean hydrogen with zero lifecycle emissions, and
what advantages might any of them have over electrolysis?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, Mr. Chairman and Congressman Bowman, you
are correct that electrolysis has been around, had been
established. Alkaline electrolysis is well-matured, but there
are advanced forms of electrolysis using polymer electrolyte
membranes, and those are nascent commercial. They're coming
forth, and then the high temperature solid oxide electrolysis,
which I've spoke. We can make improvements in all of these to
bring down their costs of producing hydrogen by electrolysis.
It comes down to the amount of electricity and the amount of
heat and the cost of those materials. And the Hydrogen Fuel
Cell Technology Office is funding consortia and research in
these areas to bring down those costs so that it can be more
competitive. Yes, there are other cutting-edge technologies for
making hydrogen. Photoelectric hydrogen is one. They are
thermal chemical loops. A researcher at Sandia National Lab has
come up with an idea, which I think is a good concept worth
pursuing.
So I would just close my remarks by saying that the
Department of Energy is funding research on advanced hydrogen-
producing technologies, and they show promise for the future.
Mr. Bowman. In terms of these other methods, is it
realistic to expect that any of them could be utilized in the
next 10 to 15 years?
Dr. Boardman. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome. Thank you very much.
My next question is for Dr. Ravikumar. Scientists have long
reported that hydrogen triggers indirect warming effects in the
atmosphere. Based on the latest understanding of those effects,
researchers say its warming power is much greater than
previously recognized. As a result, standard scientific
accounting used in treaties and reporting requirements may be
systematically understating hydrogen's powerful near-term
warming effects. However--excuse me--which disappear after
roughly two decades. However, climate impacts are usually
calculated over 100 year timeframe, thus masking damage caused
by escaped hydrogen in the near term. Can you speak to the
significance of this oversight? Do we need to adjust how we
account for near-term climate impacts?
Dr. Ravikumar. Thank you for the question. Yes, we have to
account for near-term climate impacts of hydrogen in any
lifecycle emissions calculations. The Department of Energy and
other Federal agencies have standardized methods to do this by
looking at the global warming potential of different greenhouse
gases. We have been doing that for methane emissions for a long
time. We have to do that for hydrogen as well.
The more important question in this area is figuring out
how hydrogen will leak from natural gas infrastructure if
you're blending hydrogen in natural gas pipelines. That's where
we need additional studies and thinking about what are the
properties of our hydrogen, how much does it leak, and what can
we do in terms of materials research and sensor development to
reduce leakage of hydrogen from natural gas infrastructure and
dedicated hydrogen pipelines.
Mr. Bowman. Dr. Boardman, anything to add to that?
Dr. Boardman. I think he covered the subject pretty well.
And I do believe that there is an opportunity to address all of
these matters, and I think they are being taken under
consideration, again, by the Department of Energy. You probably
are aware that there is an interagency working group that
involves all of our different branches of the government in
looking at those particular areas, including the EPA. And I
would just say my opinion, too, is that we need to do a well-
to-gate emissions study in each of these different options.
Mr. Bowman. Awesome. One more question for you, Dr.
Boardman. Hydrogen has long been lauded as a tool to address
hard-to-decarbonize sectors such as construction and industrial
production. These sectors are major employers for marginalized
communities, but there have been concerns that hydrogen
production could harm workers, as well as surrounding
communities, due to problems such as leakage of nitrous oxide
emissions. How do we ensure that these communities that we are
hoping to help with high-paying jobs are not impacted with
compounding health-property risk?
Dr. Boardman. Congressman Bowman, that's a very good
question, and I would say that the answer lies in, first of
all, understanding that maybe some of the risks are--need to be
quantified. They may not be as big as we initially think that
they are. At this point, hydrogen is already produced, it's
transported in pipelines to all across the Gulf shores, and so
it is a mature system of using hydrogen. So we do have some
experience for that in--already in communities.
But in addition, we need to understand that hydrogen is an
energy currency that can be put into sometimes better energy
currencies, whether those would be ammonia, hydrocarbon
carrying hydrogen, or even synthetic fuels that can take that
clean hydrogen and put it into an infrastructure and
combustible forms that we already have compatibility to use.
Mr. Bowman. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Miller [presiding]. Thank you. I now recognize Mr.
Baird of Indiana for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I do thank the
witnesses for being here. Your expertise is really beneficial
to our Committee.
But, you know, one thing that comes to mind for me is
Artemis. We're going to try to go to the Moon, and then we're
going to go to Mars. And the thing that was interesting, since
we're talking so much about hydrogen, the fact that we found
ice on the Moon and we can break water or ice down to hydrogen
and oxygen, and then that could be a fuel supply, so I'm not
sure how many of you might be involved or interested in that,
but that question comes to mind for me. So any one of the
witnesses, you're welcome to make a comment about that,
starting with Mr. Nelson.
Mr. Nelson. Specifically on ice?
Mr. Baird. Yes.
Mr. Nelson. I don't have a lot to say on that. I would say
that one other method of hydrogen that's quite interesting is
that there are natural deposits of hydrogen underground on
Earth that could be a source of completely emissions-free
hydrogen that could be readily accessible, and there's a lot of
interest and research into that. But that's--I only have
experience with terrestrial, not with space, hydrogen.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Dr. Boardman, any thoughts on your
part?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, Congressman Baird, I can offer an
opinion on that. And many times, the thought is, is that we
might have a scarcity of water resources here on this planet.
And really, it's--we have an abundance of water and we can
cleanup water, including brackish water to electrolyze and to
make into hydrogen. We already use that water in steam methane
reforming to produce hydrogen. So that's not a concern.
But there are remote locations of which you're referring to
where ice can be found, and you could then split that water to
make hydrogen. And I would just refer you to an experiment on--
in progress right now on Mars with Perseverance where one of
the companies, U.S. companies that building this high
temperature electrolysis unit has built a device to electrolyze
CO2 in the very same manner. By splitting the CO2, they're
producing carbon monoxide. When that ice is split and turned
into hydrogen, now you have hydrogen and carbon monoxide and
you're off to being able to build many chemicals, methanol,
among them, and many fuels. And so it's an exciting opportunity
to think about how these technologies, electrolysis being one,
could co-electrolyze CO2. Now we can begin to turn our CO2 back
into fuels and the things we use. That's closing the cycle of
carbon, Congressman Baird.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, very interesting.
Mr. Johnson, you got any thoughts?
Mr. Johnson. No. We're basically just the terrestrial
approach for pipelines, not much into space, sir. Thank you for
the question though.
Mr. Baird. And Dr. Ravikumar?
Dr. Ravikumar. One of the things that's going to be helpful
because of the tax credits that are available to hydrogen
production here is that we're going to see a lot of innovation
in electrolyzer improvement both in cost-effectiveness,
efficiency, as well as miniaturization. All of these are going
to be critically important when we are looking at hydrogen
production in extraterritorial worlds.
Mr. Baird. Yes, Mr. Fuller?
Mr. Fuller. Again, like my colleagues here, I'm mostly on
the terrestrial side, but I can see some opportunities where if
you can have an abundant fuel source coupled with fuel cells,
where you can use that for power production in a remote
location. It couples nicely with the ability to not have to
transport fuel across wide areas of space so--I don't know much
more than that, though.
Mr. Baird. Well, I thank all of you for your comments. I
really do.
But my question now goes back to Mr. Nelson. The Investment
in Infrastructure and Jobs Act, we authorized--or they
authorized $7 billion for development of regional clean
hydrogen hubs. The Midwest Alliance for Clean Hydrogen is
submitting a final proposal that will clean hydrogen in the
transportation sector, steel production, agriculture through
ammonia production. And some of that's been mentioned here
already today. So my first question is what should our
consortiums be doing to prioritize their proposals for hydrogen
hubs? Should lawmakers be concerned about the use of taxpayer
dollars?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for that question, Representative. I
think it's really important that they're trying to find a wide
variety of partners who have various expertise to make sure
that projects are delivered on time and on budget. I think the
Midwest Hydrogen Hub is a good example of this as a mixture of
companies, national labs, and universities. But it's really
important that they're bringing in the right balance of
engineering experience, as well as technical experience, and
also making sure they have the right outreach to local
communities.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. And I see I'm out of time, so I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Baird.
I now recognize Ms. Lofgren for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. This has
been very interesting. I appreciate all of the testimony. I
have a million questions, but I'm going to focus first just on
one. As I said, just shy of 10 years ago, a team of gunmen
opened fire on the Metcalf Transmission Substation in my
congressional district. And just a few months prior to that,
the National Academies released a report on the very topic of
the grid being vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Now, physical
attacks like this can lead to widespread blackouts, severe
economic impacts, and I'm wondering whether we have adequately
responded to this.
Mr. Fuller, can you speak to how the grid was or was not
fortified in the fallout from this attack?
Mr. Fuller. Yes, absolutely. Thank you for the question.
And so immediately after that attack, as you mentioned,
Chairman Wellinghoff led an effort that included national labs
and other major experts that went and developed new standards
for how to protect our power, particularly substations, how to
fortify that against those kinds of attacks. Those do take
time. It's not something you can just deploy overnight, and it
does--you know, it costs money, quite honestly. And so it's an
area that there is proved standards in those areas, but there
is time to take that until those standards taking place and the
equipment is actually in place.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me ask you this. At the time, there was a
disruption, and it wasn't actually caught in an automatic
fashion. There were just people watching, and they realized
there had been a disruption and they, as human beings,
responded. Had they not done that, all of Silicon Valley would
have been blacked out, and the estimates are that they would
have been blacked out for a considerable period of time,
creating a disruption not only to the economy, but given that a
lot of the activity there is defense-related, it would have had
an impact on our national security. Has that been automated yet
or are we still relying on somebody paying attention and
catching it?
Mr. Fuller. Yes, great question. And the answer is both. So
there is additional automations. New sensors have been
deployed, things even simple like watching oils--oil levels
inside of a transformer, but it's also new sensors like gunshot
sensors to tell when a sound that's at a substation, you can
actually hear what that might have been. So there have been new
things that have been deployed to try to recognize these
events. But in the end, it really is a good operator
understanding that something is going wrong with the system and
then making a decision to try to prevent it or mitigate it.
Ms. Lofgren. Now, I'm also thinking that in a case like
that, redundancy would be our friend. There's vulnerability
just because of the reliance on the way the grid is laid out in
that part of California. Have--are we looking at or planning
for or achieving redundancy to reduce our vulnerability?
Mr. Fuller. Absolutely. That's part of the bread and butter
of what utilities do in terms of trying to make sure they
understand where their most vulnerable contingencies are. They
call it N minus 1 contingencies where they're trying to look
for where a failure will cause large-scale outages and then try
to prevent those. The challenge is something like the Metcalf
substation, those aren't small investments----
Ms. Lofgren. Right.
Mr. Fuller [continuing]. And they are quite costly to build
a second one to be redundant. And so having instead supply
equipment that can then quickly replace damaged equipment is
probably a better approach than trying to build, say, a second
substation along those lines. But of course, we're facing a
shortage in transformers right now within the Nation.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me just ask a final question. What
happened with that attack? It was an attack on the substation,
but there was also an attack on the fiberoptics that was--it
was the same group of attackers. Have we achieved adequate
communication between the operators of the fiberoptics and the
operators of the grid so that that kind of information would be
fed into the response? I mean, 9/11 was out of--for all the
cities south of Metcalf for some time.
Mr. Fuller. Absolutely. And I would say we're doing better.
We're not there yet. So there is still a major reliance on
fiberoptic cables either owned by the utilities themselves or
by third-party providers.
Ms. Lofgren. In this case, it was third parties.
Mr. Fuller. Exactly. Right. And so there is a need to
continue that communication and understanding of what it means
when you lose a communication system, have backup communication
systems. In this case, they use typically microwave or things
like that on top of a fiberoptics cable. But there's more to
go.
Ms. Lofgren. I was thinking more not just the redundancy
but actually the disruption of the fiberoptics preceded the
gunshots and could have been part of the information into the
operator in terms of what to do.
But I see that my time has expired. I thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for recognizing me.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
I'd now like to recognize myself for 5 minutes. I'd like to
thank the Chairman of the Committee and the Ranking Member.
The great State of Ohio ranks number nine in the Nation for
farm operations. And one out of every seven jobs in Ohio is in
the agricultural industry, making agriculture incredibly
important to me and my constituents. And as a Member of the
House Agricultural Committee, in addition to this great
Committee, I recently formed an Agriculture Advisory Council in
our district to bring together the voices of farmers, livestock
producers, agribusiness, and other agricultural representatives
ahead of important discussions on the next farm bill.
Mr. Nelson, have you seen any successful initiatives to
support agriculture innovation within the Federal Government
that will benefit key stakeholders such as the farmers and
producers in Ohio's 7th District?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question, Representative. I
look forward to working with you on this Committee. Yes, there
have been a number of successful initiatives. One I would like
to highlight is the Foundation for Food and Agricultural
Research, pronounced--it's FFAR or it's pronounced ``far.''
It's a public-private partnership that pairs Federal grants
with private-sector dollars. I think what's really interesting
about it is that it does have a private sector matching
requirement of 50-50. But historically, it's been such a
successful program that the private sector brings in a lot more
money than is required. I think it's been about $1.40 from the
private sector for every $1 from the public sector. And I think
they've done a lot of work with Ohio State University actually.
Mr. Miller. And they have a phenomenal campus down in
Wooster, Ohio, that we just visited.
Mr. Nelson. Oh, really?
Mr. Miller. It's unbelievable and the technology.
Another point I want to touch on is the fact that carbon
emissions from energy-intensive industrial sectors like steel
and others make up nearly 1/4 of total U.S. emissions. Industry
is looking for solutions, but many currently available options
are cost-prohibitive and impede America's competitiveness with
other countries.
Mr. Nelson, how can we build on current policies and enable
low emissions innovation while supporting strong American
manufacturing industries?
Mr. Nelson. Thank you for the question, Mr. Miller. I think
we've seen in other countries, particularly in Europe, they've
reduced industrial emissions by moving those industrial
facilities out of the country. That lowers their emissions, but
it also, you know, reduces the number of jobs they have. The
best way forward is to really develop newer technologies that
lower the emissions of the products that we want to produce
while maintaining those jobs. So, you know, a great example of
some legislation that's done that is the SUPER Act, which went
through this Committee, which is a comprehensive low emission
steel research and development program. I think you could
follow that model for other subsectors of the industrial
sector, produce those products with fewer emissions.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, and I yield back the rest of my
time.
I now would like to recognize Ms. Lee of Pennsylvania for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Focusing my comments and questions on hydrogen
particularly, I think it's incredibly important to consider
that while hydrogen is emerging as a clean and sustainable
alternative to traditional fossil fuels, my greatest concern
remains that we don't continue to marginalize the same
communities that fossil fuels have. We have to be careful not
to say that we're OK with communities like the one I'm from
being sacrificial lambs in the name of energy innovation. We
know that environmental sustainability and well-paying jobs are
not mutually exclusive. Indeed, we need and we can have both.
Research and development are essential to maintaining and
upgrading our region's energy infrastructure. I remain
steadfast in reaffirming that Pittsburgh's long and proud
history of innovation will continue as we invest in research
and development with a paramount focus on safety, efficient
operation, and security for every community.
With that, said, Dr. Ravikumar, what research and
development of hydrogen as a clean energy source needs to be
carried out and tested and practical utilizations to eliminate
the exposure of low income communities--low income and
communities of color to disproportionate and adverse risk
factors?
Dr. Ravikumar. Thank you for the question. There are
several areas of research that we need to focus on to ensure
that we produce and use hydrogen in a clean and safe manner.
The first thing to understand in terms of research needs for
hydrogen is to figure out how does hydrogen leak from our
infrastructure? So hydrogen, irrespective of what method it's
produced by, whether it's from fossil fuels with carbon
capture, whether it's from electrolysis or from nuclear energy
has to go into pipelines to go to demand centers. We have to do
a lot more research and thinking about how to minimize leaks
from pipelines of hydrogen. How does hydrogen, which is a
corrosive gas, affect pipeline materials and building new
materials to ensure that this infrastructure will stay safe for
a long time.
The second set of research needs that we have is hydrogen,
when you burn them, burns much hotter than natural gas,
resulting in pollutants such as NO
x
. We have to make
sure that technologies that we develop that use hydrogen do not
increase pollution emissions compared to current technologies.
And this is something the Department of Energy and industry
companies such as GE have been working on for some time, make
sure that the pollutant emissions when we burn hydrogen are
minimized and does not increase overall pollution burdens to
the communities in which these facilities are installed.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Also, as the majority of existing
pipeline infrastructure is closest in proximity to communities
of color, how can--and poor communities, of course, how can
modelling be used in pipeline R&D toward the mitigation of the
emissions impacts to communities that have historically borne
the most adverse socioeconomic and health outcomes from the
development of energy resources?
Dr. Ravikumar. Right. One of the best things to come out of
Department of Energy investments over the past decade has been
in technologies that help us detect methane leaks out of
natural gas pipelines quickly and cost-effectively. We need to
be expanding that program, especially as that infrastructure is
aging, to make sure that leaks are identified as soon as it
occurs and repairs initiated. In addition, several cities in
the East Coast have pipeline replacement programs to replace
aging infrastructure with newer, less leak prone pipelines. We
need to make sure that those pipelines are not leaking again.
So a comprehensive, multiyear monitoring program is critical to
make sure that all of our infrastructure, both existing on
natural gas site and new ones for hydrogen, do not leak over
the next several decades.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. I have no further questions. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Lee.
I now recognize Mr. Kean of New Jersey for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Kean. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
panelists for being here today and talking so eloquently about
the need for innovation and working to get things done for both
resiliency and making sure we have an all-of-the-above type
energy strategy.
Can you, Mr. Fuller, talk a little bit about what are the
things we need--you know, what are the tools and the
technologies that are necessary for industry to improve the
strength, the resilience, security of the U.S. electric grid?
How can DOE effectively partner with industry to identify and
to address these technology needs?
Mr. Fuller. Thank you for the question. And I think that is
that partnership that you described, the public-private
partnership is the key to success in this area because it is a
privately owned industry, right? So the supplies are out there.
We need to bring the technology to the utilities and help them
provide a way to deploy it in a cost-effective manner. So we're
talking about some of the most impactful things that we can do
right now, a lot of this on the planning side to understand
what is the impact of different events? How do you mitigate
those events, and what technologies are the best to use? They
are a way to basically cost-compare and understand what you can
get, you can basically get the most bang for your buck in terms
of what's the right technology to deploy.
But there's also the kind of more kind of on-the-ground
technology, so energy storage of any kind, whatever the
chemistry is a way to provide resilience to the system, anytime
that you're isolated from the system. There's also a
significant amount of work that can go into even small sensors
like wildfire prevention sensors like drop sensors where they
detect that a cable has fallen from the tower, and it was able
to trip offline before it actually makes contact with the
ground and therefore spark and start a new wildfire. So a lot
of kind of little things like there, but the more structural
things, pieces are--I think the planning efforts to understand
what is the best technologies and when.
Mr. Kean. OK. As you may know, I come from New Jersey.
We've had our fair share of weather-related events over the
years. What's the best way for us to all look at the
resiliency, redundancy in all these energy development, energy
transmission?
Mr. Fuller. So I think a big part of that is to start to
look at the system as an overall energy system. In the
Northeast, you know, a lot of that's tied to natural gas,
applying to both power and heat customers, and understand what
that impact is when the system is stressed from multiple
directions. So the North American Energy Resilience Model that
I mentioned from the Office of Electricity is looking at just
that. It's modeling the codependency of those two systems on
each other and trying to understand how the stresses translate
across the system and then try to build in either whether it be
natural gas storage or other mitigation methods to make sure
that you understand how you can prevent those methods or
challenges before they happen.
Mr. Kean. OK. And to whichever member of the panel is
best--thinks they are best able to answer this question, in
this all-of-the-above energy strategy, what role do you think
hydrogen plays in the future of the U.S. energy infrastructure?
And what synergies can be created with the other sources such
as nuclear, oil, gas, and otherwise?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, Congressman, I'll take a shot at that
question first. I think hydrogen has a very important role in a
number of ways. One is to provide energy storage on long time
scales. We've spoken to some at PSEG in your State. And as we
look toward building up renewables and wind turbine offshore,
then the nuclear plants may need to flex. They may need to
power down. Rather than powering down, they could produce and
store hydrogen, which can be brought back in, converted back
into power with G turbans or electrolyzers that are reversible.
So energy storage plays an important role there. And we talked
to PJM about that particular option.
Second, these electrolyzers may also be able to be used as
a way to regulate frequency and power factor on the grid to
help provide that resilience that's needed on the grid. And I
would point you to some research that was done at the National
Renewable Energy Laboratory with the low temperature
electrolysis in which they were able to modulate those very
rapidly in order to mitigate perturbations of frequency on a
grid. So it can also contribute to stabilizing and providing
resilience to the grid when the system works cooperatively.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. Representative Kean, the other thing to
think about, too, is that hydrogen is one of the next steps for
us. And it's got to be energy mosaic, as I said in my opening
testimony, of looking at hydrogen, hydrocarbons. Any study out
there you look at it's going to take all the above to really
get to our finish line. And hydrogen is a key component in
that.
We need to make sure--and go back to the comment that
Representative Lee made--safety has got to be one of the
driving factors as we move into this next evolution is how do
we do it safely and efficiently? And that's something the
industry continuously works on and continues to drive forward
on. So I think industry--hydrogen definitely has a key role,
and we just need to make sure we understand it's all of the
above. It's not just one source.
Mr. Kean. Right. Thank you for your time. And which is why
I've been focusing on the all-of-the-above energy strategy, one
of the key component--parts to make us energy-independent.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Miller. Thank you, Mr. Kean.
I now recognize Ms. Ross of North Carolina for 5 minutes of
questions.
Ms. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And also thanks to the
Ranking Member for holding this hearing and to all of our
panelists for joining us.
Grid security is a huge priority for my constituents in
North Carolina. In the last 2 years alone, my State has
experienced extreme weather damage, cyber attacks, and physical
attacks on our energy infrastructure, all on a major scale. The
Duke Energy blackouts over the Christmas holidays, the Colonial
Pipeline cyber attack, and the Moore County substation attacks
all left thousands without power or fuel. And these three
events, as well as countless others that have occurred around
the country, have demonstrated the urgent need for a Federal
Government involvement and attention to securing the grid.
You've--we've had some questions about the sniper attack,
so I won't talk about what happened in Moore County, but we
really haven't talked much about cybersecurity. And this was a
big focus in the last Congress. And I know there's some bills
out there, including one that I have that's passed the House
and is in the Senate.
So, Mr. Fuller, a report that the GAO (Government
Accountability Office) released in March 2021 pointed out that
the electricity grid's distribution system or--is vulnerable to
more cybersecurity attacks and that the report notes that the
cyber attacks on foreign distribution systems such as the 2015
attack on Ukrainian electricity facilities demonstrate the
vulnerability of distribution systems. In addition, national
laboratory officials told GAO that cyber attacks on
distribution systems could result in power outages of a
national significance.
What role should the Federal Government and specifically
DOE play in increasing understanding of the potential impacts
of a cyber attack on distribution systems?
Mr. Fuller. Thank you for that question. And you're
correct. This is a very important area to be working on right
now. You know, when you look at cybersecurity, this is not
something that you can prevent everything, but you need to be
able to prevent some pieces of it. You need to be able to be
able to mitigate it when it does happen. If you think about the
way our system has worked for really 50 years, when a failure
happens, you work around it and get the power back on. We need
to be thinking about power some operations the same way when it
comes to cybersecurity. So how do you reactivate the system
when the cyber portion of it is compromised? That's what you're
seeing happen in Ukraine, quite honestly, right, and what
they're able to do very quickly and rescan their system back up
after, you know, continuous attacks.
And so on the--when it comes to the research side of
things, there's a lot of capabilities in terms of trying to
understand what the cyber risk assessment is, so understanding
where are the vulnerabilities themselves, helping utility
understand all of that, but then how do you mitigate those, and
which ones are actually the risks? Not all cybersecurity risks
are actually something you have to worry about per se, but you
want to be able to then identify which are the ones to focus
on.
Ms. Ross. OK. And, Mr. Johnson, are there any particular
research needs that the Federal Government can help fill to
avoid a crisis like this? You know, each utility is going to be
running its system a different way, and we have everything from
natural gas to solar to nuclear. Where can the Federal
Government help in a systemic way?
Mr. Johnson. That's a great question. A couple of years
ago, there was a National Petroleum Council study that came out
that talked about the cybersecurity opportunities and how the
role of government is and industry. And it really came down to
that it really is a collaboration. It's not the DOE drives it
by itself. It's not industry. It needs to be the sharing. As
you saw when the Colonial event happened, it was a nationwide
alert that went out rapidly. Elevating those kinds of
activities from a DOE point of view is going to be critical to
our future to ensure the safety and integrity. So when you look
at the research that's needed, a lot of it's being done already
in a lot of different areas. Now, it's a matter of the Federal
Government helping coordinate and transmitting and sharing that
amongst the industry effectively. Thank you.
Ms. Ross. And this is the last question for anybody on the
panel. We know that we've given money to DOE through the
infrastructure bill in order to do some grid modernization. We
also know that FERC allows for cost-sharing for grid
modernization so that the utility pays some, people who might
want to come onto the grid pay some, consumers pay some. A lot
of States require all of grid modernization to be paid for by
just the consumer. And so do you have ideas? Because we have
such great needs in this country, and we don't want some States
to fall behind and some States to go ahead for how we should do
cost-sharing. Anybody?
Mr. Nelson. I can take a stab at that real quick. Yes, I
think utilities are very cost-sensitive. They want to make sure
that the rates that they're providing are as low as possible
for their customers, and in many cases, they're required to
keep them very low, so that sometimes means that for long-term
investments on grid resilience, you know, they might not make
the largest potential investment because that would fall on
those customers. I think the GRIP (Grid Resilience and
Innovation Partnerships) program in the IIJA (Infrastructure
Investment and Jobs Act) is a great way for the DOE to help
support utilities in making long-term investments that they
might not be able to quite afford otherwise without
substantially raising rates.
Ms. Ross. Thank you. And I yield back.
Chairman Williams. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman
from Texas, Mr. Weber, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Weber. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Boardman, for you--and welcome to all of you all for
being here. In summary of your research activities, it states
that you're working Idaho National Lab has led to a process
that can solidify sodium-bearing nuclear waste. And I see
you've been there since 1990 at the lab?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, Congressman, I have, 33 years now.
Mr. Weber. Well, bless your heart.
As we work to unleash American energy, I believe that
nuclear will play a critical role in that research and
development, and this space is critical. So I want you to share
how your research can lead to nuclear playing a larger role in
our Nation's energy portfolio. But before you do, in 2017, I
was able to pass the NEICA Act, Nuclear Energy Innovation
Capability Act, that said the Department of DOE making research
dollars, you know, get into the next round of SMR, small
modular reactors, you know, that China and Russia is eating our
lunch on nuclear, and that's unacceptable. Were you aware of
that bill, Dr. Boardman?
Dr. Boardman. I'm not aware of that specific bill----
Mr. Weber. OK.
Dr. Boardman [continuing]. Congressman Weber.
Mr. Weber. Well, it got signed into law by President Trump,
but we didn't wind up getting spondula for it, and that's a
Texas word for dinero. So how's your research going to lead to
nuclear playing a larger role in our Nation's energy portfolio?
Dr. Boardman. Thank you, Chairman Williams and Congressman
Weber. I'm excited to answer that question. And first off, let
me remark that when I started, I was working with that sodium-
bearing waste and helped develop processes, and a process will
startup very soon now to treat the very last part of that
sodium-bearing waste.
But, as we move forward with these advanced reactors, first
of all, we are looking at extending the life of the existing
fleet, and it provides us an opportunity to continue to use
that for the electrical grid and maybe even beyond. So there's
a program called Flexible Plant Operations and Generation. It's
funded under the Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program.
Mr. Weber. Let me break in for one quick second. Have you
given thought to maybe some suggestions for the NRC (Nuclear
Regulatory Commission) on updating their process? I'll yield
back to you.
Dr. Boardman. Thank you. Thank you, Congressman Weber. Yes,
and I think that's very important. And so part of the work that
we're doing is actually to help the NRC understand how both the
existing fleet and advanced reactors are going to be able to
interface with the hydrogen production plants. A lot of work is
going on right now where we're looking at probabilistic risk
assessments, failure modes, and effect analysis so that we can
be on top of being able to help these plants, existing and
future plants, very quickly, couple with hydrogen plants. So
that's part of the research and development that is underway.
Now, just as our history has been to build and prove
nuclear reactors, that work continues, and we're now set to
startup three more reactors. And we hope in the future that
through the National Innovation Reactor Center, NIRC, that
we'll be able to continue to test and prove these advanced
reactors, both the dome facility, and as well as a new facility
that we're speaking much about now called a proving center.
These proving centers are very, very vital to us to be able to
show that in a place where we're very familiar with nuclear
energy like the NuScale reactor, like the X-Energy reactor,
like the microreactors that are coming out. And so I think
we're on track right now to accelerate the demonstration of
these reactors at a place where we have a lot of people who can
do that, and then they can quickly leap into industry. And it's
important for us to continue that work, and we're very--we're
happy that we're orchestrated in that cause.
Mr. Weber. Well, thank you. I've had some conversations
with some of the Members on this Committee in days gone by, and
one of the comments was if we could show nuclear to be safe and
efficient or, you know, that they would be in favor of nuclear
power, and my comment was, I can prove that nuclear energy is
safe, efficient, a good form of power with two words, nuclear
submarines. We put nuclear reactors in a nuclear submarine, we
put them underwater in a boat or submarine that might be 4 to
500 feet long. I forget how wide and how tall it is. And then
we load it up with, I don't know, 90, 100, 110 of our finest
Americans, and they put them under the water for what, 2 or 3
weeks at a time. Does your work--are you familiar with that
style of nuclear reactor?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, very--excuse me. Congressman Weber, yes,
very familiar with that style. And I would comment further that
Pele is a program in which the military is now helping to
advance these--the use of these new nuclear reactors. And if
they can do that for military purposes, we can use them for
civilian purposes, and that is coming together in States like
Wyoming and Alaska where there are State and military and
commercial entities coming together.
Mr. Weber. How many submarines does Wyoming have?
Dr. Boardman. Not too many, I don't suppose. But I would
imagine they've sent a lot of officers to the Navy, and we'd
appreciate--we appreciate that State for all they do.
Mr. Weber. So it is coming together. Well, thank you for
that. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Miller. [presiding] Well, I appreciate those comments.
I now recognize Mr. Sorensen from Illinois.
Mr. Sorensen. I want to thank Chairman Williams and Ranking
Member Bowman for convening the hearing. And thanks to our
witnesses today.
In 2022, I purchased my first electric vehicle. It was an
important decision for me as a climate communicator and a
meteorologist. I represent parts of northern, western, and
central Illinois, Moline, Rockford, Peoria, Bloomington,
Normal. The problem that I have as a Congressman is I cannot
drive my vehicle from my home in Moline to the corners of the
district and then make it back home. The infrastructure just
isn't there. Not only does the physical infrastructure not
exist, the electric grid is, as currently constituted, is not
capable of supporting the number of chargers that we need for
Americans and the people in my district to drive an electric
vehicle tomorrow.
And so for Mr. Fuller, what steps can Congress take to
accelerate the upgrade that we need in the grid to support
electric vehicle use on a worthwhile scale?
Mr. Fuller. Yes, absolutely. Great question. And I bought
my first one in 2019 and have the same challenge. It's very
difficult to get to Seattle and back for me in one charge, so I
feel your pain there. But, you know, one of the things that can
be done is there's, you know, programs like Electrify America
and things like that that are deploying stations across the
interstate highway system, allowing for fast charging stations,
in this case, a DC-charging station network that's allowed to--
faster charging. There's also--then starting to look at some of
the long-haul trucking, which is going to be a significant
impact on the power system itself when you're talking about 5
to 10 megawatt chargers for each truck. And how do you move
across the country that way, recharging those stations? So I
think the investments that are--that the offices are doing
right now in terms of trying to understand where to place those
things, actually putting money into pushing them out there as a
public charging infrastructure are all wonderful things. I
think starting to look at what it's going to take, what are the
storage and local generation needs that are going to have to
happen to make sure that these kind of big charging stations
are going to be able to exist without having to upgrade the
network itself because you don't want to be tearing up roads
and trying to deploy new lines to support them. So there's kind
of a whole series of events that are going on right now that I
think are moving in the right direction, but we can keep
accelerating those.
Mr. Sorensen. Forgive the pun. It seems sometimes that
we're spinning our wheels here. What--on our current
trajectory, when do you think I'll be able to advocate for my
constituents to buy an EV?
Mr. Fuller. It's tough question. I really don't have a good
answer for you on that one. I know that we've done some studies
that are looking about the energy resources that are available,
for example, in the western interconnect, you know, we can
serve up to 28 million vehicles just immediately right now, as
long. As they're done with smart charging, we can actually get
up to 65 million vehicles. These are all consumer vehicles, not
big trucks and things like that. So the energy is there. It's
about getting it to the right places and then being able to
build out the infrastructure to support it. It took us, you
know, 50, 60 years to build a gas infrastructure to be able to
actually then drive gas vehicles along. How long will it take
us to do the electric vehicle infrastructure? I hope a lot
faster.
Mr. Sorensen. Thank you for that. Dr. Boardman, I'd like to
continue a couple of the questions that Mr. Weber, my colleague
across the aisle, had asked. The State of Illinois is a leader
in nuclear energy. The problem that we have today is that
developing a new nuclear reactor is cost-prohibitive for our
electric companies. How do we make sure that our--that small-
scale nuclear can be paid for? Is it public-private
partnership? What do you suggest?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, Congressman, I believe that it is. And
it is the key that we have those public-private partnerships
that we begin in the beginning to talk to the supply chain, so
those advanced reactor companies begin to look at manufacturing
done in U.S.--by U.S. companies so that we can establish, just
like any other infrastructure, a high volume of manufacturing
and then we can turn toward factory-assembled, factory-built,
filled-assembled, so we've got to come up with concepts that
allow us to bring that--those costs down in the way you do with
every other industry. And I do believe that efforts are
underway to--with those partnerships that are now looking at
that.
Mr. Sorensen. And I look forward to the partnerships across
the aisle for this clean energy, and I yield back.
Chairman Williams. Thank you. I recognize Mrs. Foushee for
5 minutes.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to the
witnesses for being here with us today.
The severity of the cost of extreme weather in the United
States is growing, and the role that climate change plays in
these events is being further studied and better understood. We
do know that, as climate change continues to accelerate,
weather will become less predictable, and extremes will grow
even more extreme. I see this firsthand in my home State of
North Carolina where the hurricane season has pushed our
State's energy grid system to its limit on multiple occasions.
So my first question is to Mr. Fuller. Mr. Fuller, grid
planners need a sharper understanding of how climate factors
could affect the performance of their systems beyond simply
expect the unexpected. So can you talk about what research
investments and coordination are needed to improve our grid
resilience planning?
Mr. Fuller. Thank you. That's a great question. There's a
lot of really great work coming out of Office of Science that
is looking at climate modeling and understanding and predicting
what the new system will look like going forward. We're really
talking about 10, 20, 30, 50 years out and trying to understand
what that is, but translating that to extreme weather events is
a challenging piece, and then what we call downscaling that to
local weather patterns to understand what do you need to get
ready for. There's a gap there still in terms of trying to
understand that. There are a number of national labs that are
working on that effort right now to try to understand it. And
that allows utilities then, say, not just look at past
historical information to understand how they should build
their system to prevent outages but look forward to say, OK,
here's the weather patterns that we are expecting, and
therefore, we can design to protect ourselves from those
things.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you for that. Is it your sense that
utilities have the tools that they need to consider various
scenarios in order to anticipate the potential physical impacts
on the grid?
Mr. Fuller. I don't believe so at this time. So, you know,
this is something that's different than the past, and so they
need the tools to build understand what the future is going to
look like. They know how to design their system. They built it,
and they've run it cost-effectively for 100 years, but they
need the tools to help them understand and predict what that
system is going to look like going forward, particularly the
weather patterns that are a part of it, where a floodplain is
going to move, where are heatwaves going to occur and how
often. And so that's a gap right now, both in the availability
in certain datasets that allow them to understand and make that
prediction and then adjust their planning around it.
Mrs. Foushee. The rapid addition of advanced technologies
to the grid highlights the need for workforce development and
training in both the grid resilience and cybersecurity sectors.
So again, Mr. Fuller, and later, Mr. Nelson, is there a role
for the Federal Government to fill this gap? And if so, what
would that look like?
Mr. Fuller. I think the answer is absolutely. There's a
severe shortage of qualified workers in cybersecurity and in
power system operations that's been ongoing for at least in
power systems for over 20 years now. And so we do need to
basically build out that workforce and have them ready for what
the next challenges will be. There are programs like the
National Security Internship Programs that help, you know,
young students get into STEM (science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics) programs, stay in STEM programs, and then
assist in the Federal investment cycles. They're all good
ideas, and we should, I think, continue to invest in those and
find ways to expand those programs, particularly focusing on
some of the STEM applications.
Mrs. Foushee. Mr. Nelson?
Mr. Nelson. Yes, I absolutely agree with Mr. Fuller on
this. This is a critical area where we're not going to have
enough folks working if we don't have specific investments. One
interesting program at DOE is the SunSpec Alliance, which works
on trying to provide jobs in cybersecurity related to solar and
distributed energy for military veterans. I think we should be
trying to find ways to try and couple our workforce development
programs for cybersecurity with also trying to support veterans
and other people who need good employment opportunities.
Mrs. Foushee. Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Mr. Baird [presiding]. Thank you. And now we have Mr.
Casten from Illinois. Representative Casten----
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Baird----
Mr. Baird [continuing]. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Baird, from Indiana. Thanks to
all our witnesses.
So I want to talk about hydrogen, and I--forgive me, I want
to get nerdy here, but it's what I do. There's a--there's an
existing market for hydrogen for--you know, as a fuel source,
and NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration),
there's an existing market as a hydrogenation agent, you know,
is--there's a chemical stipulate. All those are interesting and
not the reason why everybody's investing in hydrogen. There's a
future market that is, No. 1, how are we going to decarbonize
the hard-to-decarbonize industries where we use fossil fuel as
a reduction agent, basically, right? So, you know, can we
replace met coke in a steel mill? Can we replace natural gas in
an ammonia plant? All good in this Committee, I'm very proud to
say we passed 2 years ago the Clean Industrial Technology Act,
funded again, really, really important stuff.
The sex appeal, if you will, is on the electric side. And,
Dr. Boardman, one chemical engineer to another, I want to focus
on you because we make laws here all the time, but we don't get
to change the laws of thermodynamics. So I want to just run
some first law math, and tell me if you disagree with this.
Electrolyzer is currently 60 to 70 percent first law
efficiency. Is that a fair number?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, that's a fair number for alkaline and
alkaline electrolysis.
Mr. Casten. OK. And cutting-edge, breakthrough, best-in-
class electrolyzer, what are we talking about, 90 percent
maybe?
Dr. Boardman. Congressman, we can exceed that. We have test
units running in Idaho right now, fully integrated systems that
are reaching 90 percent, and there's opportunity for
improvement.
Mr. Casten. OK. So that takes us from electricity to
hydrogen. To then get the hydrogen into a compressed or
liquefied form where we can transport it, 90, 95 percent maybe,
maybe as low as 85 percent if we're going to go for
liquefaction. Do you buy those numbers?
Dr. Boardman. I do.
Mr. Casten. OK. And then if we're going to get that
hydrogen out to the point where we're going to use it, fuel
cell, depending on what technology, 30, 60 percent?
Dr. Boardman. In some cases, yes. In some cases, it could
be higher.
Mr. Casten. OK. So I run through that math because if we're
looking at--and let me take your 95 percent number. If we're 95
percent, 85 percent on the compression and 60 percent of the
fuel cell, that's a 34 percent efficiency of turning
electricity into electricity.
Dr. Boardman. That's correct.
Mr. Casten. So the argument for doing that versus putting
electricity into a battery and turning it back into
electricity, which is like an 80 percent round-trip efficiency,
is premised on--I don't see how that math works unless there's
a compelling reason why it is cheaper to store and transmit
hydrogen than it is to store and transmit electricity. All
right?
Dr. Boardman. Thank you, Congressman. Yes, that is an
important discussion, and I think a lot of this will come down
to also the capacity and the amount of energy that might be
stored when we have excess generation from the renewables that
get built up, come when the wind blows, come when the sun
shines, and how can we move that?
Mr. Casten. Sure. But that's still an electricity--and like
we could--I mean, that's a capital cost question, right?
Dr. Boardman. Yes, it is.
Mr. Casten. But if we're sitting there saying, like, you
know, if money's no object, I can build a lot of storage one
from the other, but at some point I'm going to care about those
marginal operating costs to determine which of the capital gets
built.
Dr. Boardman. You do need to take--account for that.
Mr. Casten. Right.
Dr. Boardman. So, Congressman, we have done some
calculations here, and I think that's a very important
question. We agree with you. The math needs to be studied. And
in cases where the amount of energy that needs to be stored
gets large enough, then the capital investment in the hydrogen
and the efficiency starts to pay off, so it's a systems----
Mr. Casten. So----
Dr. Boardman. It's a systems calculation that needs to be
considered.
Mr. Casten. So if I could--and I'm nervous about the time,
and I told you I was going to get nerdy here. I'm with you on
that logic. Have there been any meaningful advances in hydrogen
storage in the last three decades? And I say that because 20
years ago I was part of the Hydrogen DOE Technical Advisory
Task Force, and we said there's compressed hydrogen, there's
liquefied hydrogen, and then we're really excited about metal
hydrides and carbon nanotubes, which didn't really materialize.
As far as I can tell, years ago, we were talking about 8,000
psi canisters, and now we're talking about 10,000 psi
canisters. Are we--No. 1, are we--if--do we agree that storage
is the pacing technology? And if we do, are we spending enough
dollars in storage, and is there actually a plausible
technology even if it's just on the corners of somebody's
physics notebook that's out there, or are we still basically
just putting pressurized gas in tanks?
Dr. Boardman. Congressman, I'll try to answer that the best
I can. There are new technologies. The Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory is working on one that would use magnetics
to try to compress and liquefy the hydrogen. There are
opportunities to put it with other forms, put it into ammonia,
put it into methanol, put it into synthetic natural gas. Those
forms of hydrogen storage would probably be much easier. And
these are systems that we need to evaluate. We need to do the
cost. But the storage options might include putting it into
other forms of hydrogen carriers and compounds.
Mr. Casten. Well, I'm out of time, but as you can tell from
my comments, just like for decades, storage has been the only
meaningful question, and I'm not sure we've really answered
that. And we can get all the sex appeal tied up and everything
else, but if we don't have a good answer to the storage
question, we're just throwing a lot of dollars at something
that doesn't pencil.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. And I don't believe we have any more
questions, so I really want to thank the witnesses for being
here. I know that takes time out of your busy schedules, and
it's really helpful to have the kind of expertise that you have
to share with the Members of this Committee. So on behalf of
the Committee, I want to thank you for being here and sharing
that kind of information.
I must say that the record will remain open for 10 days for
any additional comments and written questions from Members. And
so with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:11 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

Appendix

----------

Additional Material for the Record

Grid Security Discussion Draft
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Hydrogen Discussion Draft
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Pipelines Discussion Draft
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
