- BUDGET PROCESS REFORM MEMBER DAY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUDGET PROCESS REFORM
MEMBER DAY HEARING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

----------

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., DECEMBER 6, 2023

----------

Serial No. 118-8

----------

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

BUDGET PROCESS REFORM
MEMBER DAY HEARING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., DECEMBER 6, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-418                    WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania,
TOM McCLINTOCK, California             Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   BARBARA LEE, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         JIMMY PANETTA, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DAVID G. VALADAO, California         ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota,
RON ESTES, Kansas                      Vice Ranking Member
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma          DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            BECCA BALINT, Vermont
MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota        ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
RUDY YAKYM III, Indiana                  Virginia
JOSH BRECHEEN, Oklahoma              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York

Professional Staff

Gary Andres, Staff Director
Greg Waring, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held in Washington, D.C., December 6, 2023...............     1
Hon. Jodey C. Arrington, Chairman, Committee on the Budget...     1
Prepared Statement of....................................     4
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget.....................................................     7
Prepared Statement of....................................     9
Hon. Carlos Gimenez, U.S. Representative for Florida District
28.........................................................    12
Prepared Statement of....................................    14
Hon. David Rouzer, U.S. Representative for North Carolina
District 7.................................................    17
Prepared Statement of....................................    19
Hon. David Rouzer, U.S. Representative for North Carolina
District 7, submission for the record......................    21
Hon. David Schweikert, U.S. Representative for Arizona
District 1.................................................    23
Hon. David Schweikert, U.S. Representative for Arizona
District 1, submission for the record......................    25
Hon. David Schweikert, U.S. Representative for Arizona
District 1, submission for the record......................    26
Hon. William Timmons, U.S. Representative for South Carolina
District 4.................................................   357
Prepared Statement of....................................   359
Hon. Kat Cammack, U.S. Representative for Florida District 3.   361
Prepared Statement of....................................   363
Hon. Zachary Nunn, U.S. Representative for Iowa District 3...   367
Prepared Statement of....................................   369
Hon. Brian Mast, U.S. Representative for Florida District 21.   372
Prepared Statement of....................................   373
Hon. Victoria Spartz, U.S. Representative for Indiana
District 5.................................................   374
Prepared Statement of....................................   376
Hon. Mike Kelly, U.S. Representative for Pennsylvania
District 16................................................   377
Prepared Statement of....................................   379
Hon. Mike Kelly, U.S. Representative for Pennsylvania
District 16, submission for the record.....................   381
Hon. Mike Kelly, U.S. Representative for Pennsylvania
District 16, submission for the record.....................   382
Hon. Matthew Rosendale, U.S. Representative for Montana
District 2.................................................   383
Prepared Statement of....................................   385
Hon. Matthew Rosendale, U.S. Representative for Montana
District 2, submission for the record......................   387
Hon. Matthew Rosendale, U.S. Representative for Montana
District 2, submission for the record......................   388
Hon. Bob Good, U.S. Representative for Virginia District 5...   389
Prepared Statement of....................................   392
Hon. Blake Moore, Member, Committee on the Budget, submission
for the record.............................................   396
Hon. Warren Davidson, U.S. Representative for Ohio District
8, submission for the record...............................   398

BUDGET PROCESS REFORM MEMBER DAY

----------

WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 6, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:04 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon Building, Hon. Jodey Arrington [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Norman, Smucker, Good,
Estes, Fischbach, Yakym, and Boyle.
Chairman Arrington. The Committee will come to order.
I want to thank the audience for coming. It is a sign of
strength and tremendous support for this budget reform process,
which is part and parcel to restoring fiscal responsibility in
our Nation's capital.
To me, that is the overarching goal for all of us, is to
rein in the deficit spending that is driving the unsustainable
national debt, to reverse the curse that James Madison talked
about. A public debt is a public curse and the worst of its
kind, he said, in a Republican form of government. We have to
reverse the curse, but we can't do that with the current
culture and the current process, and to my friend from Miami, I
would just say--who is a businessman, a local leader--people
are more important than process, and ultimately, as Tom
McClintock has articulated, the people of this institution have
to have the political will to do the necessary and now
extremely painful things, politically and otherwise, to right
this ship and put our Nation on sound financial footing, but
process matters, and if you have a broken process, you will get
bad outcomes most of the time. Process is nothing more in my
mind than a set of incentives, and incentives drive behavior,
and what we need, to my Ranking Member from Pennsylvania, the
Keystone State, is to encourage Members to conduct themselves
in a responsible way when it comes to this process so that we
can get the right and responsible outcomes for the taxpayers.
For 50 years--this week actually--this week, 50 years ago,
the Budget Committee passed what would become the Congressional
Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974. For the first 25
years it worked, budgets were passed on time, there were joint
resolutions signed by the President, and things were rocking
along. The last 25 years I would argue, it almost never worked.
In fact, here are just a few list of grievances, and by the
way, these are bipartisan grievances. No party, when they had
power and control of either chamber, has lived up to the
responsibility of administering the process as it was intended.
We rarely pass budgets and when we do, we almost never do it on
time. Too often we waive spending caps and sequestration, pay-
fors, and other offset measures, and when we do, we often use
gimmicky pay-fors that aren't real, and quite frankly, some of
the gimmicks we use, Carlos, would land our citizens in the
private sector in prison on account of accounting fraud. Half
the time we don't reauthorize programs before we appropriate
money to them. Not exactly a best practice in responsible
budgeting. Reconciliation, which is a tool to reconcile the gap
between revenues and spending, a gap that today is $2 trillion
in one year. More than all of discretionary spending, and in
ten years, according to CBO, it will be double that and we will
accumulate $20 trillion in ten years, half of which is interest
payments alone.
Well, reconciliation was a tool by which this Committee and
Congress could close that gap. Well, guess what? Congress has
used reconciliation a number of times. When Republicans had
total control, when I got here as a freshman, and just recently
when Democrats had total control, both of them used
reconciliation to jam partisan bills through that only made the
deficit worse. So they didn't use it for its intended purposes,
but for its self-serving purpose.
We hyper focus on 30 percent of the budget, discretionary
spending, and we rarely, Mr. Gimenez, give even ten percent of
our time to the 70 percent of the budget that is on auto spend.
We call it mandatory spending and that spending may be 70
percent of the budget today, it is 90 percent of the growth
over ten years.
Okay. I think, suffice it to say, as some of my folks back
in West Texas will say, it ain't working. So let's figure out
how we can put those incentives in place, and let's get to a
point where the American people can have confidence that we are
running the People's house and the People's business the way
they run their businesses, their families, their local and
state governments. It is just that simple.
I want to thank Rudy Yakym. He is a rising star, a new
Member of Congress from Indiana's Second, and he has put a lot
of thought into this. The first time I met him on the floor of
the United States House he informed me of his intention to do
something about this broken budgeting process and about our
spending problem and the national debt that is being driven by
that spending problem, and we were able to recruit him to the
Budget Committee and I have asked him to be the Task Force
Chair on the Republican side to lead the efforts to reform this
process and to work with Members in other Committees of
jurisdiction and across the aisle to identify the best ideas so
that we can bring a package to our respective caucuses, and
hopefully we can pass it out of both chambers and take a 50
year old process that isn't working and make it work better
again for the American people, the people we serve. I would say
there is low approval and low confidence--the bar has been low,
sadly--by the American people. I want to prove to them that we
can rise to their expectations and be responsible stewards.
So, Rudy, thank you for your willingness to lead the
efforts on our side. I am grateful for you and I am grateful
for Carlos Gimenez and for the many Members who will come today
to present their ideas.
With that, I yield as much time as my Ranking Member may
need for opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Arrington follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Boyle. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a few
thoughts.
First, as you know, while there are a number of things
obviously we are going to disagree on, as we have talked about
a lot in hearings and then outside of hearings, we both fully
agree that the budget process is completely broken. It has
existed for a half century, and we are so far beyond the way it
was originally designed to work that it is at the point where
there is widespread bipartisan agreement--not unanimity, I
would point out--but widespread bipartisan agreement both
inside the Capitol as well as outside, that we need real budget
process reform.
And look, I am a pragmatist. The reality is there is a
Republican House and a Democratic Senate. If we are really
going to achieve and make our mark to last not just a year or
two, but many years to come, and fix this and have a permanent
solution, it is not going to be a partisan Republican bill,
even though I know that would be the instinct for any majority
to pass. It is just not going to fly in the Senate and not
going to become law. If we really want to fix this process, it
needs to be truly bipartisan.
Now, I know that we have had recently several hearings
about a debt commission, and I appreciate, Mr. Chairman, your
genuine passion for that, but I think it is great that we are
getting into budget process reform. I think there is a whole
host--even though I have talked before about skepticism I have
about commissions, I have to say the one area where commissions
I think have done good work--although they ultimately didn't
get their ideas over the goal line--the one area where they
have done good work is in budget process reform. You served on
the most recent commission, the one in 2018. My predecessor,
Chairman Yarmuth, served on that as well. There are a number of
good ideas here that I know had bipartisan support in that
commission five, six years ago that I am very interested in. We
have talked about some of them before--biennial budgeting to
look at--several other things that I think are very much worth
exploring. There is some help from the outside, some
academics--again, both from the right and the left, and also
nonpartisan--who I think can offer real value to us and focus
on that.
I also will say again, just as the Chair has a great
passion for a debt commission, I have a real passion when it
comes to reforming our debt ceiling. We are playing with
dynamite. We can survive and have survived government
shutdowns, even though they are costly, they hurt our GDP, they
lead to lower job growth. CBO has documented every single one
has led to an increase in the deficit, but we have been able to
survive government shutdowns. We are not able to survive a debt
default. So making sure as part of our budget reform
exploration and work, making sure that debt ceiling reform is
part of that is absolutely critical. Because while--and this
has been the pattern over the last dozen years--while at the
moment the debt ceiling isn't front and center, it will be back
in front of us in almost exactly a year, about 13 months from
now.
So hopefully, and I would urge this Committee that really
over the next--well, of course, we are going to have the
Christmas break and holiday break, but once we get back in
January, I do think the work of this Committee should really be
dedicated toward widespread bipartisan budget reform, and I
look forward to working with you in that effort, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Boyle follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Well, I want to thank my Ranking Member
again for his leadership and the bipartisan sentiments and his
rightful understanding that we have to do this together if it
is going to be lasting, and I know you are sincerely committed
to that, and I appreciate the thoughts that you have had on the
debt ceiling and other areas.
By the way, Derek Kilmer and the former Chairman from
Kentucky, both Democrats, were committed with Steve Womack, who
was one of the chairs of that super committee, and you are
right, there were several things that we agreed to, and the
Senate pulled the plug on it in the eleventh hour, just like
Simpson-Bowles had the plug pulled on it in the eleventh hour.
Timing is everything. I think we have got a great opportunity.
Now from Indiana's second, and our Task Force Chairman, the
great Rudy Yakym.
Mr. Yakym. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am grateful for
this opportunity to chair the Task Force and for your
leadership on this Committee, as well as our Ranking Member,
Brendan Boyle.
Additionally, thank you to all of my colleagues for being
here today to share your valuable thoughts and insights on this
critical issue.
Nearly 50 years ago, Congress passed the Congressional
Budget Act of 1974, which established our current process for
funding Federal agencies and programs. Fifty years later, our
country looks much different. In 1976, our total budgetary
authority was $420 billion. In 2022, our total budgetary
authority was $6.5 trillion. Congress itself looks much
different today as well. We operate more often in divided
government with much smaller majorities than we have
historically, and all of these factors illustrate why it is
important that we evaluate our budget process and determine
what is serving the American people well and what is not.
It has been over 25 years since Congress enacted all
appropriations bills before the beginning of the fiscal year.
This leads me to believe that changes need to be made to our
process. The inability to pass appropriations bills on time has
led Congress to passing continuing resolutions days, if not
sometimes hours, before funding runs out. This continual
funding chaos contributes to constant overspending, high
inflation, and the recent downgrades of the United States
credit rating. This does not serve the Hoosiers I represent or
the American people well.
I am a businessman by background and have seen firsthand
how process design and adherence to such processes sets a
business up for success or for failure. The budget process in
Congress is no different. We need to thoughtfully and carefully
evaluate our budget process' success and its shortcomings and
update it to create the best results for the American people.
Committee Member Days are an important opportunity for our
colleagues not on the Budget Committee to share their ideas and
help determine the best possible solutions and how to address
them.
I look forward to hearing testimony today from my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle and working together to
determine the appropriate reforms to the budget process and set
it up for success, as well as working together to restore
fiscal responsibility to our Nation's capital.
With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Indiana, and
now we are going to move to the most important part of this
hearing. It is a Member hearing, and we are grateful, as we
know, that our colleagues have other responsibilities and serve
on a number of Committees with jurisdiction separate and apart
from budgeting, but I have talked to you, Carlos Gimenez, on
the floor a number of times, and you are as passionate as
anybody I know about righting the ship and fixing this broken
process.
With that, I yield to you three minutes, but I am going to
be pretty generous because--I don't know why we don't do five,
but I will give you three, and if you are on a roll, I might
just let you keep going.

STATEMENT OF HON. CARLOS GIMENEZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Ranking
Member. Thank you for allowing me to give some of my ideas.
I am not a businessman. Actually, I was former mayor of
Miami-Dade County, the fifth largest county in the United
States. I had about $10 billion in revenue, 28,000 employees,
and I was a strong mayor of Miami-Dade County, so I was a CEO.
Budgeting is not hard. It isn't. Budgeting is how much
money do you have, and that is how much money you spend. The
hard part is how you prioritize that, and unfortunately, I
don't believe since I have been here that I have seen us really
prioritize the money that we have.
And so there is no silver bullet to the budgeting process
that we have. The structural deficits that we have, there are
no silver bullets. We need to look at a number of things, and I
am just going to give you some of the things that I did when I
was the mayor of Miami-Dade County, I walked in on a $2 billion
operating budget--and I say it is a $10 billion budget because
it is more than that, it is a CIP, et cetera, but actually, the
actual operating budget was somewhere around $2 to $3 billion,
and I walked in about 20 percent deficit my first year. So what
are the things that we did? One of the things that we did is we
looked at the bureaucracy, and I don't think we have looked at
the bureaucracy here throughout the entire Federal Government
to see if we need all the people that we have and we have
employed, and I am sure a lot of people here are not really
happy for me to say that, but that is just the facts. Most
bureaucracies have more employees than they actually need, most
bureaucracies have employees that actually create more jobs,
more work for other employees, not really doing the work of
what is in the benefit of the people, and so I think we need to
establish some kind of a panel that looks across the board at
the Federal bureaucracy and see where we can save money there.
When contracts are approved by the Administration, are they
overly generous? All the pay raises, et cetera, et cetera, all
that costs money. So that is another piece.
In terms of revenue, we have $3 trillion in regulations
that we have piled on year after year, decade after decade. We
should be looking at a regulation reduction panel. What will
that do? Well, if we can reduce \1/3\ of the regulations that
we piled on over the last ten decades or so, maybe that is $1
trillion dollars back in the pockets of American businesses and
American citizens. That will also spur growth and unleash
American entrepreneurship. That will help us grow the economy,
grow more revenue, and so that is another way to tackle this
problem.
And at the end of the day, we are going to have to make
some hard choices. If you really want to balance the budget, we
have to be frank with the American people and say we are going
to make every effort to reduce the bureaucracy to the level
that we think we need in order to run government, we are going
to reduce regulation so that we can unleash American
entrepreneurship and grow the economy at a faster rate than we
project now, and then really look at how we can prioritize the
things that this government should be doing, and maybe we are
doing some things we shouldn't be doing, that we have taken on
some tasks that really belong to the states or belong to
counties, to cities, or governments shouldn't be doing at all.
And so those are going to be the tough choices that we have
to make if we are going to be serious about reducing the
deficit here.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Representative Gimenez I have taken
note of the bureaucracy challenges, the regulatory costs that
affect growth, and just prioritizing, which is something we
rarely do. We just plus up the last year's spending in a four
corners omnibus spending deal. I mean, this is the first time I
know in recent history where we have actually done effectively
zero based budgeting because we have put a lot of pressure.
We have had folks in our caucus expect that. We are not
supposed to ask questions to you all, but I am going to do it.
I am just going to ask you one quick question. That is a lot of
work. That is a lot of work----
Mr. Gimenez. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. That we tend to avoid in
Congress.
Mr. Gimenez. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington. What kind of results did you yield, in
your last comments, in terms of digging into the bureaucracy,
prioritizing--I am talking about as CEO----
Mr. Gimenez. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Of the local government,
Miami-Dade, what was the outcome of all that?
Mr. Gimenez. The outcome was that we reduced the workforce
by ten percent and didn't skip a beat, we also got concessions
from our unions, labor unions. So we had a ten percent cut, and
by the way, when we got that ten percent cut, I cut my own
salary 50 percent. So I led by example, and so I didn't ask
anybody to do something I wasn't willing to do myself.
And then there were some things that we were doing that we
didn't do anymore, and so we cut some services that weren't
that vital, but for the most part, the services stayed the same
or actually increased. Fire, police, those things that are
important, the things that we have to do, garbage pickup,
parks, et cetera, all those were untouched, but we were able to
balance because we have to balance. See, that is where also I
find is incredible here, you don't have to balance here. Well,
all state governments have to balance, and all city governments
have to balance and all county governments have to balance. I
don't have a choice. The problem is we have a choice here, and
if we didn't have that choice, then we would be forced to make
a lot of these decisions.
One further question before I go, and thank you for
indulging me. The CBO scores. Have we done analysis of CBO
scores in the past and have they been accurate or have they
missed the mark? Because I will bet you that CBO scores miss
the mark every single time, and they don't miss the mark by
being, gee, we overestimated the cost of this. They always seem
to miss the mark by underestimating the cost of things, and so
am I wrong with that? Or is that something that you see over
and over and over again?
Mr. Boyle. I can answer that. First, it is nice to meet
you. Good opportunity to do this, I think. Newer Member, I
assume, and haven't had the opportunity to work.
I am sure you support--I always say every year around this
time, my idea is that Miami should be the Nation's capital for
three months a year, January through March. But----
Mr. Gimenez. We can set that up for you, don't worry.
Mr. Boyle [continuing]. The other nine months, I would like
it back in my hometown of Philadelphia, representing
Independence Hall, as I do, but in terms of CBO, I mean, the
famous physicist Niels Bohr once said, predictions are hard to
make, especially about the future. So the professionals, the
nonpartisan professionals of CBO do a wonderful job, but we
should recognize just how challenging their job is. They have
missed the mark on a number of occasions, but I have not,
sincerely not noticed a pattern to them missing it.
For example, in the 1990s, when you look at CBO projections
that were made in the early to mid 1990s, they badly
understated what the growth of the economy would be. In 1993,
1994 they projected deficits and debts. They completely
underestimated just the growth of the economy and the growth of
tax revenue that would come with that, and at the same time, if
you looked at CBO projections from 2006, 2007, they completely
missed, as everyone did, the Great Recession, and their
projections were that the economy would be much stronger in
2009 and 2010, than it ended up being.
So I would say they have missed on both sides.
Mr. Gimenez. My question really wasn't so much about a
particular year, it was about a program. So major programs like
Medicare, et cetera, Social Security, the programs that really
put us in this bind.
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. Were they underestimated at the time? I know
Social Security was back in the 1930s, but Medicare was like in
the 1960s and all. Did they drastically underestimate the cost
in the future for America?
Chairman Arrington. It is a good question. I think they are
limited in their tools. We should look at as part of this
process, CBO's methodology, the tools they have, and
transparency, quite frankly. Not saying it is not a difficult
job, but I think I am a continuous improvement kind of guy. So
I think it is a great question on those major entitlement
programs that are driving the spending side, and we will look
at that for sure.
Mr. Gimenez. It is water under the bridge, but it is
something to take a look at so that if we were considering any
kind of major project, we would say, hey, maybe we ought to add
a factor to this because it is always somewhat underestimated.
And again, thank you for indulging me past the three
minutes. I really appreciate it.
Chairman Arrington. Yes, it is the way I like to do it, but
I am getting all kinds of pressure and pulls and mean stares,
but I love it Carlos, and you taking time to do this. I
appreciate it. Thank you, and the next colleague of ours is
from Wilmington, North Carolina. If we can understand him with
this thick accent, then he is going to, I know, contribute to
this process.
I am going to ask Rudy Yakym to make his way up here to the
captain's chair, and I know Ralph Norman had a comment. I would
like Mr. Norman to make a quick comment as we set up for Mr.
Rouzer's testimony.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
No, I would just say that there is nothing more important
than getting prioritization, like Carlos said, and every dollar
up here has got an advocate and it is tough to get weaned from
things that shouldn't have been.
So, David, thank you for your comments to be and appreciate
your involvement.
I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Norman.
With that, Mr. Rouzer, welcome and thank you for your ideas
and comments. The floor is yours.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID ROUZER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Rouzer. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking
Member Boyle for holding today's hearing on how Congress can
create a better budget process to help address the current
state of spending in this country, including holding this
institution better accountable for its actions that increase
the deficit and the debt.
So I would like to suggest three ideas for the Committee's
consideration, and I will be candid and say that these are just
top of the head ideas, but I do think they will help lend to a
constructed debate.
Number one, a change to the country's fiscal calendar,
number two, holding CBO more accountable, and, number three, an
accountability mechanism for lawmakers on votes of major
spending that increases our deficit and national debt.
So, first, I believe we should consider modifying our
fiscal calendar to February 1 to January 31. According to the
Federal Times, starting in 1842, the fiscal calendar was July 1
to June 30. It was later changed to the current October 1 to
September 30 fiscal year in 1977. Ironically, from what I have
read, both changes to the calendar were intended to provide
Congress with more time to pass appropriations legislation to
avoid continuing resolutions. Our current fiscal calendar and
the Executive Branch's inability to effectively deliver the
President's budget proposal to Congress on time are not
conducive to the current fiscal year structure. Often, the
President's budget is not delivered until March or April, the
House and Senate then have three to four months to agree on top
line spending, pass their respective bills through each
chamber, and begin the conference process just shortly
thereafter. It is a system, quite frankly, set up for failure.
Consequently, we often come back from the August recess and
have to pass a CR, many times multiple CRs, which then lead to
a bloated end of the year omnibus, or several bloated
``minibuses'', as we call them. It can also lead to a very long
and damaging long-term CR.
So I recommend a February 1 to January 31 fiscal year. It
allows the President to deliver a budget on the current
schedule, gives the House and Senate the calendar year to pass
their own bills with a conference report to be voted on
following the holidays.
My second suggestion would shift Congress from complete
reliance upon the CBO in order to better establish a better
projection of what legislation will or will not cost the U.S.
Treasury. How many times have we seen projections that proved
to be way off the mark once the law was in place? And, let me
put it this way: if we each had a GPS that more often than not
provided incorrect directions, we would toss it immediately,
but let me be clear, the intention of this idea is not to
dismantle the CBO, but the intention is to state that perhaps
we need other instruments for which we can evaluate the CBO and
improve it.
For the sake of time, I am going to slip down here to the
third suggestion, which I think is probably the most important.
I suggest we have a mechanism of accountability for votes we
cast that increase the deficit and debt. For every vote that
scores an increase in annual spending over $20 billion, $200
billion over a 10-year window, and/or converts discretionary
spending to mandatory spending should require a subsequent vote
of acknowledgment that by enacting such legislation, spending
will add to the debt requiring that the debt limit will have to
increase. If a subsequent vote of acknowledgement is required
by the House following the passage of bills that add to the
deficit and debt, which by the way, could be conducted the same
as approving the Congressional Journal, Members would further
establish a more transparent public record of our
acknowledgement that a bill will result in additional deficits
and debt, or conversely, the Member could vote no and explain
in the record why such Member either believes the scoring is
wrong or the increase to the deficit and debt is necessary,
such as in the case of war or other national emergency.
So those are just a few suggestions.
I yield back. I appreciate the opportunity to share.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym [presiding]. Thank you Mr. Rouzer. We appreciate
your time today and thank you for coming.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Schweikert.
Mr. Schweikert.
Mr. Schweikert. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Yakym. Mr. Schweikert, thank you. Let me begin by
saying thank you for coming. You have been a great champion of
these budgetary issues and I know you have got a chart there.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCHWEIKERT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ARIZONA

Mr. Schweikert. Yes, it needs to be a chart.
Look, I will do this actually fairly quickly because I am a
bit of a heretic here.
Yes, the budget process, the mechanisms, the complexities
don't work. Fine, but that is not the primary driver of U.S.
sovereign debt. Every dime, every dime of U.S. sovereign debt
from today through the next 30 years comes from two places.
Health care cost is number one, and this slide is already a
year out of date. If you factor in the new interest rates, that
top line could be as high as $130 trillion of borrowing over
the next 30 years. Now that is not inflation adjusted, but just
understand today Social Security is number one, gross interest
is now over $1 trillion dollars, so it is number two, Medicare
now is number three, defense is now number four. On the chart
here is in eight and a half years, nine years, Social Security
has about a $600 billion shortfall. Even if you do what the
left has suggested of raise the caps, a couple of other things,
at our best, we are working on modeling the math, it is still
short. It still does not cover the shortfall, but even if you
did what the left suggests of just raise all these taxes, you
have now just taken away--functionally you are now maximizing
out your tax rates to anyone. It is the concepts of the Laffer
curve. You have maximized tax rates, you have no more capacity,
and, once again, health care is three quarters of the borrowing
over the next three decades. So almost everything people like
me will come to this microphone and talk about of changing this
in the process, doing a better job of this or that, over the
next couple of decades, it is a rounding error, and that is
really hard and really uncomfortable because the scale of the
math is so difficult.
A few months ago the Joint Economic Committee Republicans,
we decided we would step on the landmine and talk about
something we can do. I have tagged it. I am going to give this
to you, ask you to put it in the record and, who knows, maybe
you will have a staffer that will actually look at it. Chapter
3 of the Joint Economic Report talked about obesity in America.
Turns out it is a few trillion, and if you add in some of the
economic effects, could be $7 trillion over ten years in
savings and economic vitality and second degree, third degree,
fourth degree effects, and it is also moral. If you take a look
at some of the data right now, we may be about to enter into
the fifth year of life expectancy in the United States becoming
shorter. There is some data in there that shows one of the most
powerful things you could do for income inequality for my
Tribal populations, rural populations, urban populations,
actually, is not transfers of money, it turns out it wasn't
even education, though education was way up there, it was
health. We are financing, and this is where I become a heretic,
and I am sorry, it is uncomfortable, we finance through
nutrition support programs, the way we do them, or the way we
do agricultural policy, the way we do these things, you got to
look at the base numbers. We are making ourselves sicker, and
it is the driver of the debt.
And with that, I yield back.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Schweikert.
The Chair will now welcome Mr. Timmons.
Mr. Timmons, thank you for coming today. You are now
recognized for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. WILLIAM TIMMONS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington, Ranking Member Boyle, and Members of
the House Budget Committee, today's hearing cannot come at a
more critical time for our Nation's fiscal future. It is past
time for leaders of our Nation to come together and solve the
tough problems we can no longer ignore.
As Members of this Committee are fully aware, Washington
has a spending problem. We currently have $33.8 trillion in
debt, our debt-to-GDP ratio is 122 percent, the highest it has
ever been. Next year, for the first time in our Nation's
history, our interest payments on the national debt will be our
number one expenditure. Social Security will be insolvent by
2033, and our health care system is fundamentally broken. We
spend twice as much as the average country per person on health
care, and our obesity rate is three times the average, which
does not bode well for our future health care spending either.
Our fiscal situation is not the fault of a single political
party or Administration. It is the collective shame of
generations of politicians who continually kick the can down
the road and choose political expediency over what is right for
the future of our country, and it is no secret why. Interest
groups from both sides of the aisle have preemptively started
political attacks alleging the other side wants to take
seniors' benefits. This is false. If we do nothing, in ten
years, there will be a 23 percent reduction in Social Security
benefits across the board due to insolvency. This is clearly
unacceptable.
The issue of the national debt affects every American,
regardless of political affiliation. No one party, scholar, or
economist can solve this problem. Either the fiscal commission
is going to be successful or our country's doomed. A
historically used tool to bring together the best and brightest
to tackle the issues politicians are afraid to go near. By
bringing together experts, economists, and Representatives from
both sides of the aisle, a fiscal commission will foster
bipartisan cooperation, setting aside ideological differences
to focus on pragmatic long-term solutions. The structure is
intended to transcend the political divide and elevate the
public discourse. The creation of this commission is not merely
an option, it is a necessity. Such a commission would be tasked
with the critical responsibility of comprehensively evaluating
our fiscal policies, identifying areas of inefficiency, and
formulating strategic solutions to address the root causes of
our escalating debt.
As we all know, a root cause of our debt is mandatory
spending. Medicare spending grew by 18 percent and Social
Security spending grew by 11 percent just this year. These are
vital programs and lifelines for millions of Americans, and we
must strengthen and preserve them for generations to come
without compromising the promises we made to our senior
citizens in this country. This is not about sacrificing the
welfare of our citizens, but rather about ensuring that these
vital programs remain viable and robust in the face of fiscal
challenges. Every day we fail to move forward with this effort
represents a theft from seniors, those close to retirement, and
future generations of Americans.
If we are truly to address our Nation's fiscal solvency, we
must have serious and uncomfortable conversations about the
true drivers of our debt. Establishing a fiscal commission will
force this body to finally face these issues head on, rather
than continually placing more and more of a burden on the
American taxpayer.
Again, I want to express my gratitude for holding this
hearing today. It is a step in the right direction for us to
come together and have a serious discussion about the need for
a fiscal commission, its mission, and begin the process of
restoring our fiscal solvency and securing our Nation's future.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Timmons.
The Chair will now recognize the gentlewoman from Florida,
Ms. Kat Cammack, for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. KAT CAMMACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Cammack. All right. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all of my colleagues on this wonderful, wonderful
Committee. Your work is crucial in charting a path towards
fiscal sanity for our Nation, so I thank you in advance for
your work.
Now, as we speak, the United States national debt is
barrelling towards $34 trillion. Our window to restore common
sense to our Federal budget is slowly closing, and we must act
before our kids and grandkids pay the price for our
government's abdication of fiscal responsibility.
Now, as one of the youngest Members serving in the House of
Representatives today, I am infuriated. I am disappointed. I am
very frustrated. The fiscal sins that have been committed in
the halls today and continue on are going to be paid by me, by
my peers, by my generation. It is Millennials and Gen Z's that
will pay the steep price for the lack of courage displayed by
Members of this chamber. Continuing resolutions are nothing
more than lazy rubber stamps of previous years' spending and
priorities that do nothing to course correct the devastating
path that we are on.
Of course, no discussion about our Nation's fiscal health
is serious unless we address the drivers of our debt, namely
mandatory spending, which, as you and everyone in this room
knows, is on autopilot. Without reforms immediately we will
never be able to honor the commitments made by this government
to our seniors and those most vulnerable. It is a conversation
that is a much longer one, but a critical one.
That being said, I would like to highlight a handful of
proposals that we could implement immediately that would help
restore our Nation's fiscal health.
One, creating and implementing a structured national debt
repayment plan. Two, realigning our budgeting process to start
from zero, or as we all know it, zero based budgeting. Three,
including CBO scores on regulatory costs before they are
implemented, not when they come off the books, and, four,
passing a balanced budget amendment.
So first, a structured debt repayment plan would be a
crucial step in tackling the national debt in a meaningful and
intentional way. We can no longer leave this issue to chance
and just hope it goes away. Eliminating the deficit and
balancing the budget would be obviously the first step, but
executing the concept of a long-term structured debt repayment
plan is largely ignored and could be the trick to getting us
back on track. Two variations of this proposal exist, but one
that seems to work the easiest and make the most sense would be
to peg principal payments of our national debt to a percentage
of the GDP. This would allow for payments to ebb and flow
amongst the cyclical nature of our economy and our revenues. My
belief is that these payments would not be suggestions, but
should be made mandatory, as we can no longer treat the fiscal
health of our Nation as a discretionary issue. Only under
circumstances such as economic crisis or a declaration of war
could these payments be waived. These waivers would be
congressionally authorized and only by a supermajority of the
People's house.
Furthermore, realigning the budgeting process from our
current status quo of year-to-year budgeting to a zero based
budgeting process is a no brainer. Every year we approach this
appropriation process assuming that the previous year's funding
levels are adequate and substantiated. We know that to be
false.
Including CBO scores on regulations is also a commonsense
step. Regulations have a $2 trillion annual impact on our
economy in enforcement and compliance costs alone. We have no
actual figures that demonstrate what the government pays in
these enforcement costs on regulations. In fact, when I spoke
with the CBO Director, he said that they only score regulations
when they come off the books as a cost savings, but no
mechanism has been in place when they go on the books.
And, lastly, as I mentioned before, we should pass a
balanced budget amendment. In Congress we hold the power of the
purse, and like any business, we must maintain a balance sheet
where our costs do not exceed our revenues. We will have no
path forward in paying down our national debt if we do not make
these reforms now. We cannot garnish the wages of our children
and our grandchildren. We have to take action immediately.
I appreciate your work and this Committee's work in
exploring the ways that we can change the course of our
budgetary process for the better and with the American
taxpayers in mind first.
Thank you. I yield.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Ms. Cammack.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from Iowa, Mr.
Nunn, for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. ZACHARY NUNN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF IOWA

Mr. Nunn. Thank you very much. I want to thank the Chair,
Mr. Arrington, for his incredible leadership on this, as well
as Ranking Member Boyle for providing a forum for non-budgetary
Members like myself to share our policy priorities for this
jurisdiction.
Mr. Chairman, I also want to commend you for your Committee
on advancing a budget resolution for Fiscal Year 2024 that
would reduce the national deficit by $16 trillion and balance
our Federal budget within ten years. That alone is a step in
the right direction.
In my home state of Iowa, we operate with a commonsense
approach. Just like farmers, small businesses, families, we
balance our budget and our checkbook at the end of every month,
and so does my home state of Iowa every year when it comes to
our budget. In fact, in the Iowa legislature, when I have the
privilege to lead, we balanced the budget each year when I
served there, and it is something that I want to bring to D.C.,
the Iowa model. The idea that we can balance the budget with a
balanced budget amendment, the commitment that we will not
spend more than we take in in revenue, that we will not have
unfunded mandates, and through the result of bipartisan
leadership, both with our governor and our state legislature,
we unleash the potential of every Iowan to be able to grow the
economy, pay down our debt, and now serve as one of the best
managed states in the country because of our fiscal priorities.
My constituents sent me to Washington to bring common sense
solutions to an institution that can't stop swiping the credit
card and racking up our national debt. In Iowa, we have worked
hard to live within our means and I am dumbfounded by a Federal
Government that refuses to take this priority seriously. While
constituents must balance their checkbook to afford basic
necessities, especially with an inflation rate at 19 percent
increase since the pandemic, our Federal Government has failed
to rein in Federal spending, and I believe it is time to
restore a sensible functional government that works for the
American people, not one that is irresponsible in using the
taxpayers' hard earned dollar.
That is why in my first week of Congress, my very first
bill was to introduce the Balanced Budget Amendment. This
resolution would have prohibited the total outlays for fiscal
years from exceeding our total receipts, i.e., more money
coming in than going out. This resolution would also require
the President to submit to Congress a balanced budget annually,
not one bloated with partisan wish lists.
Let's just look at the facts from the Administration's
proposal, this year alone, Mr. Chair. Over the 10-year period,
the President's budget would increase spending by $73
trillion--with a T--or 23 percent of our overall GDP, the
highest sustained level in American history. It would increase
taxes by $58 trillion, or 19 percent, also the highest in
American history. The deficit under this proposal would also
increase by $16 trillion over ten years or, said a different
way for our citizens back home, a $50,000 increase per American
citizen. Let's not forget, this is in addition to the $100,000
each individual American household currently owes in the
national debt, which currently stands over $33 trillion.
So, Mr. Chair, as I conclude here, I want to highlight that
Washington is sacrificing the livelihood of our children, our
grandchildren, and national security of our great country to
claim partisan victories for reelection.
I urge my colleagues on both sides of the aisle of this
Committee to support each of the individual constituents'
futures in my district and yours by making Washington fiscally
sane. D.C. must live within its means, it must recognize that
economic success comes from unleashing the hard work of
Americans, and we must also recognize that D.C.'s primary
responsibility is to protect Americans' national security, and
this truly is the greatest national security threat we face.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the Members of the
Committee.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Nunn.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Mast. Mr. Mast, you are
recognized for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. BRIAN MAST, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Mast. I know this Committee takes very seriously that
we work within our means, work within the means of We the
People, and one of the places that we consistently do not do
this year after year after year, and the numbers bear this out,
is with emergency disaster supplemental funding. Whether that
be for a volcano, a wildfire, a hurricane, a flood, a tornado,
something else domestically in the continental United States of
America, Alaska, or Hawaii, or whether we deal with something
abroad in Europe, war in the Middle East, or somewhere else, we
consistently, for whatever the reason is, we do not account for
this. The 20-year average for the amount that we do not account
for is $105 billion on average, every year for the last 20
years, some years a little bit less, some years a little bit
more. I think this is something that needs to be accounted for
as we are looking, if we are looking at, for example, the
Limit, Save, Grow Act. If the Limit, Save, Grow Act was $1.4
trillion, then as we are accounting what each of the 12
individual appropriation bills should receive, that number
should have probably come down to $1.3 trillion from $1.4
trillion. Why? Because year after year after year we are
spending on average $100 billion more, $105 billion more than
what we account for. Personally, in my opinion, I think we
should create a thirteenth appropriation bill that specifically
accounts just for disaster supplemental appropriations, both
foreign and domestic. I know this moves into the world of what
goes with the Disaster Relief Fund and what happens with State
and Foreign Ops appropriations, but given that we are not
accounting for this, I think it needs to be addressed.
I would like to see the Budget Committee address this. I
think there are a number of ways we could do it, but to not do
it is simply irresponsibility against the commitments that we
have made. Certainly as Republicans, what we campaigned on,
which was strictly fiscal responsibility. We believe in it, we
work towards it, and if we don't account for that at least $105
billion that we are spending every year, not accounting for,
then we are not really living up to the fiscal responsibility
that we hope to meet.
In that, I thank you for your time.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Mast.
The Chair will now recognize the gentlewoman from Indiana,
Ms. Victoria Spartz for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. VICTORIA SPARTZ, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF INDIANA

Ms. Spartz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, my fellow Hoosier. I will
be brief. I think this Committee needs to do a very important
job, and unfortunately, we are not. We can talk about balancing
something. Congress hasn't even tried to balance anything for a
while. Our spending is on steroids and recurring because we are
so weak, we are afraid to vote on it and really deal with that,
and the rest of it, we cannot touch most of it. We cannot even
pass appropriations bills. We keep increasing the amount of
unauthorized spending for decades. So it is a very, very
serious situation.
Our growth in GDP will not be covering now even growth in
interest and how much debt has to be refinanced in the next few
years at this interest rate and slow down the economy, we will
reach soon the point where half of our spending will be on
interest, just interest on debt, and that is going to be the
collapse of our economy, and the only way to solve it will be
if we continue punting these issues, it is double taxes on the
middle class because everyone here is afraid to reform
anything. So doubling taxes on the middle class, which paid
roughly about, if you add all taxes, 50 percent, now probably
you will get to 80 percent. We will have socialism.
Unfortunately, we had lots of discussions, lots of good
things, and I appreciate your Committee had a hearing on the
debt commission recently. There are a lot of good people here
in the House who have been working and I think there are a lot
of these proposals. I work with numbers of people and we try to
reconcile the differences, but I think at least in the House we
do have some bipartisan support, but the Senate is in trouble
because the Senate only cares about elections, power, and
unfortunately doesn't want to deal with it on a bipartisan
basis.
So I would urge my colleagues here, Republicans and
Democrats in your Committee, to start really thinking about our
country and what we are doing to our country and have at least
a conversation. Our credit rating was downgraded just because
we are not willing--we are so weak and worthless here that not
willing to have a serious conversation that will be destructive
for so many people, and inflation will destroy the middle class
in our country and opportunities for people on lower income and
people on fixed income.
So I think this is a very serious national security crisis.
I think the Budget Committee needs to also look at how we can
reform. We did some reforms at the beginning of last century,
then we did at the end, closer to the end of the century, but
realized that it is not working. We are not budgeting here. We
do a lot of presentations and hearings, but not really looking,
and the number one function given to Congress by We the People
is power of the purse and power of war because our founding
fathers understood that is the only way American people can
have accountability.
I think this is a very, very important thing that we need
to try to move the needle, and I hope we will have bipartisan
support and support of this Committee, and I would be happy to
help you in any way I can, and I appreciate the Chairman really
leading the charge on this issue.
Thank you.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Ms. Spartz.
The Chair will now recognize the gentleman from the great
State of Pennsylvania, Mr. Mike Kelly, for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. MIKE KELLY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Kelly. Thank you.
This has been done before. So I have a copy of the Simpson-
Bowles, but the cover on it was the moment of truth. This is
from 2010. So that moment of truth in 2010 has long passed. We
are long past that time, and to be honest about this and
listen, guys, I am going to talk to you as a Chevrolet dealer.
I am not going to talk to you as a Member of this because I
have dealt with debt my whole life. I understand how it can be,
and I know exactly where we are. You all know exactly where we
are. The question is, do we have the political courage to do
what has to be done? And I hear people tell me, this is all you
have got to do. Say, that is a great idea. Are you willing to
step up and do it? And the question is, well, let me make sure
I understand what we are doing before we go any further.
I did bring some charts today, and I know David always
brings charts, but we try to talk and I am at the dealership, I
usually end up talking to people who are prospective buyers.
Ninety-seven percent of what we sell is on time, and what I
mean is there is a sales contract for that financial
institution. One of the biggest things we have to understand is
people's credit score. Now, when people talk to me about
cutting the cost of operation, I don't use the figures that we
use, like, we have $5 trillion worth of revenue this year, we
are going to spend $6.9 trillion, and people say, I have no
idea what it means. I say this is what it means. Somebody
making $50,000 a year is going to go out and spend $69,000 a
year and they say, oh my God, you can't do that.
Well, we talk about getting this in order. Do you know that
out of every single dollar that we take in, $0.73 cents of it
is already spent. That leaves $0.27 for us to do something
about, right? The mandatory is there. What is it? It is Social
Security, it is Medicare, it is Medicaid, it is interest on the
debt. So when people tell me you guys are going to have to get
together and get this done, my answer is, I absolutely agree
with you. I absolutely agree with you. Which programs do you
think we should cut? And the answer is every program but the
one I participate in. We are talking about just not the courage
of Congress, we are talking about the courage of the American
people to understand where we are right now.
Now, we can sit back and we can talk and talk and talk, but
I will tell you what, we are now at a position--in 2010--let me
just read from the preamble because this is what they said at
that time--if we do not act now, the country will be lost.
Thirteen years ago. Trillions upon trillions upon trillions of
debt increase since then and we have done nothing. This is not
a criticism of the body, by the way, this is a criticism of a
culture. We are a culture that likes to spend. The only thing
that can rein in spending is strong management. Strong
management comes from this body. I would just ask you, as you
look at everything we talk about, do you have the political
courage to do what needs to be done? The referendum, what we
are going to have to do is going to be drastic and it is going
to cause a lot of people a lot of pain because they have been
used to it. They have been used to overspending without any
responsibility to covering the cost of it.
Mr. Smucker comes from the private sector as I do. There is
no way in hell I could run the dealership the way this business
is run. There is no business in the world that can be run this
way. Not for a long period of time. Our size of our debt is
unbelievable. This is a titanic moment for us because most of
the debt is below the surface. You don't see it, but when we
hit that, it is going to cause the country to go upside down.
I really appreciate what you are all doing. Lloyd and I
talk about this stuff a lot, Jodey and I talk about this stuff
a lot. Politicians can't fix it. We come up with policy. The
question is, we need people of courage that are able to stand
up and do it.
So I would just implore you all, listen to what it is we
are trying to do. We all agree in the same thing. Is there a
moment of truth? Yes, there was 13 years ago. The one today is
far more challenging than the one they had then. I don't think
we have implemented any of what they did before, and I know if
we start talking about cutting, our phones will never stop
ringing, our offices will be full every day with people that
say, yeah, but, you know, you can't, you can't, you can't, you
can't, and the answer is now if we don't, it is over.
So thank you all. It is good to see you. I will see you
later on today, but great initiative, great initiative. Let's
see what we can do. Let's see if we can all come out of the
huddle the same way, run the same play in the same kind.
Thanks so much.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Kelly.
The Chair will now recognize my friend from the great State
of Montana, Mr. Rosendale.
Welcome. You are recognized for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. MATTHEW ROSENDALE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MONTANA

Mr. Rosendale. Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Appreciate
it. Appreciate everybody taking the time to organize this today
so that we can help you. So that we can help you.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify. I am here today
not to talk about a new legislative proposal or new scheme to
fix our broken budget process. Instead, I am proposing that
Congress simply follows the law that it passed for itself 50
years ago. After decades of recklessness shown by Congress,
America now finds itself nearly $34 trillion in debt. Our
government's fiscal irresponsibility is the single biggest
threat to America.
As Congress continues to ignore this threat, the situation
only worsens. Earlier this year, the U.S. debt credit rating
was downgraded for the second time in a year. This is a direct
result of our refusal to address our debt. If we continue this
trajectory, the U.S. will have to spend 50 percent of our
annual revenue to pay the interest on the debt within five
short years. Mr. Chair, I am not pointing fingers at anyone. I
have made every attempt to assist in the reduction of our
spending. I know how. When I ran my own agency in the state of
Montana, I reduced my spending by 23 percent. When I had the
authority to make the cuts, I reduced it by 23 percent. It does
not require another Committee, it only requires discipline from
this body. That is what it requires. Continuing down this path
for any longer is completely unsustainable and will cause never
before seen financial hardship in our country.
You can see it on the charts here. Everyone is bringing
these charts in. We know what the numbers are. Deficit this
year: $1.7 trillion, national debt approaches $200,000 per
household, the national debt is nearly at $34 trillion. We just
cannot sustain this.
Since 1974, Congress has only passed the appropriation
bills on time four times. Congress has not passed the 12
appropriation bills by the required deadline at all in the last
26 years. No one can function that way. We need to simply
follow our own mandates, and here it is, and we have heard some
recommendations about how to change the timelines, but the fact
of the matter is, if we followed this timeline and we produced
the budget and then had the Appropriations Committees turn
their work in--and they are prepared to do so, they are able to
do so, they are capable--then we would be able to accommodate
that. Although the Republican majority in the House took much
needed steps to reduce wasteful spending this year--I have
listened to everybody come before us, but 86 percent of the
proposed spending reductions were prevented on the House floor,
not by Democrats, but by Republicans.
So please, install a mirror in this room so that the people
could look at themselves in the eye and see what is causing
this problem. Eighty-six percent of the reductions that we
brought forward were defeated by Republicans. We struggled to
get 75 to 125 Republicans vote for those reductions time and
time again. Even if we eliminated 100 percent of the
discretionary spending, we would still be adding roughly $500
billion to the national debt each year, and that is all we are
dealing with, the discretionary. Call it $1.6 trillion, okay?
If we eliminated 100 percent of that, we would still be
accumulating $500 billion a year to the debt every year.
This unprecedented debt crisis means that going forward
Congress will have to take the tough votes to lower our debt
and restore our country's financial independence. The apparent
unwillingness from some of the Republican Party to act in the
interests of the American people and pay us 12 appropriation
bills that spend within our means will only prolong and worsen
the struggles the American people are facing every day.
Additionally, we must address the mandatory spending, which has
been on autopilot for far too long, and I know that the Members
that are sitting here agree with that.
Americans across the country balance their budgets and
ensure their spending is within their means, and it is past
time the Federal Government does the same.
Mr. Chair, I am willing to do my part. This does not take
another Committee. It does not take another Committee, it takes
discipline. It takes commitment and public service that we all
signed up to be here for, and that is to make sure that we
preserve this Republic. We can do it. We must do it. I am here
just to say that I will help you do it.
Thank you so much for your time today. Thank you for your
interest. I yield back.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Rosendale.
Chairman Arrington. Mr. Chairman, may I have a 30 second
comment to my friend, Mr. Rosendale? May I comment on his
remarks?
Mr. Yakym. Please do. You are recognized.
Chairman Arrington. I couldn't agree more, and I am
encouraged and inspired by the passion of you and many Members
that it is discipline and political will ultimately that must
prevail in order for us to turn the tide of this deluge of debt
that is going to bankrupt the country, to put it mildly and
succinctly.
I would say there is one big advantage of a debt commission
that is bipartisan, and here is what it is. I don't think there
is enough pressure from the electorate in any district in any
part of this country on Democrat and Republican Members to come
up here and follow through on what they say they are going to
do with respect to spending and the debt. If we can have
bipartisan agreement on the numbers and the projections and we
can sound the alarm together and have a national campaign that
wakes everybody up to this. As Abraham Lincoln said, without
public sentiment, you can do nothing; with it, you can do
anything. We need more pressure from the citizens of our
country on the knuckleheads here in Congress that just
apparently live in a different world altogether.
So I see education and awareness as a valuable outcome of a
bipartisan commission, but you are right, ultimately got to
have the political courage.
I thank you for your input.
Mr. Rosendale. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Good. Mr. Rosendale, would you like to sit behind this
a little bit longer?
Mr. Rosendale. You just want to use my charts.
Mr. Yakym. The Chair will now recognize Mr. Good from the
great state of Virginia.
My friend, Mr. Good, you are recognized for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. BOB GOOD, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
Committee for holding this opportunity for Members to come and
talk about one of the, I would suggest two greatest threats to
our country along with our open border.
We all know that the budget process has been broken for a
long time and the American people are suffering the
consequences. The days of no consequence spending are long over
with record inflation, 40-year high inflation, 20-year high
interest rates, gas prices, grocery prices, housing prices,
utility prices, just breaking regular income Americans.
Congress has not, unfortunately, demonstrated the intestinal
fortitude to approach the budget with the necessary resolve to
cut spending, to rein in the bureaucratic state, or remain
accountable to the established budget process, let alone think
about addressing the mandatory spending disaster on the
horizon. I find it just very interesting so many of our Members
in the Republican Conference even will say, gosh, it is not the
discretionary, it is the mandatory, we have got to go after the
mandatory, and they don't have a willingness to deal with the
discretionary to earn the right, quite frankly, to reform
mandatory spending.
Currently, the national debt--we all know this--is at a
historic high at $34 trillion, which equates to $260,000 per
taxpayer, $100,000 per citizen. Interest on the debt has
doubled under Biden, totaling $663 billion this past fiscal
year. By 2027, it is projected interest payments on the debt
are going to surpass defense spending. The national deficit
this year is over $2 trillion. We are on track for a 12 month,
$2.5 trillion. Worse, the Biden border crisis is costing us
$150 billion annually on top of that, and yet assistance to
Ukraine has topped $113 billion, with no oversight for that,
and we have got the President and the Senate Majority Leader
asking for another $60 billion for Ukraine and they don't want
us to pay for it or have any offsets for that. You would hope
that no Republicans, Mr. Chairman, would support supplementals
without offsets, because that would demonstrate that the
Republican Conference, the Republican majority, doesn't take
serious the greatest fiscal crisis we ever have faced that we
are under right now.
Democrats broke the bank last Congress by spending over
$550 billion in the name of environmental justice, and the
President continues to ignore the established process of checks
and balances by putting forth 850 Executive actions which have
allowed his Administration to unilaterally enact $1.5 trillion
in additional spending. Congress must approach the budget
process reform with a commitment to cut spending, a
demonstrated commitment to do so.
A couple of suggestions. I would offer my nickel plan,
which should be included as a guiding principle for the budget
process because it requires the Federal Government to reduce
its budget by one nickel for every dollar that it spends
annually, and it would balance the budget in five years. This
upfront cut would allow the budget process to address the
excessive spending enacted by prior Congresses. My Article I
Regulatory Budget Act would help Congress account for and
address the out of control bureaucratic state. It is nearly
impossible to balance the budget when unelected bureaucrats
issue costly rules and spend money without proper oversight.
For this reason, the budget process must include a framework,
like my bill, again the Article I Regulatory Budget Act, that
would require a regulatory budget detailing regulatory costs
similar to the annual budget for taxes and government spending.
It would ensure that all bureaucratic spending is accounted for
in any future budget process. This tool would allow those
working on the budget to have a comprehensive understanding of
all federal spending, not just that which is enacted through
regular order.
Some additional reforms, the budget process should ensure
that if a budget is not passed by April 1, then Congress is
required to remain in D.C. until the job is done. We ought to
also not allow the President to give a State of the Union
address unless he has done his budget, as required by the first
Monday in February. We ought to change the requirement for the
congressional budget resolution to include requiring a 10-year
debt service projection. How are we going to balance a budget
or effectively address the budget process if the debt payments
are not adequately accounted for? We need to change the
requirement of the congressional budget resolution to include a
baseline and a target debt-to-GDP ratio. What is acceptable,
what is our target there? And change the requirements of the
congressional budget resolution to require a markup of the
budget within two months of the President's budget being
published.
I am proud of the work that our Chairman and our Committee
has tried to do on this issue. I think that a debt commission
is a good thing to do, but it is only as strong or as valid as
the willingness of Congress to enact the reforms that we all
know are needed. This is not easy, but it is also not
complicated.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Good. I certainly appreciate not
only your friendship but also our shared passion for restoring
fiscal responsibility to the Nation's capital.
I also want to thank our full Committee Chair, Chairman
Jodey Arrington. As you well know, it has been 50 years since
we have even looked at or evaluated or reformed any of our
budget processes. I think this Task Force is an important step
in doing that on a bipartisan basis, and doing so in a series
of phases that allows us to get to a much better budget process
that works not only for Washington and for the lawmakers, but
more importantly, for the American people as we work together
to restore fiscal responsibility.
So I really want to take this opportunity to thank you for
asking me to Chair this Task Force as we go through and reform
our budget processes.
Chairman Arrington. Mr. Chairman, will you yield me one
minute?
Mr. Yakym. At the discretion of the Chair, I will yield you
one minute, yes, sir.
Chairman Arrington. Well, you are the Chair for this
purpose and it is a righteous mission and it is a very
important endeavor. Fifty years, the results of the last 25
have been horrible, tragic really, and while ultimately it does
come down to now the party in power in the House, but both
sides have just failed to live up to the discipline and
political courage that has been talked about today. We don't
have any more runway left. I don't know how much longer, but
within this decade I believe, if we don't change course in a
meaningful way with respect to our rising deficits and
unsustainable debt, we are going to lose the country, and we
can't kick the can down any further. I think your leadership
and the efforts of our colleagues under your leadership to make
sure that the incentives are right to motivate us through
carrots and sticks, to get us to responsible budgetary outcomes
to save this country, is critical, and so you have come to
Congress at just the right time. It was clear to me that you
had the leadership skills and the passion and the respect from
your peers to lead this charge, and I expect big things from
you, not only in this endeavor but in your future here in
Congress. Thank you for your willingness to lead it and I am
excited about the results of this and all of our efforts to
restore fiscal sanity in our citizens' capital here in
Washington, D.C, and I yield back.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
That completes the Committee's business for today.
I would like to thank all the Members who shared their
ideas and recommendations before the Budget Committee. We
appreciate your perspective and feedback.
The Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:18 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
