- THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., MARCH 23, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
53-461 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania,
TOM McCLINTOCK, California               Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   BARBARA LEE, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         JIMMY PANETTA, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DAVID G. VALADAO, California         ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota,
RON ESTES, Kansas                      Vice Ranking Member
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma          DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            BECCA BALINT, Vermont
MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota        ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
RUDY YAKYM III, Indiana                  Virginia
JOSH BRECHEEN, Oklahoma              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Professional Staff

Gary Andres, Staff Director
Greg Waring, Minority Staff Director

CONTENTS

Page
Hearing held in Washington, D.C., March 23, 2023.................     1
Hon. Jodey C. Arrington, Chairman, Committee on the Budget...     1
Prepared Statement of....................................     4
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget.....................................................     6
Prepared Statement of....................................     8
Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee, Member, Committee on the Budget,
statement submitted for the record.........................    12
Hon. Shalanda D. Young, Director, Office of Management and
Budget.....................................................    17
Prepared Statement of....................................    19
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................    34
Hon. A. Drew Ferguson IV, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................    64
Hon. A. Drew Ferguson IV, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................    70
Questions submitted for the record...........................    98
Answers submitted for the record.............................   104

THE PRESIDENT'S FISCAL YEAR 2024 BUDGET REQUEST

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 23, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Jodey C. Arrington
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Norman, McClintock,
Grothman, Smucker, Burgess, Carter, Cline, Good, Bergman,
Ferguson, Roy, Moore, Valadao, Estes, Bice, McClain, Fischbach,
Yakym, Brecheen, Edwards, Boyle, Higgins, Schakowsky, Peters,
Lee, Doggett, Panetta, Wexton, Jackson Lee, Omar, Trone,
Balint, Scott, and Espaillat.
Chairman Arrington. The hearing will come to order.
Welcome to the Committee on the Budget's hearing regarding
the President's Fiscal Year 2024 budget request. Today, we are
delighted to have the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget, the Honorable Shalanda Young, with us. Welcome. I
appreciate your reaching out to me and starting this business
relationship, and your good-faith efforts to work with me and
my colleagues on the Republican side of the aisle, and today we
get the opportunity to unpack and understand the President's
vision for this country and, as he says, the values and
principles that he believes are best to guide our Nation
forward. With that, I want to yield myself such time as I may
consume for my opening statement.
Over the last 2 years, this administration's reckless
spending and failed economic policies have resulted in
continued record inflation, soaring interest rates, and an
economy in a recessionary tailspin, with the prospect of a
catastrophic, and I would say irreparable, debt crisis looming
over the horizon. Two years--2 years under this President, $10
trillion in spending, $6 trillion of which has been added to
the national debt, all of which has ignited a cost-of-living
crisis for working families who are struggling to survive;
taxing our job creators back to their knees as they try to get
back on their feet after a nationwide shutdown, paying people
more to stay home than to go back to work, and waiving work
requirements for able-bodied adults, trapping a whole new
generation of Americans in poverty and government dependence;
weaponizing--and this is personal for me being from West Texas,
the energy capital of the world--weaponizing a whole-of-
government assault on American energy, the lifeblood of our
great economy, a cornerstone of our national security, and the
blessing of affordable electricity and gas for families across
the country. This administration, I believe, has sown the wind
of disastrous economic policies, and the American people are
reaping the whirlwind of its cruel consequences.
No one can look at our Nation's balance sheet or CBO's
economic outlook, and not shudder to their core at the rapid
deterioration of our Nation's financial health, and our
unsustainable spending and debt trajectory. On March 9th, the
President had the opportunity to recognize this sober and grim
economic reality, reverse course, and show the American people
that he understood the painful results of his failed policies.
Instead, President Biden doubled down on his reckless spending,
radical policies, and the woke and bloated bureaucracy that is
bankrupting our Nation.
The President's budget proposes the highest sustained
levels of taxes, spending, and deficits in the history of the
United States. In the middle of a spending-induced inflation
crisis that is crushing working Americans, the President's
budget proposes $82 trillion in spending over 10 years, a
spending per GDP that is 18 percent over the 50-year average
and is the equivalent of $100,000 per family of four; a $2.5
trillion increase in the auto-spend of mandatory spending;
nearly $100 billion in requests or proposals in discretionary
spending year-over-year, a 6-percent increase over this year
for Fiscal Year 2024 in discretionary spending.
As job creators try to get back on their feet and our
economy plummets into a recession, CBO projects that the GDP
growth for next year will be a meager 0.1 percent. As this
happens to the greatest economy in the world, and to our
families, and to our family-owned small businesses, the
President levees $4.7 trillion in new taxes on virtually
everyone.
Small businesses will lose the 20-percent deduction, tax
hike. Families will lose marginal rates, where they were able
to keep, after Republican tax reform, $2,000 more of their
hard-earned money in their pockets, in their savings accounts,
tax hike. Doubling the death tax on farmers and ranchers, who
work hard to give us food security. They pay taxes, Federal
income, State income, property tax, sales tax, now twice the
pain of this, what I believe is an unfair, un-American tax, in
the death tax. Nearly $40 billion in new taxes on American
energy producers, which will only drive energy prices further
up and penalize folks at the lower economic spectrum who are
having a difficult time heating and, this summer, cooling their
homes, and obviously with energy independence. That will be
jeopardized with more taxes passed on to consumers, and less
investment, and less domestic energy production, and more
dependence on foreign sources.
And then finally, the highest rate of corporate taxes in
the developed world. We will go back to having a higher
corporate tax rate than communist China. So, we can wave
goodbye to America's competitiveness, say goodbye to the
trillions that flowed back to our country, back to our
manufacturing, creating more jobs, and more opportunity, and
more prosperity, where all boats rose on the tide of the
results of lower tax burden, lower regulatory burden when
Republicans had control of Congress. By the way, when I say all
boats rose on that tide, 6 million people were lifted out of
poverty, the lowest poverty rate in the history.
And what will Americans get for this unprecedented
expansion and reimagination of the people's government? They
are going to get more inflation, more shrinking paychecks, more
skyrocketing prices at the grocery store and gas pump, soaring
interest rates, more labor shortages, more of a culture of
dependency, and, overall, a weaker economy and a more
vulnerable Nation. Are we going to get more safety and security
for our Nation? Nope. More economic freedom and prosperity?
Nope. Greater access and lower cost of healthcare? No. Stronger
and more resilient real infrastructure?
In sum, are we doing our job as lawmakers of the greatest
country in the world, as stewards of taxpayer resources, as
fiduciaries of our children's future? Are we giving our
children a safer, stronger, freer America? Not even close, in
my estimation. Not even close. What I believe we are getting is
a more wasteful, woke, and bloated bureaucracy. A 20-percent
increase in EPA, and we are asking for more spending. We are in
an inflation crisis, and we are asking for 2,400 new climate
activists disguised as EPA employees. We are going to get more
infiltration of leftist ideology through divisive, in my
opinion, divisive politicization of race and sexuality, not
running a better government, not running a more accountable
government. The list is long. I will spare you.
But I agree with the President, Madam Director. I agree
that budgets aren't just numbers on a balance sheet. They are a
set of values and principles, and based on the President's most
recent budget, it's clear to me that he values, and this
administration values, a bigger, more radical, and more
powerful Federal Government over the freedom, safety, and
economic security of his fellow Americans. With that, I would
like to give my colleague from Pennsylvania and friend an
opportunity to provide 5 minutes for his opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Arrington follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Boyle. Thank you. You hit the talk button on me. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Shalanda, Director Young, it
is great to have you back in front of our Committee.
What a difference 2 years and 2 months make. Under
President Biden and Congressional Democrats' leadership, we
have rolled out vaccines and testing, seen a record 12 million
new jobs, unemployment at 50-year-plus lows, and have had the
strongest manufacturing recovery in this century. Democrats
have proven that Congress can deliver for the American people
while promoting fiscal responsibility--from galvanizing a
record-breaking and world-leading recovery from the COVID
pandemic, to rebuilding our infrastructure, to making major
investments in America's economic competitiveness, to passing
legislation to reduce the deficit while at the same time
lowering costs for American families.
President Biden's 2024 budget is exactly the plan we need
to build on this progress, and how proud I was to be with the
President in my district in Philadelphia 2 weeks ago today when
he unveiled this budget, one that lowers families' costs on
everything from childcare to prescription drugs, housing to
healthcare. It upholds the promise of Social Security and
strengthens Medicare for another generation. It invests in
America, in red and blue states, strengthening our communities
and our economy, and it makes commonsense reforms so that the
wealthiest few and big corporations finally start to pay their
fair share in taxes just like the rest of us because it is damn
unfair that a teacher or firefighter in my neighborhood in
Northeast Philadelphia pays a higher percentage of their
paycheck in taxes than a billionaire.
This budget sets out our next generation for success by
investing in their education, from universal pre-K to making
college more affordable. It restores the full child tax credit
that we passed as part of the American Rescue Plan--and when it
was in place, that full child tax credit cut child poverty by
more than half. It caps the cost of insulin at $35 for everyone
and lowers the cost of other prescription drugs, saving
Americans and our government money. Importantly, the Biden
budget accomplishes all of this and more while making sure no
one who makes less than $400,000 a year pays a penny more in
new taxes. These investments are socially responsible, but they
are also fiscally responsible. They will put our Nation on
better financial footing, reducing the deficit by $3 trillion
over 10 years and without taking a sledgehammer to the vital
programs that keep our Nation and American households secure.
Now, that brings me to my next point. I am deeply concerned
by the extreme budget proposals that we are hearing from the
other side of the aisle, and while we wait for the official
Republican budget, we do know there have been other proposals
that have been out there, most recently made by the House
Freedom Caucus. One idea that seems to be gaining traction with
many Republicans is cutting spending to Fiscal Year 2022
levels. Let me just take a moment to explain what that would
do. Two million Americans would lose access to healthcare
services through community health centers, and more would see
their healthcare costs rise. Six hundred and forty thousand
families would lose the rental assistance that helps them stay
in their homes. Rail safety jobs will be cut, dramatically
reducing inspections. Thousands of police officers, border
security agents, and other law enforcement officials will lose
pay or--worse, their jobs, and those are just a few examples.
An analysis by Moody's Analytics found that cutting
spending back to Fiscal Year 2022 levels would push our economy
into a recession, wiping out 2.6 million jobs and driving
unemployment up to nearly 6 percent. You can't take an ax to
the Federal budget and then turn a blind eye to people who will
suffer the blow. There is a human cost to budget cuts, and I am
concerned that that sometimes gets lost in this town.
The President's budget lays out Democrats' plan--and our
math--to achieve a $3 trillion deficit reduction while
critically making the needed investments to improve Americans'
quality of life, and it is all here for the public to see, and
yes, critique. I would ask my Republican colleagues, when will
we see your plan? What are you actually proposing that would
help working families like my neighbors in Philadelphia? And
how can you be so quick to dismiss the President's budget when
we have yet to see your own?
As we await the Republicans' proposal and markup, I am glad
that we can have this honest and fair hearing and openly debate
what is in the President's budget. It is a fiscally responsible
and pro-growth document, and Director Young, I thank you for
being here to talk about this budget today. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Boyle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman and my friend,
Mr. Boyle. In the interest of time, if any other Member has an
opening statement, I ask that you submit it for the record. I
will hold the record open to the end of the day to accommodate
those Members who may not have had time to prepare written
statements.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Okay. Now, I would like to recognize
Director Young. Director Young, thank you again for your time
today. The Committee has received your written statement. We
appreciate that. We made it part of the formal hearing record,
and we will now give you 5 minutes to deliver your oral
remarks, and you may begin when you are ready. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE SHALANDA D. YOUNG, DIRECTOR, OFFICE
OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET

STATEMENT OF SHALANDA YOUNG

Ms. Young. Well, I will use a little of that 5 minutes to
echo how you started. Thank you for the relationship you and
Ranking Member Boyle have. We all have differences--we have
talked about this--very strong differences, but we have agreed
to disagree but not be disagreeable.
Chairman Arrington. Hear, hear.
Ms. Young. And you have my commitment to do that----
Chairman Arrington. Thank you.
Ms. Young [continuing]. As we progress through this
process. I also want to thank your staffs. Two years ago, I sat
where you sat, in a slightly less nice room in the
Appropriations Committee, so you shouldn't let them visit this
hearing room. [Laughter.]
Ms. Young. But thank you. I know it takes a lot to put on
hearings like this, but thanks for having me here, to the
Chairman, the Ranking Member, the Members of the Committee, for
the chance to talk and discuss the President's 2024 budget.
This President came into office with a very clear plan: to
grow the economy from the bottom up and the middle out, not the
top down, and over the past 2 years, in the face of significant
challenges, that strategy has produced historic results for the
American people. Under the President's leadership, we have
added more than 12 million jobs, more jobs in 2 years than any
President has created in a single 4-year term. The unemployment
rate has fallen to 3.6 percent, one of the lowest rates in over
50 years. We have taken action to lower prescription drug
costs, health insurance premiums, and energy bills, while
driving the uninsured rate to historic lows, and the
President's economic plan is rebuilding America's
infrastructure, promoting workers, and fueling a manufacturing
boom that is strengthening parts of the country that have long
been left behind.
The President has done all of this while delivering on his
commitment to fiscal responsibility. During his first 2 years
in office, the deficit fell by more than $1.7 trillion, the
largest decline in American history, and the Inflation
Reduction Act will reduce the deficit by hundreds of billions
of dollars more over the next decade. The President's 2024
budget details a blueprint to build on this progress and finish
the job. It is built around four key values: investing in
America, lowering costs for families, protecting and
strengthening Social Security and Medicare, and reducing the
deficit, and it does all of this while ensuring that no one
earning less than $400,000 per year will pay a penny more in
new taxes. The budget more than fully pays for its investments,
cutting deficits by nearly $3 trillion over the next decade, by
asking the wealthy and large corporations to begin to pay their
fair share and cutting wasteful spending to special interests.
The budget builds on the progress made over the last 2
years and proposes additional policies to lower costs for
working families, including for health insurance, prescription
drugs, childcare, utilities, college, housing, energy, and
more. When working families have a little bit more breathing
room, they help power our economy. The President believes that
Social Security and Medicare are more than just programs. They
are promises we have kept to generations of America's seniors.
The budget keeps that promise, protecting and strengthening
these programs without cutting benefits for our seniors who
have paid into these programs their entire working lives.
It also invests in America and working families. The budget
will bolster manufacturing, make our communities safer, provide
paid leave, support research in cancer, deliver for our
veterans, cut taxes for families with children, and more. These
investments will pay dividends for decades to come, and in what
will be a decisive decade for America and the world, this
budget reflects the National Security Strategy by including
robust investments in military readiness, our diplomatic and
development tools, and honors the sacred commitment to our
veterans.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, for
allowing me to appear before the Committee and talk about the
President's 2024 budget.
[The prepared statement of Shalanda D. Young follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Director Young. We will now
begin the question-and-answer session. I will start, yielding
myself 5 minutes.
I am not trying to trap you, I am not trying to stump you,
but I am going to go straight to the numbers here. This is the
President's budget, and I'd like to walk through some of the
figures that are in here. I am not suggesting you have
memorized this, but in Summary Table Number 1, what is the 10-
year average of spending as a share of the economy?
Ms. Young. Mr. Chairman, next year, so the 2024 budget, our
outlays are projected to be $6.9 trillion, about 25 percent of
GDP.
Chairman Arrington. Okay. Thank you. So, you've answered
correctly, and I appreciate the transparency. That almost 25
percent of GDP in spending over the 10 years is the highest
sustained level in America's history. Now, if you look at OMB's
Historic Table 1.3, the Summary of Receipts, Outlays, and
Surpluses or Deficits, the Federal Government spends in every
year as a share of GDP, more than any year dating back to the
invasion of Normandy, pre-COVID, there's not a year where, in
every year of the budget, we're not spending more as a
percentage of GDP, than any and every year pre-COVID, all the
way back to World War II. Do you know that to be true and
believe that to be correct as----
Ms. Young. Mr. Chairman, I haven't seen that analysis, but
I will take your analysis for fact. I am happy to look at it
after hearing.
Chairman Arrington. Okay. Thank you. I think just about
every economist on the left or right, and I certainly recall
Larry Summers briefing a group of bipartisan Members of
Congress where he talked about the bathtub overflowing, bathtub
of Federal monies, stimulus monies, flooding the marketplace,
and igniting what has now been 15 consecutive months of 40-year
high inflation. I think the cumulative inflation increase is
about 15 percent since the President took office. Do you agree,
while there are monetary policy factors, and I am certain
others, that spending is one part of the problem that has
created this record inflation that our working families are
struggling with today?
Ms. Young. Mr. Chairman, I think the largest part of the
inflation story is economies coming out of pandemics. That is
why we have seen inflation around the globe. So it's not one
bill passed by the United States Congress supported by the
President. When you have seen inflation levels, like we've seen
them in the U.K. and France, what explains that? It tells us
the pandemic, supply chain shortages, shipping companies, lack
of competition, certainly had a larger role.
Chairman Arrington. Do you think spending has any role?
Ms. Young. It absolutely can. I think it had a small role
given what we've seen over the global economy.
Chairman Arrington. What I would tell you is most
economists on the left, advisors to Democrat Presidents, have
said it plays a significant role, and there were warnings.
Don't spend $2 trillion, for example, in ARPA monies when a
trillion dollars remained unspent. Work with Republicans, find
out where there are targeted needs, but don't flood the market
with trillions of dollars in more spending. It's the old
saying, when you are in a hole and you want to get out, the
first thing you have to do is stop digging.
But my concern is, year over year, just on discretionary--I
recognize that the longer term is more directional, and
visionary, and aspirational--but next year's discretionary
proposal is almost $100 billion more than last year. It's hard
to understand when people are having to tighten their belts,
they're changing their spending habits, they are struggling to
make ends meet, and the President is asking, not just asking
for the $2.5 trillion in mandatory spending and all the things
we talked about, but next year $100 billion more in spending.
Let me get to my last point, and I will yield to my
colleague. I am from a border State. We are struggling and
suffering with lawlessness and chaos like we have never seen,
and everybody is overwhelmed. Border Patrol is overwhelmed,
hospitals are overwhelmed, schools are overwhelmed, and the
whole country is struggling with the flood of crime, gangs, and
especially the drugs. Over 100,000 Americans have died last
year, and it seems to only be getting worse. The President,
with all due respect, and his Secretary of Homeland Security
says, ``The border is secure.'' My people in Texas, and I am
certain because of the pervasive effects of the open border on
all States, I suspect people across the country find that not
just hard to believe, but insulting to say the border is
secure. Maybe embracing open border policies and just accepting
that as the policy and saying that's what I believe is the best
for the country, that's different, but saying it's secure is
insulting.
But the budget, when you think about safety and security
being the first and most important priority of the government,
providing the common defense, you mentioned the investment in
the military. The President's budget cuts Homeland Security by
$600 million. So here we are in this unprecedented border
crisis. I can report from my State, direct impact in my
communities, in my district, and the President says we need
2,400 new EPA employees, 20 percent increase in EPA, but $600
million less for Homeland Security? I am going to just let you
finish with my Q&A with an answer to that because I don't know
that there is going to be an answer that is going to satisfy--
--
Ms. Young. I hope it does. I hope it does because we agree
with you. We have to have, from a funding perspective, and not
everything can be fixed with money, but on the border, we
recognize more money is needed. We asked for money in December.
We got a little over half, so we hope to partner and do a bit
better than getting half of our budget request. We are asking
for close to 9 percent, Mr. Chairman, an increase in DHS, about
$6 billion. TSA passenger fees are treated differently in `23
than `24, and that accounts for the majority of the difference
you cite.
Apples to apples, budget authority to budget authority, the
Department of Homeland Security would receive 6 percent more
with the passenger fee change alone, if you give us credit for
the $5 billion almost we are asking for, for the Border Surge
Fund, which I think should count because it's money we're
asking for. That goes up to a 9 percent increase. So I hope
that's a place we can work together.
Chairman Arrington. Well, I will not bogart the time. I
have resented some of my Chairmen in the past who continued
this dialogue without giving my colleagues the opportunity. I
would respectfully disagree with the characterization of
investing in border security, but I appreciate your response.
Now, to my friend from Pennsylvania, your Q&A. You got 5
minutes.
Mr. Boyle. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wasn't
planning on asking this, but there was good dialogue on the
American Rescue Plan, and I want to present some facts that
weren't mentioned, although we mentioned them both in our
opening statements. Can you state again how many new jobs have
been created in the last 2 years?
Ms. Young. I said over 12 million. It is 12.4.
Mr. Boyle. And is there any 4-year period in American
history where you saw that many new jobs created?
Ms. Young. No.
Mr. Boyle. And was that projected by any independent
analytics firm or CBO just a couple of years ago?
Ms. Young. No.
Mr. Boyle. Are you aware that CBO, as well as others, have
directly stated that the American Rescue Plan is part of the
reason for our strong recovery?
Ms. Young. I am.
Mr. Boyle. And are you aware of any other OECD country
coming out of COVID that has had as strong growth and as strong
job creation as the United States of America?
Ms. Young. I do not.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you. Now, I noticed your testimony last
week over in the Senate, and I was struck by some of my
Republican colleagues in that chamber have kind of foggy
memories. Perhaps it goes with serving in the Senate, but be
that as it may, let me help clear up the records, and some seem
to be confused on that other side. Senator Romney, Senator
Scott, Senator Lee, Senator Graham, Senator Thune, as well as
others in this chamber have explicitly called for benefit cuts
to Social Security. And if any one of them doubt that, I am
happy to provide those quotes for the record. Let me quote one
exactly, Senator Mike Lee. He has said, ``It will be my
objective to phase out Social Security, to pull it up from the
roots, and to get rid of it.''
So on the other hand, the President's budget makes it
pretty clear that there will be no cuts, but there seems to be
some confusion out there as to this matter. So can you please
talk about the prospect of Social Security cuts that some have
clearly called for in relation to the President's budget?
Ms. Young. Well, you have laid out some of the history
there. I will talk about what the budget does on Social
Security. The President's budget is about values, and he
strongly believes that benefits should not be cut for seniors
who have paid into this program, and his budget reflects that
value.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you. Would you be able to, because there
is an inside baseball term--this is my characterization of it--
there is an inside baseball term in this town, ``non-defense
discretionary,'' that most regular people, most normal people,
frankly, have no idea what the heck that means. So when some on
the other side talk about cutting non-defense discretionary,
that might sound reasonable to some. Could you give some real-
life examples of what exactly we are talking about if we saw
cuts to non-defense discretionary?
Ms. Young. Sure. I will start with one we just had a
discussion about, border security. That is a non-defense
discretionary. Veterans' medical care is a non-defense
discretionary. Our law enforcement, State and local grants, is
in discretionary. FBI is in discretionary. Rail safety, air
safety, TSA wait times, Pell Grants, childcare block grants,
Head Start, WIC, housing vouchers, to name a few.
Mr. Boyle. And those are just a few.
Ms. Young. To name a few.
Mr. Boyle. To name a few, yes. Well, like the Chairman
pointed out, in the past, when Chairs and Ranking Members, not
necessarily in this Committee, but have exceeded or taken up
their time, if you are kind of on the end of the dais, it can
be a little painful. So I will just stop there and will yield
back, and thank you again, Director Young, for being here.
Ms. Young. Thank you.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Boyle, and now we will
recognize our fellow Members, starting with the gentleman from
South Carolina, Mr. Ralph Norman.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Ms. Young.
Ms. Young. Thank you.
Mr. Norman. Thank you, Ms. Young. I appreciate you taking
the time to come. I am a real estate developer. I don't think I
have ever seen a time like this where this country is in the
shape that it is in. So goes housing, so goes economy. I will
tell you because of this administration, housing is pretty much
tanky, and I am in a State that is supposed to be booming.
To talk about his budget, let me just go over a few things.
As I get out and talk to the people, the businesses in this
country, and when I tell them some of these things that is in
this President's budget, when you see $3 billion to advance
gender equity and equity among the broad range sectors, I hear
nobody saying this is a national concern, I appreciate my money
going there. When I see the mention of climate change 42 times,
LGBTQ 7 times, diversity 16 times, for the mom and dad trying
to run a business, I don't hear them saying, yay, this is a
great thing, this is a good use of my tax dollars; a billion
for Central America and Haiti, again, with no policy changes to
rein in the illegal immigration going to Haiti; $430 million
for hemispheric migration management. Now, think about that,
hemispheric migration management. What is that? Where is the
return on the investment? You know, the list goes on and on.
When you talk to the mom and dads who are concerned about
this, when I hear what this administration is doing, when I see
what they are doing, to say he is not proposing a tax increase
on those making $400,000 is really so disingenuous. I hear no
one saying, you know, I am excited about paying $76 more for
eggs, I am excited about paying $129 more for dairy products,
for milk if you can find it, I am excited about $270 more for
fruits and vegetables, I am excited about paying 50 percent
more for gasoline than was under the Trump Administration, $465
more for electricity. It goes on and on, and I hear no one
saying that times are good.
Have you asked the questions that I just asked to that mom
and dad, to that family trying to raise kids, trying to go to
work, to that dental hygienist who cannot afford insulin
because of just what I named you? Have you hit this, or am I
totally in a foreign land?
Ms. Young. Oh, Congressman, if you know me, I have a 16-
month-old, so I am one of those parents, and I am also from a
town of less than 2,000 people. We don't quite have a stop
light but a caution light, and when I talk to them, they are
interested in things proposed here, like bringing down costs of
childcare, the paid leave proposals here. Many of them having
to make a difficult choice with elderly parents. They can't
take off work without losing their job.
Mr. Norman. But specifically, what I mentioned, those are
everyday items that all of us are having to buy. Those numbers
are either, they are fabricated or they are true. Would you say
they are true or are they fabricated?
Ms. Young. I will say we have proposals that help American
families lower costs. This President has made it clear bringing
down inflation and cost for goods is his number one domestic
priority. So we agree we should work together to pass some of
these proposals that would help families with childcare, that
would help families make sure they can take care of their----
Mr. Norman. I am running out of time.
Ms. Young. Okay.
Mr. Norman. Let me just say I just named a few of the
insane items of where our money is going. Janet Yellen's
proposed multinational tax of 15 percent, is that going to help
companies come back to America? Is that a good sign to send, 15
percent tax on multinational companies?
Ms. Young. Congressman, that is absolutely the goal here.
Mr. Norman. Okay.
Ms. Young. Many companies leave to go to countries that
don't have any taxes.
Mr. Norman. Okay. It is time to put----
Ms. Young. This says----
Mr. Norman. I am reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time. It
is time for somebody in this administration to put America
first. It has been completely last under this administration. I
resent it, and hopefully we are going to have a change sooner
rather than later. Thank you so much for appearing.
Ms. Young. Thank you.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from South
Carolina and would now yield 5 minutes to my friend, Mr.
Higgins, from New York.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Young, thank
you very much for being here. You know, all of America
experienced and the world experienced a pandemic beyond human
comprehension, unprecedented, the lives that were lost
throughout the world and this country, the money that was lost.
Congress, both Republicans and Democrats, under a Republican
administration initially had to come up with something to save
the American economy, to save the world economy, and to save a
lot of lives, and we did what we had to do.
Under the previous administration, the debt ceiling was
increased 3 times. Eight trillion dollars of debt was
accumulated during that period of time. Are we in a period of
uncertainty right now? Yes, we are, of course coming out of a
pandemic for 36 months with all the money that both Democrats
and Republicans supported. We had too much money chasing too
few goods. Consequently, we had inflation that was very high.
Bloomberg Analytics did a series with all of their economic
columnists to talk about the Biden Administration and the 10
metrics by which it will be judged, and the initial narrative
said that Biden is on track to become the greatest jobs-
producing President in the history of America, 12 million jobs
created in 2 years, more than any administration in a period of
4 years. The unemployment rate, down to 3.4 percent, the lowest
in 54 years. Yes, inflation is still high, but the forecast,
based on Bloomberg Analytics, is that this time next year, the
inflation rate will be at 2-and-a-quarter percent, normal by
historical standards.
So we have a budget that has been proposed by the
administration that is $6.9 trillion. We have a $23-and-a-half
trillion economy. That budget is nearly 30 percent of the
entire economy. If--if--we were to default on this budget, as
some are threatening, you would see $20,000 lost in retirement
savings by every American. You would see the stock market fall
by one-third. You would see the elimination of $12 trillion of
family savings, 2.6 million jobs lost, and the economy would
drop by 5 percent. The responsible thing to do is to come up
with a budget that people can live with but can also help grow
the economy. I would submit that the Biden budget, if it does
one thing that is clear and compelling, it is investing in the
growth of the American economy. This is, in fact, what we need
after 36 months of hell.
So the Chairman spoke of issues of lawlessness and chaos,
and there are several budget proposals that I have reviewed,
one by the Republican Study Committee. It would balance the
budget in 10 years. To do so, and by the way, 173 of 222
Republican House Members are part of the Republican Study
Committee. To do so, you would have to cut Social Security by 4
percent, Medicare by 24 percent, Medicaid, child health
insurance by 49 percent, other spending--food assistance, farm
subsidies, military retirement, anti-poverty programs--60
percent, veterans' health, transportation, education, law
enforcement, 49 percent, and there are several plans out there,
but if you are not hitting Social Security and Medicare, which
you are in this plan, let's say you just take those off the
table and military spending. What does that do to the law
enforcement budget to address the lawlessness and chaos the
Chairman speaks of?
Ms. Young. I gave the Ranking Member a list of things that
we called non-defense discretionary. I noted FBI, other law
enforcement, like Marshals Service, billions of dollars in
grants to State and local law enforcement agencies. CBO has
looked at proposals. If they did not touch Social Security and
Medicare and you want to balance in 10 years, those things go
away in non-defense discretionary.
Mr. Higgins. The Federal funding for law enforcement
agencies, that is like the COPS Program?
Ms. Young. That is correct, COPS, Burn, JAG, the host of
things that go out to State and local law enforcement,
prosecutors from the Department of Justice budget.
Mr. Higgins. So it would adversely affect law enforcement
and the prosecution of criminals.
Ms. Young. Well, you wouldn't have more cops on the beat.
This President has asked for 100,000 more. You couldn't do
that, and you would also lose----
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from New York and
now would recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
McClintock for 5 minutes.
Mr. McClintock. Madam Director, my concern with this budget
and the ideology that has produced it is that it takes us far
from the fundamental principles that have produced the
prosperity and freedom that Americans once enjoyed. Except for
World War II and the COVID pandemic, the sheer size of spending
is unprecedented, both in its amount and as a percentage of
GDP.
Free markets are inherently democratic because every
consumer everyday votes with every dollar that they spend on
what they want the economy to produce at what prices they are
willing to pay. When you take the dollar they would spend for
their needs and instead spend it yourself, for whatever lofty
purpose, you have not only reduced their standard of living,
but you have also harmed the economy by moving it away from
producing what consumers need to what government officials
want. Of course, it is necessary to pool our resources to
provide for the common defense and promote the general welfare,
but the farther that we stray from these core responsibilities,
the more we damage our prosperity and our freedom. You might
think you are helping people, but you are not.
In a free market, the only way to make a dollar is to
figure out what somebody else needs and provide it for them
better than they can provide it for themselves. If I take a
dollar from Peter and give it to Paul, Peter has earned that
dollar by helping others. Paul hasn't. I take a dollar from
Peter and give it to Paul, Paul has got an extra dollar to
spend, that is true, but Peter now has one less dollar to spend
in that same economy, and here is the real damage: you have
robbed both of a dollar's worth of incentive to help each
other, Peter because he no longer benefits by helping others
for that dollar and Paul because he no longer needs to.
I also find this argument between deficits and taxes to be
silly. They are the same thing. A deficit is simply a future
tax in the form either of debt or inflation. It is all driven
by spending. Taxes harm the current economy, borrowing harms
the future economy, and inflation hollows out people's savings
and purchasing power. That is why no country has ever taxed,
and borrowed, and spent its way to prosperity. Just as you
can't drink yourself sober, you can't spend yourself rich.
Now, you used your entire presentation telling us how great
the economy is. Well, the problem is you can't spend the
economy. People know perfectly well what is going on in their
own lives, and trying to tell them otherwise only makes you
look foolish. You need to stop that. Americans are soon going
to ask themselves are we better off today than we were 4 years
ago, and you had better have a better answer than doubling down
on policies that two-thirds of Americans are desperately trying
to tell you that put their families and their country on the
wrong track.
Instead of looking for new ways to spend money, we should
all be looking at ways to save it. Republicans have a lot of
suggestions we are trying to share with you and require able-
bodied adults to work as a condition of receiving benefits.
Stop flooding the labor market with illegal aliens. Stop
subsidizing political cronies whose products people don't want
to buy. Stop sending money to countries that hate us. Stop
bailing out banks from their own bad decisions. Get out of the
way and unleash America's energy resources. I could go on.
Bill Clinton reached across the aisle in 1994 and declared
that ``the era of big government is over.'' Together, a
Democratic President and a Republican House achieved some
remarkable things. Together they reformed the welfare system.
They cut spending as a percentage of GDP. They produced what
amounted to the biggest capital gains tax cut in history. They
balanced four budgets in a row, and they produced the biggest
economic expansions in our Nation's history. We can do that
again if you decide to join us, but in the meantime, I guess I
have just got a simple question for you. What makes you think
that socialism is going to work any better here than everywhere
else in the world it has ever been tried?
Ms. Young. Mr. McClintock, I will just add one thing to the
Clinton Administration. Taxes as a percent of GDP were 19.6
percent, very similar to what we are proposing here. So part of
the solution is a tax policy that asks the wealthy and large
corporations to pay more. I have a simple proposition, too, and
this is where we differ. The oil industry had $200 billion in
profit last year.
Mr. McClintock. Director Young----
Ms. Young. One loophole closure would save $31 million.
Mr. McClintock. Director Young, do you not understand that
corporations don't pay corporate taxes? A corporate tax can
only be paid in 1 of 3 ways. It is paid by consumers through
higher prices, it is paid for by employees through lower wages,
and it is paid for by investors through lower earnings. That is
your retirement fund. So when you say you are only taxing
corporations, what you mean is you are raising taxes on every
consumer, every employee, and every investor.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from California
and now recognize my good friend, Mr. Peters, from California.
Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for having
the hearing, and thank you, Director Young, for testifying
today. I am so proud of one particular accomplishment last
year, which was a bipartisan bill to improve the Nation's
infrastructure, something people had been talking about for a
long time here, even week to week, but we actually did a
decade's worth of infrastructure investment, and among the many
lessons that we learned and addressed in the pandemic is how
crucial broadband access is for families and businesses to stay
connected in today's world. That is the access to opportunity.
That is the access to information. The Affordable Connectivity
Program helps bridge the gap for families that otherwise could
not afford broadband access, connecting more than 16 million
lower-income households in rural and urban districts since its
creation in 2021. I want to make sure that the White House does
support ensuring the program has the resources necessary to
continue funding once it runs out early next year.
Ms. Young. Absolutely, and can I also say thank you for the
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law. This broadband program will
bring high connectivity to 15 million households. We saw kids
in parking lots of McDonald's. That should not happen in this
country, so thank you for that.
Mr. Peters. We will expect continued funding after----
Ms. Young. Yes. When we have gotten through this initial
investment, our commitment is to work to make sure the progress
does not stop.
Mr. Peters. Great. Thank you. You know, one of the things
we are all concerned about in this Committee is the condition
of the Medicare Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, which could be
insolvent in 5 years, but President Biden has proposed to
extend the solvency of Medicare by 25 years or more. Can you
explain how this budget proposes to extend the solvency of
Medicare?
Ms. Young. I will, and I want to thank Mr. Doggett, who has
worked on this program for many, many years, and the
President's policy aligns with his and goes a step further. We
take the net investment income tax that was always intended to
go to solvency and move that over to help the Trust Fund. We
also close loopholes. Some wealthy have found legal ways not to
pay into Medicare. We close those, and we also ask those making
more than $400,000 to pay 1.2 percent more, up to 5 percent,
while middle-class working families continue to pay 3.8
percent.
Mr. Peters. Great, and how long will you be able to extend
the----
Ms. Young. Not just our estimates, but the actuaries at CMS
estimate at least 25 years.
Mr. Peters. Great. Thank you. Finally, the Republican Study
Committee didn't come out with a budget, but last year they
replaced Medicare as a guaranteed benefit with the subsidies to
purchase private insurance. It also raised the Medicare
eligibility age from 65 to the normal age for Social Security,
which ranges up to 67, and the subsidy wouldn't cover enough of
the costs, and out-of-pocket increases for seniors would be
significant under that approach. The President's budget takes a
different approach and protects Medicare by extending its life
for 25 years or more. Can you tell us a little bit about your
reaction to the RSC budget and the differences between the
President's budget and the RSC?
Ms. Young. I won't talk about individual proposals, but
what I will say is this. This President is clear he would not
support benefit cuts to Social Security or Medicare and has a
proposal that would extend the solvency of Medicare, and
anything that would raise the out-of-pocket costs for seniors
is effectively a benefit cut.
Mr. Peters. Okay. I am willing to work with my colleagues
throughout this Committee on ways to solve this problem. I just
think the draconian approach we saw from the RSC, which is the
only suggestion we have seen so far in an official way from the
other side, is not going to be acceptable and look forward to
continuing discussions and thank you again for your work.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from California
and now recognize my friend from Wisconsin, Mr. Glenn Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. Obviously, a budget is a long
thing to go through, and I hope I caught everything, but I
don't know. I don't see any work requirements here for what the
public would call welfare, like EBT, food stamps, that sort of
thing. Did you decide to put any work requirements in there?
Ms. Young. Mr. Grothman, you know work requirements are a
part of several of those programs already. We have not changed
those work requirements.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. A lot, a lot of people are getting
stuff without requirements, but you have not changed that. Next
question, on the child tax credit, historically, you know, that
can be $3,600 for a child under 5, $3,000 for a child over 5.
So if you have, like, 4 kids, that can be, you know, $14,000 a
year. Most recently, there were work requirements to get that
child tax credit. You would not just be able to walk down and
get, you know, another 1,200 bucks a month. It looks to me like
you are changing the law so that you no longer have to work for
that. Like I said, if you have 4 kids, it can be an outright
$14,000 a year, you know, tax-free gift. Is that what we are
doing here? Are we increasing the amount you get for not
working by that amount?
Ms. Young. Mr. Grothman, what we are trying to do is in
2021, the child tax credit was raised. There is a child tax
credit now, and in 2021, we raised that amount from $2,000 to
$3,000 for older children, $3,600 for younger children. What we
saw in, I think, and many analyses were done, was that child
poverty was cut in half in this country, so we are trying to go
back to the policy we saw work in 2021.
Mr. Grothman. Just so I understand, and I am sure if we
gave everybody, you know, $30,000, there would be no poverty in
the country, but the question is whether that is good public
policy. You are changing the rules to remove the work
requirement for that child tax credit, right?
Ms. Young. We are not doing that. We are changing the
amount so families have more in which to help their children.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So you are giving them more whether
they work or not. Next question, and I think it, therefore,
would encourage what I will call the welfare lifestyle. Don't
work, don't get married, and you still have a substantial sum
of money. Next question. We talk about the unemployment rate,
but I think even more significant is what I call the labor
participation rate. It looks to me like, you know, we were
floating around 63-and-a-half, that sort of thing, before the
COVID. We are still down around 62.4, so there has been a drop
in the labor participation rate, which I think is a lot more
relevant than the unemployment rate. Is that true? Has there
been a significant drop?
Ms. Young. You stated the figures. We are almost back to
pre-pandemic. The good news is prime age workers, those 25 to
52, I believe, is the age, we are back to pre-pandemic levels,
and that is what you want to see were prime wage workers.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. But we are down about a full percentage
point, correct?
Ms. Young. Overall.
Mr. Grothman. Overall, correct. Another question with
regard to the calculation of the labor force participation
rate. There are many people out there working, making maybe
$14, $15, $16,000 a year, and if you talk to employers, you
hear there are a lot of employees today, because of the
generosity of government benefits, who don't want to work more
than, you know, maybe 20 hours a week or 15 hours a week,
because then they begin to lose their benefits. So if I am
somebody working 25 hours a week or 20 hours a week, I am one
of those people who are telling my employer I don't want to
work any more hours because I am going to begin to lose
benefits, is that taken into account in the labor force
participation rate?
Ms. Young. Mr. Grothman, I think most American families,
regular folks that I was asked if I talked to earlier, would
tell you they have a much more complicated story about why they
choose to work. My guess is, because I have been there, the
figure you stated, $14,000, pays about half of my childcare
bill. So families have a very complicated dynamic----
Mr. Grothman. Well----
Ms. Young [continuing]. In which to make sure their kids
are taken care of and balance that with their salary.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I think you got to get out in the real
world a little bit, but I am going to ask you again. Does that
take into account people who are telling their employer I can't
make more than X and X because I will lose my government
benefits?
Ms. Young. What I am telling you is families have very
complex dynamics----
Mr. Grothman. They are complex.
Ms. Young [continuing]. That we should all take into
account.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Now, there are many, many spending
increases in here to hire more bureaucrats, to increase
diversity of a variety of different programs, and a lot more
money here for Planned Parenthood. These grants to Planned
Parenthood, as I understand it, will put gals as young as 15 or
16 on contraceptive without their parents knowing about it. Do
you think that is good public policy?
Ms. Young. Mr. Grothman, you know, 4-and-a-half million
people use Title X clinics. What we are saying is we should
support that preventive health, which also includes family
planning. I don't know if the specific hypothetical you
mentioned happens, but I think we should be investing in
institutions that cover 4-and-a-half million Americans who
receive care there.
Mr. Grothman. It doesn't bother you if people are getting
this without their parents knowing about it.
Ms. Young. You can imagine I won't speak to hypotheticals.
If that is happening, I am happy to look at, after the hearing,
what stories you may have seen.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Wisconsin
and now yield 5 minutes to Ms. Lee from California.
Ms. Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member. Good to see you, Director Young.
Ms. Young. Hi.
Ms. Lee. You know what question I would like to ask you,
but I would like to frame it in the context of what the
Congressional Budget Office has shown in terms of reducing our
defense budget. The President's 2024 budget includes $886
billion for defense spending, which is a 3.3 percent increase,
I believe, over the enacted 2023 level, which included, for the
last 2 years actually, about $37 billion over what the
President asked in the prior couple of years.
Now, the Pentagon, first of all, has not been audited. No
agency in the history of this country has ever failed an audit,
and I believe the Pentagon has failed 5 audits. Again, going to
the Congressional Budget Office, it has shown that a cut of
$100 billion would not impact our national security. We know
there is about $150 billion in waste, fraud, and abuse. The
taxpayers deserve accountability in terms of how the Pentagon
is spending their money, so I cannot understand why we would
increase defense spending when the Pentagon can't even pass an
audit 5 times.
So with every $100 billion, according to the CBO, we could
power every household with solar energy, hire 1 million
elementary school teachers, provide free tuition for 2 out of 3
public college students, we could cover medical care for 7
million veterans, and so much more, and so I am trying to get a
handle on how did the administration arrive at this funding
level given the increases above what the administration asked
for for the last couple of years, and how can we justify
increasing an agency or department that has failed 5 audits.
Ms. Young. Congresswoman, you probably won't be surprised--
I will get that from you--I will get a wildly different belief
that we should be doing more on defense from some on this panel
today. What we try to do, because people have strong feelings
on both sides, is follow the National Security Strategy. What
is the right amount based on the strategy we have to defend
this country, to counter China? It is a very complex world. We
also increase something I know you are interested in as you
chaired the State Foreign Ops Appropriations Subcommittee: our
diplomatic line. It is not an either/or. We have to make sure
our defense strategy is fully funded, and we counter our
adversaries and our competitors, and we also have to make sure
those diplomatic lines, and we are interested in making sure
both of those things are robustly funded.
Ms. Lee. Thank you for that, but I also know the taxpayers
deserve some accountability. Everyone must be accountable to
spending public money, every agency. It has failed an audit 5
times, and, in fact, are three legs of our national defense:
defense, development, diplomacy. In the last few years, my
budget as Chair of State and Foreign Ops was approximately $64
billion. Defense was approximately $750 billion, and so we
need, again, some rebalancing if, in fact, we are going to
prevent conflict and wars, and many generals have indicated
that to not only this Committee but to other committees.
And so I would hope that rebalancing at this point in
history with the Biden Administration would be looked at very
carefully, and also finally accountability for taxpayer
dollars. So how do we spend more, again, when, in fact, the
Pentagon has failed 5 audits?
Ms. Young. They have not received a clean audit, and I told
this to a Member last year on this Committee, I believe, we
need to fix that. I know the complicated answers and the
details. DOD has a lot of property, and I know that weighs
heavily into their ability to get a clean audit, but we cannot
not follow our National Security Strategy.
Ms. Lee. But again, the CBO has indicated that cutting $100
billion would not tamper with nor even touch our ability to
ensure our national security. Let me just ask you very quickly
because, again, going back to the $100 billion, the CTC
expansion of the childhood poverty rate. The CTC actually
reduced poverty rates among children. What happens if we make
it permanent? How would this policy make meaningful changes in
child poverty levels?
Ms. Young. Well, we saw and we beta tested it in 2021 and
cut child poverty in half, so we believe we should bring it
back and make it permanent.
Ms. Lee. And in the President's budget, it is----
Ms. Young. He would make the refundability part permanent,
but in 2025, we have a lot of tax cliffs, and our proposal
would take this to 2025 so we can deal with those holistically.
Ms. Lee. Thank you for your answer.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentlelady, and I really
appreciate, regardless of whether we agree or disagree on how
to resource the people's government, and regardless of whether
we agree or disagree on specific programs, I really respect the
seriousness, the diligence on elevating the level of
accountability on are we getting what we paid for. Not are we,
are taxpayers. Is the public impact, the desired goal being
met? And so I respect that, and I hope we get more of that
throughout this Congress. So with that, I would like to yield 5
minutes to my friend from Pennsylvania, Mr. Lloyd Smucker.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Young, thank
you for being with us today. This budget proposes close to $5
trillion in new taxes. Am I in the ballpark, Director Young?
Ms. Young. Four-point-seven, so----
Mr. Smucker. Four-point-seven in new taxes. It would be $65
trillion in total taxes over the next 10-year period, which
would be record high taxes ever proposed, agree?
Ms. Young. I mentioned some statistics on percent of GDP,
so we would be in line with where we were in the 90s on percent
of GDP revenue.
Mr. Smucker. Nineteen-point-six percent of GDP----
Ms. Young. Correct.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. Is record high. Mr. Chairman, the
Tax Foundation released their analysis of the President's tax
proposals this morning. Just very briefly, they find these tax
hikes would be devastating for the American people. The burden
of higher taxes hits middle-income families, once again
breaking Biden's promise. It would cost 335,000 jobs, would
reduce wages, and would reduce GDP by 1.3 percent, which would
increase the deficit even beyond what is being proposed here.
So, Mr. Chairman, again, this is by the Tax Foundation released
just this morning, the details and analysis of President
Biden's Fiscal Year 2024 Budget proposal. I would like to
insert that into the Record.
Chairman Arrington. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Smucker. And I would like to then get back to just a
few comments that you made during your opening comments, the
deficits in particular. Are you concerned with the level of
debt that we have now and with the projection going forward?
Ms. Young. Yes. That is why you have seen our policies that
would bring down the deficit by nearly $3 trillion over 10
years.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, and this is what I would like to get to,
and I asked Secretary Yellen these questions as well because I
can't for the life of me see where you are decreasing the
deficit, and I don't think anyone outside of the beltway
looking at these numbers can see that as well, would agree that
you are reducing the deficit, and I think it is important that,
you know, if we recognize that that is a goal, then we need to
be transparent and understand what the numbers are. So I have
in front of me your proposal from last fiscal year. You were
proposing that the deficit at that point in 2023 would be $1.1
trillion. Do you agree with that number?
Ms. Young. If you have last year's table in front of you, I
will agree with it.
Mr. Smucker. One trillion one hundred and fifty-four
billion. What was the actual deficit in 2023 in your new
proposal?
Ms. Young. So in 2023, our projected deficit will be----
Mr. Smucker. One trillion five hundred and sixty-nine
billion.
Ms. Young. Yeah.
Mr. Smucker. Four hundred----
Ms. Young. So in 2023, deficit is projected to be $1.6
trillion.
Mr. Smucker. One-point-six trillion compared to $1.1
trillion, so it is half a trillion higher than what you were
projecting 12 months ago.
Ms. Young. I will just remind you we are still in the
middle of 2023, and those deficit numbers will change from this
number and that number. They were projections last year.
Mr. Smucker. Will probably go up, if anything.
Ms. Young. Absolutely not. We actually had lower deficits
last year than our budget projections in 2022.
Mr. Smucker. It is 40-percent higher than you were
projecting last year at this time.
Ms. Young. In 2022, our deficit projections were lower than
the $1.7 trillion actually----
Mr. Smucker. Let's look at one more year. Let's look at one
more year. Last year at this time, you were projecting a
deficit of $1.2 trillion for 2024. That is the upcoming year.
What are you projecting in 2024 now?
Ms. Young. One-point-eight trillion.
Mr. Smucker. One-point-eight trillion. Do you think that is
reducing the deficit?
Ms. Young. So you are comparing projection to projection.
Mr. Smucker. I am.
Ms. Young. Interest rates have changed since then. Our
economic projections have changed since then, unemployment, and
that all factors into the numbers.
Mr. Smucker. I am comparing what your plan was a year ago--
--
Ms. Young. Projections.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. To your projections now, correct.
Last year at this time, you were projecting $14 trillion in
total deficits over the next 10-year period. This year you are
projecting $17 trillion. That is $3 trillion more in deficits.
Where are you seeing reductions in the deficit?
Ms. Young. Our deficit number is the projection from this
year to the budget year in 2033, 10-year budget in 2024. If you
pull out this year's table----
Mr. Smucker. Sure, I have it right here.
Ms. Young [continuing]. It would show a cumulative deficit
reduction of $2.9 trillion, the nearly $3 trillion.
Mr. Smucker. Compared to what?
Ms. Young. Compared to where we are starting in this fiscal
year.
Mr. Smucker. It is not true. This fiscal year, the deficit
is $1.5 trillion. What are you projecting in 10 years from now?
Ms. Young. The cumulative deficit will be----
Mr. Smucker. No, you are projecting----
Ms. Young [continuing]. Reduced nearly $3 trillion.
Mr. Smucker. You are projecting $2 trillion 10 years from
now compared to $1.5 trillion. Nowhere----
Ms. Young. Sir, deficits are year over year, so you add the
deficit reductions each year, the cumulative addition. We have
done a lot of adding of spending over 10 years, so we do the
same for deficits. You add each of the savings each year there
are savings. The total is $2.9 trillion----
Mr. Smucker. The bottom line is----
Ms. Young [continuing]. At the end of----
Mr. Smucker. The bottom line is----
Ms. Young [continuing]. At the end of 2033.
Mr. Smucker. Reclaiming my time here, the bottom line is in
10 years, the deficit will be $2 trillion compared to $1-and-a-
half trillion now. We agree that it is important we reduce the
deficits. It is really important that we look at these numbers,
and the numbers you are looking at, there is no way anywhere
anyone outside the beltway would believe that we are reducing
deficits. It is unfortunate, but that is the case.
Ms. Young. Those are our estimates if the President's
policies are adopted.
Chairman Arrington. The gentleman's time has expired, and I
thank my friend from Pennsylvania. We will now yield 5 minutes
to my colleague from Texas, Mr. Doggett.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Director Young. You know, really, I had hoped this morning
we might see some specific Republican alternatives to this
budget so you could compare and contrast them with your insight
on this, but we seem to only have harangues against the
successes of the Biden Administration.
I would like to focus your attention specifically on
Medicare. I am pleased that the President included as one of
his four pillars of his initiative the importance of protecting
and preserving Medicare for the future. As you know, I
introduced legislation last year that was designed to extend
the solvency of the Medicare Trust Fund to 2040 by relying on
the net investment income tax and closing a loophole,
redirecting all the funds from that tax into the Medicare Trust
Fund, as was originally intended. President Biden has taken the
additional step of proposing a tax on the very top earners that
would extend Medicare solvency far beyond 2040.
He has been successful, I think, in essentially shaming
Republicans into saying that they won't cut Social Security and
Medicare, but they don't appear to have offered any
alternatives as he has, as I have tried to do, to assure that
Medicare will be solvent and available to pay those benefits.
Why do you think the net investment income tax is an
appropriate way to finance Medicare rather than the Republican
traditional approach of cutting benefits?
Ms. Young. Well, one, thank you for your leadership. As I
said earlier, the President's proposal has a lot of
similarities to what you put forward last year. The net
investment income tax--the NIIT--was always intended to go into
the Medicare Trust Fund, and so it is appropriate, and based on
people who helped start that during the ACA conversation, that
should have always helped solvency in the Trust Fund. So we do
that proposal like you also had.
We close loopholes, I believe, like your bill did as well,
ensuring that the wealthy pay into the Medicare Trust Fund the
same as everyone else who goes to work. We go a click further
by saying those making over $400,000 should pay 1.2 percent
more than middle-class families, and those making under 400,000
by paying 5 percent.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you very much, and certainly that
contrasts with the only Republican budget we have out here,
which is the Republican Study Committee, which proposes to
privatize Medicare and really eliminate it as a guaranteed
benefit. Let me ask you also about a second aspect of that, and
that is to assure Medicare's fiscal health. I am concerned
about tens of billions of dollars that are lost in provider
fraud. These are not victimless crimes. They impact the
security of the Medicare Program. I have introduced a Medicare
Fraud Detection and Deterrence Act to close a shocking loophole
that CMS does not currently have authority to take away a
national provider identifier number that fraudsters use to bill
Medicare, and it would give CMS that authority. Additionally, I
have legislation concerning preventing Medicare telehealth
fraud where, without ever seeing a patient, lab tests that are
not necessary and very expensive or expensive services and
equipment are provided to someone through telehealth.
There have been billions of dollars that have been the
subject of Justice Department action trying to do something
about this, but the key, I think, has to be preventing this
fraud from ever occurring in the first place, and I would just
ask you if I could count on your office and CMS to work with us
in securing scores on the savings that can be achieved to
Medicare by devoting our efforts to preventing fraud from
providers before it ever occurs.
Ms. Young. I don't want to speak for the CMS Administrator,
but I think I know her well enough to speak for both of us when
we say we will be happy as an administration to work with you
on that.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you so much. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Texas and
now would yield 5 minutes to my friend, Mr. Cline, from
Virginia.
Mr. Cline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am concerned by this
budget request because deficits, as far as the eye can see,
into perpetuity is not the way we are going to achieve fiscal
responsibility in this country. For the future of this country,
for future generations of this country, we owe it to them to
rein in the excessive spending that we have seen over the past
several years, particularly over the past 2 years.
One of the existential threats facing this country is our
level of debt. Our excessive deficit is now over a trillion
dollars a year and growing, by all accounts, over the next 10
years under the President's budget. Another threat to this
Nation is immediate and direct, and it is on our Southern
border and is being ignored by this President. I see that last
year, Congress enacted $61 billion for Homeland. This year, the
budget proposes, and I am just reading a number here, $60.4
billion in discretionary budget authority, and I know that you
are talking about TSA fees and other kinds of revenues, but
that is a cut for Homeland, even in the face of 2.7 million
Border Patrol enforcement actions, a 30-percent increase over
Fiscal Year 2021, and since President Biden has been in office,
there have been nearly 4.7 million migrant encounters at the
Southwest border.
The population of Virginia is 8.8, so you are over half of
the population of Virginia at this point. It is not counting
the 1.2 million known got-aways who evaded Border Patrol agents
in the last 2 years, but despite this increase, the Biden
Administration is looking to cut the appropriation for the
Department as a whole, including for U.S. Customs and Border
Protection and U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, but at
the same time, in a reflection of the values of this
administration and their failure to protect the rights
enshrined in this Constitution, the President's budget requests
$2 billion for the ATF to increase regulations of the firearms
industry, among other directives.
Can you tell me specifically of this $2 billion, will any
of these funds go toward the enforcement of bans on pistol
braces, often used by veterans, assault rifle bans, the
creation of a gun owner registry, or the elimination of
manufacturer immunity as part of their efforts to increase
regulation of the firearms industry?
Ms. Young. I am going to be very clear what the ATF funds
are about: keeping guns out of the hands of dangerous people,
implementing the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, and making
sure criminals don't have access to guns, which are being
trafficked in this country that I think is a bipartisan
concern. We can do that without infringing on the rights of
law-abiding citizens, and on DHS----
Mr. Cline. So your commitment----
Ms. Young [continuing]. I am happy to submit for the record
that DHS is actually getting a 9 percent increase, so I welcome
bipartisan cooperation to provide these resources.
Mr. Cline. I reject the characterization of it as a 9
percent increase, but your answer, can you commit that none of
these funds will go to the creation of a gun owner registry?
Ms. Young. This is----
Mr. Cline. Gun owner registry.
Ms. Young. And I will repeat it.
Mr. Cline. Specific to gun owner registry.
Ms. Young. Law-abiding citizens----
Mr. Cline. Tracking gun owner----
Ms. Young [continuing]. Is not the focus. It is about going
after dangerous criminals. Everyone in this country has seen
mass shooting after mass shooting after mass shooting, and they
are asking us to do more about it. This is what that is about.
Mr. Cline. So this administration wants to create a gun
owner registry to track the lawful purchases of guns by law-
abiding citizens. That is a violation of the Constitution, and
I think it demonstrates the neglect of this administration to
its responsibilities under the Constitution to protect those
rights of the citizens. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Virginia and
will yield to my good friend from California 5 minutes, the
great Salad Bowl of the country, Jimmy Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that. It
is an honor to be here with you and the Ranking Member and
appreciate this opportunity. Director Young, thanks for being
here, and thanks for the good work you have done over the past
couple of years, especially with your help in passing some
historic pieces of legislation that has led to, you know,
basically last month 517,000 jobs created, this month's 311,000
jobs created. Inflation has gone down 3 percentage points to 6
percent. Unemployment is at 3.4 percent. The deficit-to-GDP has
fallen from 15 to 5 percent. The deficit has fallen by $1.7
trillion. Wages are up, savings are up, and, boy, are corporate
profits up as well.
However, obviously, we understand that you know, we want to
ensure that we do lower our debt and deficit, but the last
thing we want to do is screw around with this thing called the
debt ceiling because if we start to do that, if we even
threaten that, basically you are going to see GDP decline by 4
percent, 6 million jobs are going to be lost, unemployment is
going to go up to 9 percent, and stocks are going to plunge,
basically causing a $15 trillion hit to our economy. So look,
we got a lot of work to do. We understand that, and obviously
there are hardships right now that many working families are
facing, but clearly, we have a good foundation going forward
upon which we can tackle these challenges.
Now, some of the challenges that we are facing also have
the deal with basically the recent storms in my district that
we faced, and I got to admit I appreciate the fact that you are
probably one of two Directors of the OMB that are familiar with
the word ``Pajaro,'' and you don't even have a personal
connection to it, but I appreciate your partnership that we
have developed in at least addressing the Pajaro River Flood
Risk Management Project there in the 19th Congressional
District. Obviously, I have raised the alarms about the risks
of the potential failure of flooding in that levy, and
unfortunately, just last week, the people of the town of Pajaro
experienced what can happen when there is flooding, considering
that they are completely out of their town at this point and
not able to go back in because of a breach of that levy.
Now, there has been an authorization to have this project
fixed. Unfortunately, there has been this thing called the BCR,
this benefit-to-cost ratio, that really, I would say, prevented
any sort of progress since the authorization since 1966.
However, we were able to get $4.8 million for the pre-
construction engineering and design, and then I am glad to say
with the IIJA, we were able to sort of, at least get past the
BCR in order to get $150 million to get that project started,
but unfortunately, based on last week, it came a little too
late. So we have still got a lot to do to get this project
going.
I guess my question to you, Madam Director, is, are you
still--still--committed to working with us to ensure that we
can complete this project before this community is devastated
once again in a timely manner?
Ms. Young. One, I will tell you I am sorry we were late,
and I am sorry that community has suffered. You are talking to
a South Louisiana girl who has helped many friends and family
pull out drywall. It is devastating for communities, so I am
sorry, but I am happy that the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law
allowed us to put money towards this critical flood control
project, and you have my commitment to continue to work with
you. Benefit cost ratios are important. They are not the full
story. What I have seen, Mr. Scott and others, if you have an
Army Corps project in your neck of the woods, we have got to
look at more than just the BCR. It does not tell the full
story, and when you ask why can't that poor community get a
flood wall project, well, their housing is too low to get a
good benefit cost ratio. Something is wrong with that. You have
my commitment to work on this in a systemic way and a
bipartisan way because it shouldn't matter who sits in this
seat. We have to look at fair ways in which to judge these
projects.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. Thank you, Madam Director. I
appreciate that and look forward to working with you on that.
Just quickly in the 30 seconds that I have, what is OMB's role
in ensuring that the projects from the historic pieces of
legislation that we passed--the IIJA, the IRA--are improved in
a timely manner, and is it possible to speed up the NEPA
process without undermining our environmental protections?
Ms. Young. So we have to work in a bipartisan way to
streamline permitting. The President has been clear about his
willingness to engage here, and we need to do that.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Madam Director. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Arrington. I thank my friend from California. I am
sitting here watching you, observing such good behavior. We
serve on Ways and Means Committee, and I don't mean to be flip
about it, but then I look over and see one Leon Panetta, and
now I understand why you are behaving so well. If that was my
dad, I would be rubbing my backside the whole time with some
tremendous PTSD, but thank you, Jimmy, and now we will yield 5
minutes to my friend, Bob Good from Virginia.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Director
Young, for being back with us again today. Director Young, what
do you believe are the greatest threats to our country?
Ms. Young. There are a lot of threats. One, we talked about
defense and making sure----
Mr. Good. Just kind of quickly, your three or four.
Ms. Young. Yeah, making sure that we have a strong national
defense to protect Americans against international threats. I
also believe we have to be fiscally responsible. We talked a
lot about that today. We have differences on how we get there,
but we have put forth proposals to do that. I also think we
have to look at climate change. We talked about flooding and
seeing the cadence of those hundred-year floods be every 2 or 3
years. So we have a complex environment we have to solve for.
Mr. Good. Okay. So you would identify national defense,
national security as one, the national debt as another or the
spending?
Ms. Young. Yeah, we have to be diligent.
Mr. Good. How much national debt do you think is too much?
Ms. Young. So that is a good question and one I hope we all
take a look at. We believe one thing to look at is real net
interest----
Mr. Good. No, just how much----
Ms. Young [continuing]. How much it costs to service----
Mr. Good [continuing]. National debt do you think----
Ms. Young. I personally don't----
Mr. Good. Excuse me. When does national debt become a
problem? How much?
Ms. Young. I personally don't believe looking at a gross
number tells the story. I think you have to look at percent of
GDP. I think you have to look at the cost of servicing debt.
Mr. Good. Okay.
Ms. Young. Most economists will tell you it is more----
Mr. Good. If I may, how much is our national debt now?
Ms. Young. The national debt, if you look at just public
debt, is a little over $24 trillion.
Mr. Good. Our total national debt is how much?
Ms. Young. If you add in debt that other government Trust
Funds----
Mr. Good. Okay. Our total national debt is how much?
Ms. Young [continuing]. Will take it to over $31 trillion.
Mr. Good. Okay.
Ms. Young. But that is government-to-government----
Mr. Good. And how much does that equate to per American
citizen?
Ms. Young. I have not divided by the number of citizens,
but you know we don't pay the debt that way. We don't go out
and tax individuals like that----
Mr. Good. You are correct that we don't pay the debt. That
is exactly right.
Ms. Young [continuing]. That way.
Mr. Good. We are going to spend more and add to that debt,
so let me help you with that. The national debt is about $32
trillion with 330 million American citizens. It is about
$100,000 per American citizen. What do you think the average
American citizen might say they have gotten for their share of
$100,000 in national debt?
Ms. Young. Congressman, that is a great question and why we
are here today: what investments makes sense for the American
people, and we have a whole suite of proposals about lowering
costs of healthcare and childcare.
Mr. Good. With us at $100,000 in national debt per citizen,
at $32 trillion for 330 million Americans, when would that
become an unsustainable problem? When does that become just a
tremendous national threat that we have got to deal with in
terms of cutting spending? When would that happen?
Ms. Young. Congressman, we are putting proposals forward
today. The President's policies would bring down the deficit by
nearly $3 trillion over 10 years. I know there is disagreement
about those, but it is in black and white.
Mr. Good. You mentioned our debt as a percent of national
GDP. What is the percentage of debt to national GDP now?
Ms. Young. So the percent of debt-to-GDP last year, it was
97 percent. This year we are in, it will be 98.4 percent.
Mr. Good. Okay. It is really about 125 percent because you
are not including the whole $32 trillion when you calculate.
When was the last time that we had national debt as a percent
of GDP as high as it is now? When is the last time in history
we had that happen?
Ms. Young. I will take that back. I am not sure when the
exact level is, but I am happy to answer for the record.
Mr. Good. Yeah. You would have to go back 80 years to World
War II when we had that level of national debt. Do you see it
as a problem? We are not coming out of World War II, the
greatest threat to the globe, to the United States or our
national security. Here we have similar 125 percent debt-to-
GDP, and we are not coming out of World War II. Do you see that
as a problem?
Ms. Young. Well, Mr. Good, I would point out we are coming
out of a historic pandemic, so the----
Mr. Good. Okay. So what was the peak of the spending during
the pandemic? What was the largest amount of budget during the
pandemic?
Ms. Young. What I am saying is we are coming out of----
Mr. Good. No, I would ask you that question because you
referenced it. We just came through the China virus pandemic,
and the highest amount of spending on annual basis was about
how much?
Ms. Young. So I can tell you in 2022, the outlays were
about----
Mr. Good. It was about $6.8 trillion.
Ms. Young [continuing]. $6.3 trillion.
Mr. Good. Highest national deficit ever. How much has the
President proposed now that the virus is over, the pandemic is
over, how much has he proposed in the latest budget?
Ms. Young. As a reminder, this President pays for all of
his policies, so all this spending talked about today, what is
not also noted is that this President has policies----
Mr. Good. The answer to my question is we have proposed a
$6.9 trillion budget----
Ms. Young [continuing]. With taxes on the wealthy to pay
for it.
Mr. Good [continuing]. Which is the largest ever after we
are coming out of the China virus pandemic, so we are proposing
a budget of even more. How much does that $6.9 trillion equate
to per 330 million American citizens?
Ms. Young. I am sure you have the calculation with you.
Mr. Good. Twenty thousand dollars per citizen. Think about
that. The President has proposed to spend $20,000 per American
citizen. What does the average American citizen get for his or
her share? The household of four, $80,000. What are they
getting in return for that share in this President's budget?
Ms. Young. Congressman, this President has asked, as you
know, billionaires, large corporations to pay more, to pay for
these----
Mr. Good. Sadly and unfortunately, there are not enough of
those----
Ms. Young [continuing]. For working families.
Mr. Good [continuing]. To pay for this reckless and
unprecedented amount of spending, and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Ferguson [presiding]. Thank you. Next, we will go to
the gentlelady from Minnesota, Ms. Omar.
Ms. Omar. Thank you. Director Young, thank you so much for
being with us. Just to piggyback off some of the questions that
you were being asked that you didn't really have the chance to
fully and clearly answer, does the President's budget proposal
add to the deficit?
Ms. Young. The President's proposal not only doesn't add to
the deficit, his policies will reduce the deficit over 10 years
by nearly $3 trillion.
Ms. Omar. And in regards to Presidents adding to the
deficit, what historical understanding do you have about that?
Ms. Young. I have mentioned where I used to sit. I have
been in receipt of lots of budgets, and it is not a norm for
Presidents to send up proposals that pay for their, not only
spending and investments, but tax cuts.
Ms. Omar. And would you say that this President has reduced
the deficit or increased the deficit in his proposals over the
last 2 years?
Ms. Young. He presided over a $1.7 trillion deficit
reduction in his first 2 years.
Ms. Omar. And I know that you have continuously repeated
the fact that we find ourselves in this predicament, as many
other countries find themselves in this predicament, because of
COVID. What does that tell us about the fiscal health of our
country in comparison to other countries who have also dealt
with the pandemic?
Ms. Young. That tells us we are much more resilient. We are
seeing 2 months ago over 500,000 jobs added, last month over
300,000 jobs added. Most economists would not and did not
forecast that level of employment growth.
Ms. Omar. And there was a question about what Americans are
willing to invest in. I know that in the last 2 years, we
reduced child poverty by 40 percent. We invested in addressing
the climate change, but I also know that we have been investing
in things like housing, creating affordable housing and making
sure people are able to buy housing. The Minnesota Housing
Agency estimates that it would take $2 billion per year to
secure housing of all cost-burdened, low-income Minnesotans. I
am happy that this budget addresses this financial need and
recognizes this important truth that housing is a human right.
Our State agency has been using Federal and State funds to
develop transformative programs to expand and maintain our
affordable housing stock. One example is Minnesota's
Downpayment Loan Program centered on racial and economic
equity. The Agency hopes to have 40 percent of first-time home
buyer mortgages go to households of color by 2023, and they
actually hit this goal much earlier last year. In my district
alone, almost 60 percent of these loans went to people of color
in Fiscal Year 2022. However, this downpayment assistance
currently relies on State funds and private public partnership.
Federal and State funds have not kept up with demand, so our
State agency has had to make up the difference, which has
constrained their budget.
Could you explain how the President's budget could help
Minnesota narrow the racial wealth gap through affordable
housing and mortgage lending programs?
Ms. Young. I think a lot of Americans still see
homeownership as the path to the American Dream. Lots of
families' wealth is tied into home ownership. That is why this
President feels very strongly that we should do everything we
can to encourage that, including increasing more affordable
housing supply, which we have proposals to do. We also have a
first-time homeowner program. Ten billion dollars in total
would help 400,000 people, and I want to be clear who would be
eligible for that: those whose parents do not own a home, so I
wouldn't have gotten this, and my child won't get this. This is
about putting people on a different path and giving them a leg
up, a little breathing room, as the President says, income
below 120 percent of the area median income and covers their
downpayment and closing costs. So we think that it is
incredibly important to make sure new generations of people,
who have not experienced homeownership and, therefore, have not
created that wealth through homeownership, have a chance.
Ms. Omar. And so you would say these programs help families
that we heard talked about earlier who are overwhelmed with
housing costs and the ability to afford a house. It would help
families be able to feed their children with this budget
proposal, that it would help make sure families have jobs to
sustain themselves.
Ms. Young. At least 400,000 families with this proposal to
start, and it is also critical we look at the proposals that
would encourage the building of affordable housing. We know
there is a housing stock problem in many parts of this country.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Ferguson. Okay. Next, we are going to go to the
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Bergman. General.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Six years ago, there
were a few of us on this dais who joined the Budget Committee
as freshmen. The first document we were given by the
Congressional Research Service was a 24-page document called
The Evolution of Federal Budgeting for us to study as new
Members. I still have that document, and on day one, after
review, I retitled it ``when 2 and 2 cease to equal 4.'' So
when I look at basic math, and there is a joke within the
Marine Corps, ``math for marines.'' It is pretty simple: what
does 2 and 2 equal? So when I ask the questions in our limited
time here in dialogue, if I ask ``yes'' or ``no,'' I would
appreciate a ``yes'' or ``no'' answer. There are going to be
some questions that you will be able to expand on, but I would
appreciate it in the interest of time and the constituents who
are listening to this hearing.
So let's talk about small businesses. Would expanding
Medicare payroll taxes increase the tax burden for small
businesses? Yes or no.
Ms. Young. Not under $400,000.
Mr. Bergman. Would ending the small business deduction
increase the tax burden for small businesses?
Ms. Young. Anyone making under $400,000, no.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So if, as you said earlier this month,
that President Biden would work with Congress to extend the tax
cuts for those making below $400,000 that was first passed as
part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, I mean, that was the
statement. However, this budget assumes that these provisions
will expire, as currently scheduled, in 2025. So are we telling
the folks that after 2025, they are fair game at under
$400,000?
Ms. Young. Mr. Bergman, this is a 2024 budget, but we felt
it necessary to put out a statement of principles because we
know people would be interested. So in----
Mr. Bergman. For that person who is out there, should they
expect that after this, that they are going to be fair game?
Ms. Young. No.
Mr. Bergman. So----
Ms. Young. The budget makes clear that the President would
support extending tax cuts for those making under $400,000.
Mr. Bergman. So we are going to extend them. Is there----
Ms. Young. Those making under $400,000. He is very----
Mr. Bergman. Does the President have a plan for that
extension so that the people as they are starting their
business or raising their family----
Ms. Young. It is in the budget, clearly written, that the
President supports those cuts for those under $400,000.
Mr. Bergman. It is one thing to support. It is another
thing to enact.
Ms. Young. Well, we----
Mr. Bergman. And I would like to move on here because,
again, the kind of questions I get asked by the folks back
home. The President's budget requested a total of $2 billion
for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, and
Explosives to ``increase regulation of the firearms industry,''
among other directives. This is despite the fact that the ATF
is already reaching far beyond their congressional mandate and
pushing new restrictions that violate the Second Amendment.
Will this $2 billion of new funding for firearm regulations be
used to create new red flag laws, greater burdens on lawful gun
owners, blanket bans on assault-style rifles, or elimination of
manufacturer immunity? Will any of those occur under this $2
billion expansion?
Ms. Young. Congressman, I am sure you saw the President
sign an executive order doing as much as we can
administratively to make sure, do whatever we can, to stop
these mass shootings and keep hands of guns----
Mr. Bergman. And the----
Ms. Young. So this money would be used to support----
Mr. Bergman. Yeah, and the mass shootings, and no one in
this room, I know, wants to not do everything at all possible
to prevent this. Last time I checked, the bad guys don't care
about laws. The bad guys don't care about rules. So we can add
laws, and rules, and restrictions all day long, but the bad
people don't, so I would suggest this administration and any
future administration consider what drives the behavior. So
with that, I will yield back.
Mr. Ferguson. Thank you. The gentleman yields. We will next
go to the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Trone. Mr. Trone, you
are recognized.
Mr. Trone. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Director Young, thanks
for your leadership at OMB. I have a number of questions, but
is there anything you want to finish on response to my
Republican colleague?
Ms. Young. I think we've answered, and I thank Mr. Bergman
for that last interaction, but I think we've answered
everything. I don't want to take your time.
Mr. Trone. We are good to go. I applaud the President's
bipartisan unity agenda with Addiction and Mental Health
Priorities 1 and 2, so thank you. President Biden has done more
for this crisis than every other President combined. Every one.
However, we are still losing. We are going to lose a million
folks to addiction overdoses in this decade, or lose about half
as many, 500,000, to suicides. So tell us a little bit about
how this budget prioritizes these important issues, one, and
two, would freezing the budget at 2022 numbers, as the
extremist Republicans have proposed, lead to more lives lost?
Ms. Young. One, there is not one community, probably not
one person--we could throw a stone and hit in this room--who
has not been touched by mental health disease in their family
and addiction issues, and this has been a bipartisan effort to
make sure we do everything we can, and I want to thank the
Members for doing that. This is non-defense discretionary. That
is where we do mental health and opioid grants is out of non-
defense, so if you cut that, that will be cut, but this
President's budget goes further than we have gone before. We
would invest more than $75 billion in a set of key proposals to
transform behavioral mental healthcare in this country, to
address substance abuse and opioids. The budget provides a
combined $1.1 billion, or 30 percent more, for substance abuse
prevention, treatment, and recovery services block grants and
State opioid response grants, and I can go on and on, and I am
happy to provide for the record, but one other thing I want to
point out is the $10 billion in mandatory funding for SAMHSA,
which would be a 40 percent increase to improve our behavioral
health services in this country that are lacking, and also, I
want to work with you and others to make sure we have the
professionals in that system who have left in droves because it
was a tough job during the pandemic to make sure we have the
people to staff the behavioral health clinics and services.
Mr. Trone. Thank you very much. There is no question we are
short on staffing, and we have got to provide the dollars to
get folks who go into these tough areas in behavioral health
and mental health and take these jobs, or America is going to
be much worse off, you know, for it. Another area that can help
Americans is you have a $2.5 billion for ARPA-H. The success
rate, NIH, on grants is 18 to 19 percent. When I talk to
Director Collins, he has been crystal clear for the last 4 or 5
years that should be 33, 35 percent. That means we are leaving
lives, tens of thousands of lives, hundreds of thousands of
lives on the sidelines that aren't going to be saved. So what
would the idea of cutting the 2022 levels do on impacting our
medical research and saving American lives?
Ms. Young. Look, a cut to NIH would take more research
grants off the table, meaning we do less in Alzheimer's,
cancer, diabetes, any of those research institutes where I
started my career as a civil servant, off the table, and the
fewer research grants you do, the less innovation you will see
in the biomedical research area.
Mr. Trone. I am a capitalist through and through, as most
of my Democratic colleagues are capitalists, and to do that,
you have to spend money to save money. Spend money to make
money in business, spend money to save money, and that is what
these votes on ARPA-H were all about, this money. The money for
addiction, the money for mental health, it was all about
spending dollars to save hundreds of thousands of lives, so we
applaud you for that.
The last thing I want to quickly touch is, in business, you
have got to invest in your infrastructure. I was just at a
BOPCJS hearing on the Appropriations Committee, and the
Inspector General talked about the crumbling infrastructure at
the Bureau of Prisons. I saw it firsthand last week at FCI
Cumberland with Director Peters where we spent the day in
Cumberland at the prison, and we see the same thing at NIST.
Our infrastructure is crumbling. The Chinese are beating us.
They have copied NIST 5 times over. We don't have the ability,
and we have to invest in infrastructure.
So this aging construction often gets left behind. It is
not fun. It is not sexy. Members don't ask for it, but we need
to invest in construction issues. So any thoughts on that area
before I close?
Ms. Young. We have $262 million in for construction
facilities at NIST, and just to echo what you said, if we want
to counter China, we also have to take into account our
research space and make sure that we remain leaders in research
in this country.
Mr. Trone. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Ferguson. I thank the gentleman for yielding back and
now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Roy. Mr. Roy, you
are recognized.
Mr. Roy. I thank the Chairman. Thank you, Director Young,
for joining us here today. I would note we have already
acknowledged the 19.6 percent overall percent of GDP revenue to
the Treasury, which would put it at historic highs. I assume
the Director would agree that that is a relatively high
historic percentage of revenue to the Treasury.
Ms. Young. Yeah, we would be in line with where we were in
the mid-90s.
Mr. Roy. But nevertheless, those are very high levels as a
relative basis of percentage of GDP, but we are also
acknowledging that we are increasing spending next year to $6.8
trillion--$500 billion more than Fiscal Year 2023--$82 trillion
over 10 years. Eighty-two trillion dollars of spending over 10
years, but we are trying to praise a $3 trillion so-called
reduction in the deficit, despite the fact that we are spending
$82 trillion.
Here is where I want to kind of go. What are the priorities
of this administration when I look at what I see in the budget?
Here are some of the spending items that are brought to my
attention: $3.9 billion for the Department of Homeland Security
Climate Resilience Program. $3.9 billion because the
administration cares about a climate crisis more than the
crisis at our border. $109 million going to Mexico--Mexico--for
law enforcement and military support, this despite the fact
that our border is overrun and Mexico has lost complete control
along our Southern border. $3.5 billion for the FBI's new
headquarters. $3.5 billion for the FBI to have a brand-new
headquarters in Maryland. $1.8 billion more for the Internal
Revenue Service on top of the $80 billion that was given to the
IRS last year. $1.6 billion for the United Nations Green
Climate Fund, which includes $100 million to go to China--
China--for greening its economy. $108 million for the World
Health Organization, which conspired and colluded with the CCP
to cover up COVID, imperative to CCP propaganda.
I have been combing over the budget to find any reductions
in outlays or cuts in this administration's budget. There are
precious few. Where I could find a couple of actual reductions
was, for example, in reductions to Border Patrol, reductions to
ICE, actual cuts to the spending for those particular programs,
but that is supposedly offset by $4.7 billion for a new
Southwest Border Contingency Fund to respond to migrant surges,
but here is the thing: those are restricted. According to the
language that I see, eligible uses for the funds include soft-
sided facilities, transportation, detention beds, alternatives
to detention, and shelter and services programs to
organizations caring for non-citizen adults. In other words,
that is additional money for more processing with cuts and
reductions to the actual enforcement of the law. Those are the
priorities of this administration.
So one thing that I would like to have at the end of this
is I would like for the OMB to produce for us a list of
specific reductions in outlays throughout the President's
budget because I am combing over them, and I am finding
precious little reduction in outlays, but the only outlay I
could find with serious reductions were to DHS' Border Patrol
and ICE. I would also note that there was $114.7 million for
diversity and inclusion activities at the Department of
Defense. $114 million for diversity and inclusion activities--
the Air Force Academy curriculum that recommended cadets avoid
gendered language, like ``mom'' and ``dad''; a United States
Marine Corps report that was studying whether we should use
``sir'' and ``ma'am'' for our drill instructors; a memo from
the Department of Defense Secretary Austin recognizing
transgender and gender non-conforming persons; the Naval
Academy Admiral that told midshipmen to read How to be an Anti-
Racist by Ibram Kendi; $91,000 for diversity and inclusion
seminars for the Air Force Band; $180,000 salary for a senior
diversity official at the Air Force, which is more than a
Member of Congress gets paid.
And how about Kelisa Wing, who serves as the Department of
Defense Education Activities Diversity Chief, 2020 tweet: ``I'm
so exhausted at these white folks in these PD, professional
development sessions. This lady actually had the CAU-dacity to
say black people can be racist, too. I had to stop the session
and give ``Karen'' the business. We are not the majority. We
don't have the power.'' Are these the priorities of the current
administration to fund the kinds of offices that hire
individuals that use this kind of divisive, racist language? Is
that the priorities of this President's budget?
And you have criticized our plan, some conservatives in
Congress' plan, to shrink Washington and grow America. The
House Freedom Caucus plan wouldn't reduce the deficit by one
penny. Which is it? All I have heard today from my Democratic
colleagues is all the horrifying cuts that are going to occur.
Which is it--because you are going to say that we are not going
to reduce the deficit when you say that we are going to stop a
student loan bailout of $400 billion? You are telling me that
wouldn't reduce the Fiscal Year 2023 deficit, to eliminate a
$400 billion bailout of student loans, that it wouldn't reduce
the deficit if we were to reclaim $91 billion of unspent COVID
money, or $80 billion from the IRS expansion, or $78 billion
from the so-called Inflation Reduction Act's unspent climate
funds, or $270 billion from the Inflation Reduction Act's so-
called energy subsidies, or getting Americans back to work
under SNAP or Medicaid. All of this that we proposed in the
House Freedom Caucus budget would save $4.8 trillion over 10
years.
Mr. Ferguson. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Roy. I yield back.
Mr. Boyle. And, Mr. Chair, since there was obviously a lot
there for the last 3 or 4 minutes, I would ask the indulgence
if the OMB Director could actually respond to some of that, if
she wishes. I think that would be appropriate.
Mr. Ferguson. Yes, we will give just a few seconds to do
what you can on that, Director Young.
Ms. Young. Just a few seconds. There are spending cuts you
have outlined that we have talked a lot about here today.
However, if you continue the tax cuts, which has also been a
stated policy goal, of those making over $400,000 and skew to
the wealthy, you use all of those savings for extending those
tax cuts. That is where the analysis came from, sir.
Mr. Roy. And where in the Freedom Caucus proposal that was
put out publicly was there any mention of the tax cuts? Putting
aside the debate over tax cuts, which is a meritorious debate,
but there was no mention of that. So how can then the
gentlelady say, oh, this is----
Mr. Ferguson. The time has expired on this.
Mr. Roy. Well, the time was extended. The question was laid
out and the allegation was made there about taxes, which is----
Mr. Ferguson. Certainly, sir. I appreciate the vigor of the
conversation. With that, next, we will call on Ms. Balint from
Vermont. The gentlelady is recognized.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Director
Young, for being here. As I am sure you know, this week, the
Republican majority is bringing a bill to the floor that would
put a very large burden on schools and families. It would
condition Federal funding for schools on implementing policies
that will actively harm LGBTQ students, and we are only in D.C.
for a few days this week, and we are spending our valuable time
on a bill that would insert the Federal Government between
parents, and kids, and local schools. It promotes censorship
between--you know--it promotes book banning, it violates the
privacy of young people, and they say it is about freedom, and
they say it is about protecting kids, and I have to ask, you
know, what about book banning is about protecting freedom, and
what about defunding schools is about protecting kids?
And I could tell you, this is not how my constituents want
me to be spending my time. I was back in Vermont last week
traveling around the State, and we talked about a lot of
urgent, urgent issues facing families in Vermont: housing,
mental health, protecting social safety nets like Social
Security and Medicare. We talked about how we have to do more
right now to support mental health in schools, and not one
person, not one, in all my travels around the State advocated
for less funding for schools. I met with so many high school
students last week, and what they told me clearly and directly
is that they need us to support them in meaningful ways,
especially when it comes to mental health supports, and
American families across this country are facing these urgent
problems.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention just
released their Youth Risk Behavior Survey results, and the
results show that teen girls and LGBTQ teens are experiencing
extremely high rates of mental distress, violence, and
substance abuse. Three in 5 girls feel persistently sad and
hopeless, which is a marker for depressive symptoms, and more
than 1 in 4 girls report that they had seriously considered
suicide in 2021--1 in 4. This is a substantial increase from
2011, and we have House Republican leadership ignoring this
epidemic and instead pushing H.R. 5, a bill that stokes the
fire of division instead of uniting us around this issue that I
know--I know--that Republicans across the aisle also care about
the mental struggles of families in their communities. So I
want to know why we are not talking about that more.
Our kids and teens are suffering. We need real investments
in mental healthcare, and as a parent of school-age children, I
can tell you that is what parents are talking about right now.
That is what they are talking about. So I know that Mr. Trone
asked about mental health supports. I wonder if you could go
back to the President's budget and talk a little bit more about
what families and students can look for that will give them
hope in this budget around these issues. Thank you.
Ms. Young. So that sobering reflection makes me want to put
my 16-month-old in a bubble because this is a hard time for
young people with social media, and I think many of us who grew
up after it wonder how we would have done during this time, and
I take this very seriously, and I hope there is bipartisan
support to grow the Title I budget, which says it should not
matter what zip code you live in, you should have access to a
good education in this country. That is an economic argument as
well in addition to just a compassionate one.
We also have increases for IDEA, which has been bipartisan
in nature, and we have a proposal I hope we take seriously on
pre-K, 3 and 4, getting kids educated in the system earlier. We
think it is critical. It is economics. You want more people in
the labor force? Let's educate them, and it shouldn't matter
what zip code. They should have a basic education at a certain
level. So that is what this budget does, and I hope we can come
together and find some common solutions to, in many ways, what
you laid out, a crisis for our kids at that age.
Ms. Balint. Thank you so much. I yield back.
Mr. Ferguson. I thank the gentlewoman. I will next yield
myself 5 minutes. Director Young, thank you for being with us
today. A couple of things. First of all, I have a graph in
front of me that I, without objection, would like entered into
the record, and we will get a copy for this.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ferguson. But it shows the timeline of the actual
passage of the American Rescue Plan and inflation. At its
passage or just before it, inflation was right about 2 percent.
The Congressional Budget Office basically estimated, pre-
American Rescue Plan, that inflation would peak somewhere just
south of 3 percent and level out around 2 percent, and
actually, what we know has happened is that it went above 9
percent and is now back down just below 7 percent. It is still
insanely high, but just to show this, that the amount of money
that was pushed into the system has clearly driven inflation to
a 40-year high.
A quick question for you. When you started early on, I
think you were talking about the energy component, and you said
that American oil companies had $200 billion in profit. Is that
the number that you----
Ms. Young. In 2022, yes, sir.
Mr. Ferguson. In 2022. Okay. Thank you. So also, without
objection, I would like to enter an article into the record
that basically shows that in 2022, Aramco, Saudi Arabia's
largest state-owned oil production company, itself had $161
billion in profit, okay?
So if I go back and look at this and I think about it, if
American oil companies and those producers here in the U.S. are
doing very well, and my gas price at the pump was about half
and my diesel fuel cost at the farm was about half of what it
was, I am much more in favor of those U.S. companies
participating in that than I am Saudi Arabia and so it just
seems that the administration's policies are still generating--
I mean, the world is still going to use fossil fuels. It is
just, are we going to reward our friends in Saudi Arabia, or
are we going to reward American workers working in American
energy?
You know and I go back to the day the President took office
and he killed the Keystone Pipeline, and I am just wondering if
any of those communities have seen any of the green energy jobs
that were promised, okay? I am not saying jobs aren't created
somewhere in America, but when this place makes the decision to
gut part of an industry and then leaves the community broken,
and the response is you are going to be okay, we are just going
to give you a check, I think that is pretty cruel. I think it
is pretty inhumane. I just think these energy policies are
misguided, and the fact that Saudi Arabia's state-owned oil
company had a $161 billion in profit on record, I think I would
be looking more at that and how do we drive those revenues back
to the U.S. for American innovation, American clean energy, and
American energy workers.
I want to go back to also a conversation that we were
having about the labor participation rate, and that labor
participation rate is made up of people that are working part
time, full time, seeking work, and it is low right now, and I
believe that my friend from Wisconsin asked you--Mr. Grothman--
about did the labor participation rate include those workers
that were part time or that would only come in and work 2 or 3
days a week. I am sure that there are people that have
complicated issues with their household finances, but the
reality is, and at least a big part of the 3rd District of
Georgia, we have got a lot of people that will only come in and
work 2 days a week, 3 days a week, whatever it is because they
simply do not want to lose those Federal benefits, and it is a
reality. I mean, I have got my small business owners that are
telling me this, and so I just don't understand how this
administration can lessen work requirements for people to
receive Federal benefits.
And let me just say this too, when you have got so much in
the way of SNAP payments, and food stamp payments, EBT, those
numbers are so great. This story is told time and time and time
again in my district where someone, they buy all the groceries
for the month, and then they turn around and sell the excess
for pennies on the dollar just to get cash. I mean, those kind
of programs don't make sense, and I don't care how much you say
it, it is a disincentive to work. So will the administration
work with us to implement incentives for work that actually get
people back into the business community to raise that labor
participation rate?
Ms. Young. Congressman, we share the goal of increasing
labor participation. We have differences on how we get there. I
will point to one proposal we have that I think it tells the
story: childcare in this country. Women fell out of the labor
market during the pandemic at higher levels than men did, and
one reason they have told us that happened is because they
don't have adequate childcare for their families. We think that
our proposal is a good economic engine to make sure our labor
participation rate goes up.
Mr. Ferguson. Reclaiming my time. That sounds well and
good, except you are driving the labor needed for childcare out
of the market by some of the disincentives. Again, I appreciate
your response. We have to agree to disagree on that, and with
that, my time has expired, and now I will call on the Ranking
Member of Ed and Workforce, Mr. Scott. Mr. Scott, you are now
recognized.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Director Young,
thank you for being with us today. I was told, my staff was
told, that we couldn't use charts, so I can't present the
chart, but if I could, I would present a chart that would show
that every Democratic administration since Kennedy has left
office with a better deficit situation than they inherited, and
that every Republican administration since Nixon left office
with a worse deficit situation than they inherited, and so it
is not both sides, and in fact, what portion of today's debt
was created by the Trump Administration?
Ms. Young. I will say more than 80 percent of debt was
accumulated prior to this administration.
Mr. Scott. Okay, and the Trump Administration, about 25
percent of the total debt?
Ms. Young. Correct, and I just have to point out, Mr.
Chairman, $2 trillion in tax cuts does add to the deficit.
Mr. Scott. Okay, and in fact, in the first 2 years, the
Biden Administration reduced the deficit $1.7 trillion, and
this budget reduces the deficit over 10 years by $3 trillion.
Is that in addition to the $1.7?
Ms. Young. It is. The budget says if none of his policies
are enacted, the deficit would be $2.9 trillion higher than if
the President's policies were adopted.
Mr. Scott. Now, you were badgered about how a slightly
higher deficit could be a reduction. Your reduction is if you
had done nothing.
Ms. Young. If you had done nothing.
Mr. Scott. Compared to doing nothing, your budget deficit
will be about $3 trillion less than what it would have been.
You were also badgered about a 15-percent tax and whether that
is good for America or not good for America. Can you say why
corporations would be more likely to move back to the United
States with that tax than move offshore?
Ms. Young. We have seen corporations leave this country and
go to countries where they have effectively no tax rate. We
believe, and Secretary Yellen has worked with our partners
across the globe, that establishing this minimum global tax
will bring companies back to the United States because those
tax shelters will no longer be available to them.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. You also have been badgered about
evidence that welfare reduces jobs. Are you aware of the
studies that show that if you give a little bit of support to
those who are unemployed today, they are actually more likely
to get a job than if you don't supply that little support?
Ms. Young. That, and as they see jobs continue to be added,
as they see unemployment remain low, those who have stayed out
of the labor market for a long time, we start to see them
return into the labor market.
Mr. Scott. And that has nothing to do with whether or not
they get the little minimum benefits that may be available.
Ms. Young. It is not. I will point out unemployment
insurance may make up half of a person's salary.
Mr. Scott. And, in fact, when some States eliminated the
unemployment benefit under the American Rescue Plan, the
additional $600, when some States eliminated that, were those
citizens more likely to go back to work in those States that
continued the $600?
Ms. Young. So we now have data. Those States who chose to
turn off those benefits saw no more of a boost to their labor
participation or unemployment rates than those that kept the
enhanced benefits.
Mr. Scott. And, in fact, they saw less economic activity
because those people with unemployment benefits were more
likely to spend every dime they got. It goes right back in the
economy and stimulates the economy. Does your budget protect
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid?
Ms. Young. Congressman, Social Security and Medicaid, this
budget ensures that no benefits would be cut, and Medicaid, we
would actually add benefits, for example, for women to make
sure they would have 12 months of postpartum coverage. We have
seen terrible, terrible statistics out of COVID that pregnant
women are seeing a 40 percent increase in deaths, so we are
doing more in that space, and in Medicare we talked about a
lot, we would extend the solvency by at least 25 years.
Mr. Scott. And Social Security?
Ms. Young. Social Security, this budget maintains the
President's ironclad commitment that he will not reduce
benefits.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ferguson. The gentleman yields back. Next, our
colleague from Utah, Mr. Moore. Mr. Moore, you are recognized.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Representative Ferguson. I want to
echo the Chairman's comments earlier in sharing appreciation
for you to reach out to us. Earlier, we had a conversation and
want to continue to keep that dialogue going. We have major,
major fiscal issues in our Nation, and I, and I hope everybody
on this Committee, you know, truly recognizes that, and I want
to just lay out the three big things that we need to be doing,
and I really tried to dig into these three things, and if we
can do this, we can actually get ourselves to some sense of
fiscal sanity, and again, Republicans and Democrats are going
to probably disagree on a little bit of the how, but if we can
at least agree on the three major things.
The first thing is to find wasteful spending, right? That
is, to my opinion, the lowest-hanging fruit in all of budgetary
considerations is to find wasteful spending. I will dig into a
little bit more of this, but it has been the large focus of my
colleagues and I, and I know Chairman Arrington's drive is to
scour the budget, scour what we have done over the last 2 to 3
years, and find areas of just waste that we can easily claw
back, and find ways for improvement, and everything has to be
on the table, right?
So in 2019, and I am going to use OMB numbers, so please
correct me if I have any of this incorrect, but our total
revenues in 2019 were $3.5 trillion. So our total budget was
$4.4 trillion, and what is projected right now for 2024, total
revenues at $4.8 trillion. That is $1.3 trillion more than just
2019, but our expenses, our total budget is $6.4 trillion for,
we are talking, 2024. That is an increase of $2 trillion. From
2019 to 2024, there is a delta of $2 trillion in our total
budget.
Things haven't fundamentally changed that much in our
Nation over the last 5 years. When you had the pandemic, costs
went up. There was a bipartisan approach to that, then there
was the American Rescue Plan, right? I firmly disagreed with
the American Rescue Plan. Democrats will even say that it ties
to inflation. Okay. Let's figure out a way to address that. It
happened. I wish it didn't happen, but it happened, and we need
to come back out of it. We have an opportunity to find waste in
our budgeting.
Number two is the participation rate. The area that I am
really passionate about, and it is something that Utah always
has a really good approach to, is finding ways to lift people
out of poverty. If you are born in the lower 20 percent of
socioeconomic numbers, status, you have the best opportunity in
Utah to get into the top 20 percent. It is probably the thing I
am most proud about from being from my State, and it is because
we incentivize work. We show the dignity of work is what builds
lives, and we are not seeing that right now with what President
Biden is doing. If we are going to brag about going from the
highest unemployment, from 10-plus to 14 percent unemployment
just a few years ago right at the height of the pandemic, and
then brag about being at 3.5 but having more still enrolled in
welfare programs, we've got a problem here because if
unemployment is going down, then the same should be true with
what we are needing from our assistance, and there has to be a
fix there, and so it is participation rate.
And again, doing a hearing on it later. I won't dig into
it, but healthcare costs, right? So we have got to truly find a
way to make healthcare affordable and not just, you know, cap
it here and make someone else pay for it--we are just financing
who pays for it right now--and truly go after these issues:
finding waste, increasing participation rate, and get after
healthcare in a really true, sincere way.
I am going to give you an opportunity. What areas are you
truly finding to be able to cut waste? Like, families have to
do this all the time. What is the Federal Government doing
right now to truly target and cut waste? Anything in this
budget that is clear because the numbers are going up, so we
are obviously not decreasing the numbers.
Ms. Young. So thank you, and you are right. We agree. I
don't disagree with anything you said. Where we have
disagreement on, what we consider wasteful, how you get people
back into the labor market, so we do have disagreements there.
I will point out something I pointed out earlier on, that we
have a choice about. We close loopholes, for example, oil and
gas companies. That loophole closure saves $31 billion. The
choice is would you rather do that or would you rather cut some
of these programs we have spent a lot of time talking about
that are non-defense discretionary. We save $160 billion for
the taxpayers by negotiating drug prices, more of them and
quicker than we did in the IRA in the budget.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Ms. Young. We believe that is also a place we should target
for savings and pay pharma less money. So we do have a
difference.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. So I will have to reclaim because I
am actually over time now, but this is the highlight--we are
saying we agree on the overall principle and where we are
going, and it is the how about where we get there. I would just
encourage us to look at the success we have had. Our revenues
are up. They are at historic highs. You can't not look at the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and not say that contributed. We keep
companies here, we keep them competitive globally, we grow our
revenue. We have to find areas of waste and getting people back
to work. Thank you, Director.
Mr. Ferguson. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
Again, for the record, the article that I mentioned was from
CNBC, Saudi oil giant Aramco posts record $161 billion profit
for 2022. This would be submitted to the record, without
objection.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Ferguson. Next, I will call on my colleague and friend
from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Jackson Lee, you are
recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much. I am sorry, Director.
Can we look at each other? I don't have a direct line here of
being able to see. We appreciate the work that is going on in
this room. Let me thank the Chairman and the Ranking Member for
the time allotted, and thank the Director, the leadership of
the Biden Administration for timely submission of a budget.
Just a question. Have you gotten a budget from Speaker
McCarthy, from the majority in the House?
Ms. Young. You might remember I said I worked here for a
long time, and I will say budgets are congressional documents,
so we would not be in receipt of that, but there are various
proposals floating around. I don't want to speak for the
Chairman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. But you have not seen a final floating
around budget at this time.
Ms. Young. I have not.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Let me get you focused back on
this deficit, and I am very delighted--and I have to go quickly
I see--that the budget lowers the deficit by $3 trillion. Just
a quick response. The deficit could be increasing, but what is
the value of the fact that this budget puts it down $3
trillion, because from my perspective, there is movement and
recognition that we continually, as the deficit grows, we are
still building to take it down. So please explain that.
Ms. Young. So look, the $2.9 trillion, nearly $3 trillion
is a reflection of nothing changed, no policies were enacted,
the deficit would be almost $3 trillion higher than the
President's policies he has put forward.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And could you explain the value of making
the child tax credit permanent for families in America, working
and middle-class families in America?
Ms. Young. Look, it is one of the few programs we get to
say we beta tested in 2021, and we saw the results for American
families, for children who are lifted out of poverty, and this
President believes that that was a good statistic, and we have
seen those poverty levels go back up, which means that the
child tax credit worked, and we would like to see it continued.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And maybe as large as housing, childcare,
where your budget provides a vital infusion of dollars for
childcare for working families, how does it see that being an
economic engine booster?
Ms. Young. I talked about it a little earlier. We saw women
drop out of the labor market during the pandemic at high
levels. Thankfully, we are seeing the return, but if we want to
increase labor market participation for people with young
children, childcare is often an economic burden for those
families, and we would like to do something about that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me follow up with the issue of
housing, 30 percent of a family's income or more. Do you plus
up housing opportunities or housing products to encourage, even
with the lack of supply, how does the budget respond to that
need?
Ms. Young. So we continue to support vouchers because in
some parts of the country where there is housing supply,
vouchers are still needed for families, but we recognize that
many parts of the country and your districts' housing supply is
tight. In some places, they are at crisis level. So we have a
suite of proposals, mainly through tax credits, that would
promote the building of affordable housing.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me do a round robin. I am looking at a
proposed Freedom Caucus budget that wants to go back to 2019
levels, and I am seeing the slashing of veterans' healthcare,
education, healthcare programs gutted $29 billion, defunding of
law enforcement and disaster response. What do 2019 levels
really mean? The country is growing. We have to respond to
that. We are the United States, not an individual State. How do
you respond to that?
Ms. Young. Look, cutting means you do less, and the
discussion will be what is tolerable and what doesn't impact
the economy negatively. This President certainly does not agree
that he would like to see fewer FBI personnel, and that would
mean that. It would mean fewer law enforcement grants, meaning
fewer cops in our communities and fewer Pell Grants. The list
goes on. Opioid crisis we talked about earlier. We can send
less State grants to governors to battle that, and many
nutrition programs.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will move to a next question very
quickly. It is important to have civil rights for all
Americans. For some reason, people think civil rights is a
race-based determination. My school district, the Houston
Independent School District, is being taken over unfairly by
the State of Texas. Civil rights is important for those
children. How are you funding civil rights? And I believe it is
not woke agenda. It is being awake. How are you funding civil
rights entities in the various agencies that respond to
Americans who feel that their civil rights have been violated?
Ms. Young. You know, the Department of Justice Civil Rights
Division, I think most people are aware of, this budget would
seek an increase for that and ensure that we make sure people,
States are following the law when it comes to civil rights in
this country.
Chairman Arrington [presiding]. The gentlelady's time has
expired. I thank my friend from Texas.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I was just going on. Thank you very much.
Chairman Arrington. You bet. No problem.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And I thank the Director very much for her
leadership.
Chairman Arrington. You bet. You bet. Now I would like to
yield 5 minutes to my friend from California, David Valadao.
Mr. Valadao. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you, Director
Young, for your time today. I really appreciate you testifying
in front of the Budget Committee today. I want to talk about
two issues that really hit close to home for my constituents--
first, energy prices, and second, water--and how the President
plans to address these issues in the Fiscal Year 2024 budget.
The President has called on the domestic oil and gas
industry to produce more energy, but the President's Fiscal
Year 2024 budget removes tax deductions on small, independent
oil and natural gas producers. These producers account for over
90 percent of the wells in the U.S. and produce over 80 percent
of America's oil and 90 percent of America's natural gas. These
local producers are ramping up production to meet our pressing
energy needs, while creating high-paying jobs and generating
critical revenue that support our local public services in
California's Central Valley.
The President's budget proposes to end some of the tax
deductions that many of these independent producers use to
maintain depleted wells and invest in exploration for oil and
gas. These are no different from standard deductions a business
takes for the depreciating value of equipment or investments in
research and development. Do you think it is contradictory for
President Biden to call on oil and gas companies to increase
production while at the same time his budget eliminates the tax
deductions and burdens domestic energy producers with
significant tax increases?
Ms. Young. Congressman, I will point out that domestic
production is about a million barrels per day, greater than it
was in January 2021, so we continue to see robust energy
production in this country, and as you know, the debate about
what loopholes to close, what taxes, is countered with what
spending to cut. So we have a choice if we want to get our
long-term fiscal house in order.
Mr. Valadao. So what policies in the President's budget
will encourage oil and gas exploration and spur investment, and
increase supply?
Ms. Young. I will just point out, again, we see over a
million barrels a day more than when the President took office.
We see refinery up more than 28 percent over, than 2 years ago,
so his policies are not getting in the way of production. We
are seeing increased production and refinery.
Mr. Valadao. We are actually seeing a decrease in
production in Central Valley. We are not seeing as much
investment. We have seen it to the point where local
communities have actually had to increase sales tax to make up
for the difference in losses of revenues because of the number
of jobs that were created, the number of investments that were
made, the amount of equipment that was purchased, the amount of
even local revenue to the local businesses, to the point where
they have actually had to raise revenue through sales tax to
make up for the losses because of the lack of permitting
approved, and some of that is State, and some of that Federal.
Sadly, we are fighting it from both sides in California.
And I know that the tax credits are something that the
administration doesn't support, but in the previous comments
from my colleague from Texas, tax credits were mentioned as one
of the ways that you would increase housing by giving tax
credits to people to build more, and I would say the same thing
would work for oil. If you take away those tax credits, you are
going to have the opposite effect of what you are going to do
for housing.
Now onto water. My district in the Central Valley is one of
the many across the Western U.S. that has struggled with severe
drought in recent years. While the last few months have brought
much-needed rainfall to our State, we do not have enough water
storage to capture and store this critical resource. Drought
will be back before we know it, and the people in my community
will once again be asking why we couldn't hold on to more of
the rain we have seen in recent months, and the reason I bring
this up, Sites Reservoir is a reservoir in Northern California
that we have been talking about in California for 60 years, so
longer than my life obviously and a lot of people in this room,
and we can't get those permits approved. Lake Success
Reservoir, not far from me, that is overflowing as we speak
because of all this rainfall, it took 30 years--I was probably
still in high school when they started talking about this--just
for them to be able to expand an existing reservoir 10 feet to
be able to hold some of this water.
And so when we look at the situation where I have now got
neighbors sending me pictures as they are evacuating their
houses, they are evacuating their farms. One neighbor only a
mile from my house, a couple miles from my house, is actually
moving his cows off of his farm as we speak, and so we are
losing all this water out into the ocean. We are losing it into
people's farms, people's homes. We are not able to capture this
water because of the permitting.
This administration is something, and I know this isn't
directly under OMB, but it is something that needs to be
addressed, and I would hope that the President would understand
the value of that water that we are wasting today because that
would help us create jobs for years to come because we would be
able to farm ground instead of the situation where we had over
the last year or two where we weren't able to farm a lot of our
ground because of the lack of water.
So what policies in the President's budget support water
storage, and what is the administration doing to ensure
regulatory red tape is removed so these critical storage
projects can be constructed as soon as possible?
Ms. Young. So I spoke about this earlier, and I know we are
short on time, but one, I think there is room here in a
bipartisan way to work around permitting. Both sides have
plans. Both sides have said they want to do something about it.
We have to sit down and do something about it. OMB has a small
piece of guidance we put out to try to help streamline, but it
is going to take congressional action to do something further,
and you have heard the President talk about this, so I hope the
room opens to be able to have fulsome conversations that result
in changes there.
We do with bill resources, the Bipartisan Infrastructure
Law, put some funding in the West towards drought, and we are
not taking it for granted that the rain will not continue
forever, and we have got to find long-term solutions. Water
Smart is one of the things we are doing, but we know it is too
little, and we have got to figure out something. Forty million
people, I know more than half, are in California who are
dealing with the Colorado River situation alone. So you have my
commitment to work on long-term drought solutions in the West.
Mr. Valadao. Just one thing to note. In the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Bill, one of the reasons why I was very much in
opposition to it was because it specifically was drafted in a
way that would prevent one of our most affordable projects from
being expanded, which is Shasta Reservoir, and why they would
do that in a piece of legislation. I mean, if you are looking
to save money and invest, that would be one way, and in
California, it is always interesting. If they want to build
high-speed rail or they want to build a football stadium in LA
or San Francisco, environmental regulations almost don't even
exist to them, but we talk about a reservoir for 60 years and
can't break ground on it?
Chairman Arrington. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Valadao. Oh. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Very important issue for the West and
the Southwest, and I appreciate the dialogue and the openness
to bipartisan solutions. With that, I would like to yield to
Ms. Wexton from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Ms. Wexton. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and Director
Young, it is wonderful to see you again. Thank you so much for
coming back to join us today. Before I start with my questions,
I do want to comment a little about the comments of the
gentleman from Utah about waste, fraud, and abuse, the three
sisters. I agree that we need to get rid of waste, fraud, and
abuse, and especially waste, but the issue that we are seeing
with waste is that one person's waste is another person's
valuable program.
And for me, you know, it really was driven home to me when
we saw the littoral ships, what happened with them in the 2022
debate over the NDAA. Now, the Navy had wanted to discontinue
this program. They asked that the Littoral Ship Program be
discontinued, but it was a pet project of one of the very
powerful Members of the Appropriations Committee, so then,
oddly enough, it ended up back in there, right? You know, the
Navy didn't want it, so they thought it was wasteful, but this
one Member and her allies thought it was also very useful for
her district, so it remained in there.
So that is, you know, a good example of waste not being
waste in the eyes of all. I believe that some of the issues
that are priorities in this budget, things like cutting
childhood poverty in half by helping women reenter the
workforce and increasing the slots available for high-quality
daycare and high-quality childcare slots, and also high-quality
preschool, the increasing availability of affordable workforce
housing, and encouraging the production of clean and renewable
energy, these are important things that I don't view as
wasteful at all. So I just want to thank the President and you
for getting this great budget to us.
I would ask the question. I just want to thank you for a
couple things included in this year's budget. At the risk of
sounding like a broken record from our conversation last year,
as you are aware, I have a lot of Federal workers in my
district here just out in Northern Virginia, and I do want to
thank you. Every year, I turn right to the employee
compensation part of the budget. I was pleased to see that
President Biden included a large pay increase for both civilian
and Federal workers, Federal workers and military service
members for 2024, and I hope that we can get to that 8.7
percent number. Can you talk about how the pay increase will
help Federal employees and their families in today's economy as
well as how it will boost retention and recruitment efforts at
Federal agencies?
Ms. Young. Congresswoman, one, I know your constituents
thank you for your continued hard work on these issues. I have
heard from you many times and the amplification of the work
that they have done, many of them, you know, who toil without a
lot of thanks. They do it for the mission, certainly not for
the money. I would like to point out the 5.2 percent from
military and civilians is based on a statutory formula, and the
President went with that formula because of the recognition of
the disparity between private sector and public sector has just
grown.
I am not sure if 5.2 percent closes that much, but it is a
first step to accept the recommendations of that formula and
also in recognition of the hard work Federal workers do. Many
of them throughout the pandemic worked in our veterans'
hospitals, on the border, and all of them, including the men
and women at my agency, just worked hours beyond regular hours
to make sure that all of their agencies' talent was brought to
bear during this pandemic.
Ms. Wexton. Thank you, Director Young. I was also really
happy to see that the budget request includes $1.4 billion in
compensation for TSA employees. For too long, they have been
undercompensated, given the work that they do. I want to thank
you for building on the raise that we included in the Fiscal
Year 2023 omnibus. Thank you for that. Also, Virginia's 10th
Congressional District is home to just about every kind of air
traffic control that there is, including we have three
airports, two regional and one international airport with
Dulles Airport. We have a lot of air traffic controllers there.
We have the Leesburg Air Traffic Control Center in Leesburg,
which does basically all the air traffic for the East Coast. We
have got Potomac TRACON in Fauquier County and Warrenton, and
so we have a whole lot of air traffic controllers who work in
this district. What would the impact of a 22-percent budget cut
to the FAA be on air traffic control and the safety of our
Nation's airspace----
Ms. Young. I mean, one----
Ms. Wexton [continuing]. Not to mention what has happened
with bringing back all the air travel. What would happen then?
Ms. Young. So, one, I think we all can agree and have seen
that our air system must be modernized in this country. We have
taken far too long to do that. This budget will put resources
to do that. If we went backwards, we do less, and one analysis
shows that air traffic control would be one of those things.
They are in non-defense discretionary, and our analysis shows
that 125 air traffic control towers would be shut.
Ms. Wexton. How many air traffic control towers?
Ms. Young. A hundred and twenty-five.
Ms. Wexton. That is a whole lot of the air traffic control
that wouldn't be happening. Very good, and as far as
transportation and safety upgrades, we have seen a number of
high-profile accidents and near-misses in international rail
and aviation systems so far this year, and we have also seen an
uptick in pedestrian and cyclist injuries and deaths caused by
drivers in the past few years. I look forward to discussing
these topics with Secretary Buttigieg and Ambassador Nolan in
our Appropriations hearing next month. Thank you very much. I
see my time has expired. I will yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentlelady from Virginia,
Ms. Wexton, and now yield and recognize my friend from, well,
also my friend from Michigan, Mrs. McClain.
Ms. McClain. You need to look up and down the aisles.
Chairman Arrington. I don't know why I was looking for
Fischbach, but Mrs. McClain from Michigan, I yield 5 minutes.
Ms. McClain. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Director Young, for being here. I want to talk a little bit to
get our arms around the statement that you talked about at the
very beginning, right, and it is asking the wealthy and the
corporations to begin paying their fair share. I realize that
we have a progressive tax system in the United States, but I
just want to start with some facts from the IRS. Not right-wing
sources, but the IRS.
So in 2020, the IRS reported that the top 1 percent--the
top 1 percent--paid 42 percent of all the Federal income taxes.
The top 10 percent paid almost 74 percent. So 10 percent paying
74 percent of all the total income taxes, right? Again, this is
information from the IRS. I am trying to wrap my arms around
what is the number that the wealthy and the corporations would
have to pay for you and this administration to feel like they
paid their fair share, and I am asking for a numeric number. Is
it 78, 92, 104?
Ms. Young. Just like I answered your former colleague, the
gross number is not, in my view, the appropriate way to look at
these metrics. We look at these metrics as a percentage of GDP,
for example, and as I pointed out, when we had surpluses in the
mid-90s, we were at about 19.6 percent of revenue.
Ms. McClain. With all due respect, you are a very
intelligent woman. You have done really good work. It is a
great answer to a question that I didn't ask. It is not a tough
question. It is not a difficult question. It is a direct
question. Right now, we have the top 10 percent of the wealthy
and corporations, and let's not forget, it is the economic
system that give us our social programs, right? We don't want
the producers to stop producing because then who is going to
pay? I don't have a money tree in my backyard that I can just
go out and take money. I realize I come from the business
sector, and business could never operate the way government
does because we would be out of business. So with that said, I
am just looking for a really simple number. Do you want the
wealthy and the corporations to pay 82 percent? It is not a
``got ya.'' What is the right number?
Ms. Young. Well, you asked me my opinion, and I told you
that is not how we analyze what policies go here. Let me point
out one thing. The idea, one, that those making less than
$400,000 pay less into the system----
Ms. McClain. Let's stick with the topic, though.
Ms. Young. Sure.
Ms. McClain. And please, and I am not trying to be
disrespectful. I am trying to get to a number because it seems
like you are evading the number. Ten percent of the people pay
74 percent of the taxes. Is it 78? Would that make you feel
comfortable?
Ms. Young. The question is what are those 10 percent worth
compared to the 90 percent of other Americans? What is----
Ms. McClain. Well, 90 percent of the other Americans----
Ms. Young. What is their wealth compared with the 90
percent?
Ms. McClain [continuing]. Pay 24 percent of the taxes. So
should only the top 10 percent pay the taxes and we raise that
number so only the top 10 pay the taxes? I mean, we have a
progressive tax system. It is a numerical number. Why are you
avoiding it?
Ms. Young. To me, the question is, and this is how we
analyze what policies to put out, what are the top 10 percent
worth in this country, and what percentage of their income are
they paying into taxes? What we have found----
Ms. McClain. And the last I checked, we do have a
progressive tax rate, correct?
Ms. Young. What we have found is----
Ms. McClain. Is that correct?
Ms. Young [continuing]. Is that billionaires, some of the
wealthiest families, 400 of the wealthiest families pay about
an 8 percent effective tax rate.
Ms. McClain. And you know what?
Ms. Young. That is less than most middle-class families----
Ms. McClain. We are talking 400 families. I am with you on
that. You should----
Ms. Young [continuing]. Of the top bracket.
Ms. McClain. Right. One-point-five million tax returns are
put into the IRS system for the top 1 percent. We are talking
about 400. I am talking about the other 99 percent, which you
don't want to talk about. So it is a real simple question. I
don't understand why we are dodging it.
Ms. Young. But----
Ms. McClain. I agree with you with the four.
Ms. Young. Yeah.
Ms. McClain. Is it 82 percent? I mean, why is it so
difficult to give an answer?
Ms. Young. Yeah, that is fine. I just think that is not
how----
Ms. McClain. It is because you haven't been able to give us
an answer.
Ms. Young. It is the President's budget, and I am trying to
tell you how we approach these things. I am worried about----
Ms. McClain. So it is the bottom line that counts provided
you do not know how to count----
Ms. Young. I am worried about the 99 percent----
Ms. McClain [continuing]. If we can do a shell game.
Ms. Young [continuing]. Versus the 10 percent who have more
income than the rest of the 90 percent, and they pay an
effective less tax rate than most teachers and nurses in this
country.
Ms. McClain. And I would say, you are talking about 400
people out of 100----
Ms. Young. What are they worth?
Ms. McClain [continuing]. 1.5 million.
Ms. Young. Well, what are they worth compared to the rest
of the country?
Ms. McClain. And what are they paying? Those top 10 percent
are paying 74 percent of what we bring----
Ms. Young. Eight percent of what----
Ms. McClain [continuing]. Of what we bring in.
Ms. Young. Eight percent of their income.
Ms. McClain. We should be celebrating those people.
Ms. Young. Eight percent of their income, which we think is
unfair.
Ms. McClain. And again, this is the problem with the
American people. We refuse to answer the question. We only want
to frame the issue on how we want to frame it. So again, my
disappointment is that, again, we have a very intelligent
person, and we can't get an answer.
Ms. Young. Well----
Ms. McClain. We can't get a numeric answer.
Chairman Arrington. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Young. Thank you.
Ms. McClain. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank gentlelady from Michigan and
now recognize Mr. Yakym from Indiana for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and congratulations,
Ranking Member Boyle, on your appointment, and thank you to
Director Young for being here today.
Inflation is the single biggest issue I hear from my
constituents as I travel the 11 counties within my district.
Seniors can't keep up with the price of food. Farmers, many of
whom from my district are here with me today, can't keep up
with skyrocketing input costs, and the same is true for small
businesses. Families feel the pain at the grocery store and at
the pump. Local governments can't get vital infrastructure
projects done because of the skyrocketing costs. These are the
stories I hear from real people as I travel the district. It is
generally accepted in the economics community that there are
two main ways to lower inflation, and that is to reduce Federal
spending or raise interest rates, and we saw that just
yesterday, the Federal Reserve is taking their foot off the gas
as it relates to interest rate hikes, and so what about the
spending equation from our Federal Government?
Well, as I see the President's budget, it doubles down on
policies that supercharged this generational inflation. It is a
fiscally irresponsible economic disaster, and that stands in
stark contrast with your written testimony, which speaks of the
President's ``commitment to fiscal responsibility,'' because
this budget spends $1.8 trillion in terms of a deficit that we
don't have next year, which is larger than Fiscal Year 2023. It
also calls for $82 trillion of spending over the next 10 years,
which adds $17 trillion to our debt on top of the $31 trillion
that we already have.
And from my vantage point as a father--our oldest child is
13--10 years from now, she will be graduating college and
looking for her first job, and I don't believe it is
responsible to hand her $51 trillion of national debt, and that
doesn't even include some of the budget-busting gimmicks, like
temporarily expanding the child tax credit for 3 years at a
cost of $470 billion, which hides the true cost over 10 years,
which is likely to be closer to a trillion and-a-half. We need
to seriously evaluate out-of-control government spending and
the negative implications that has on everyday Americans.
We have heard from Democrats many times over the course of
the last 3 months about the debt ceiling, and the debt limit,
and the fiscal irresponsibility that it would be to not
increase the debt limit this summer, but I also think about,
and would be curious as to your thoughts, about the debt, and
the spending crisis, and the consequences over the course of
the next 10 years by adding, as the President's budget calls
for, an additional $17 trillion to our national debt.
Ms. Young. Congressman, thank you for that. I will point
out that CBO has given you a baseline, and it states what will
happen to our debt and deficits if nothing else happens. What
the President's budget does is lay out a set of proposals. I
have heard lots of disagreement on those proposals. That is
fair, but he does lay out a set of proposals, many of them
targeting those that make over $400,000, and billionaires, and
hundreds of millionaires, so his investments are paid for. I
get the disagreement, but it would be fiscally irresponsible
had he not put a proposal to pay for his investments and put
some of those savings to deficit reduction.
Mr. Yakym. And you are correct, the CBO does lay out a
baseline, but I think for us as government leaders, both in the
Congress and with the President, it is our responsibility to
figure out how we restore fiscal responsibility to our Nation's
fiscal state. Do you believe that with the President's budget
of $17 trillion of additional deficit spending, which, again,
takes us to $50 trillion of total debt in 10 years, do you
believe that that is the definition of a commitment to fiscal
responsibility, $50 trillion of national debt?
Ms. Young. I feel very strongly, and it is a fact, that
this President's policies, whether you agree with him or not,
will bring down the deficit over a 10-year period by more than
$3 trillion compared to if we did nothing. So this President is
doing something, and I get the disagreements, but he is putting
forth proposals that would bring down the deficit by $3
trillion through tax reform.
Mr. Yakym. Comparing doing nothing is like comparing
ourselves to the worst team in football. I don't think we need
to compare ourselves to doing nothing. I think what we need to
compare ourselves to is what does success look like ultimately,
and I don't believe that it is $17 trillion in debt. Do you
believe that the American Rescue Plan reduced or increased
inflation?
Ms. Young. Congressman, for your last comment, I will just
point out that the President's budget is the only thing out
there, so we are comparing ourselves to if we did nothing. So I
look forward to seeing other proposals, but this is the
President's plan. This is the thing before us. Do I believe
inflation was due to the ARP, I think was the last----
Mr. Yakym. Do you believe the ARP increased or decreased
inflation?
Ms. Young. I believe, and I know you won't like the answer,
that we see inflation across the globe. The ARP was not passed
in France, or the U.K., or the Netherlands, and they see
persistent inflation, often not as bad as the United States.
Mr. Yakym. But do you believe that the ARP increased or
reduced inflation in the United States?
Ms. Young. Look, this President has been clear. Prices are
too high. That is why we have proposals that deal with costs
for American people in this budget: childcare, energy----
Mr. Yakym. So the ARP increased or reduced inflation. I
just want an answer. Did it increase or reduce inflation from
your----
Ms. Young. I am sure it had some impact on inflation, and
as the acting Chair at the time pointed out, it was passed at a
time of lower inflation. However, we believe, given the global
climate and global inflation coming out of the pandemic, supply
chain issues, lack of competition and shipping, for example,
certainly had a greater role because all major economies are
saying inflation----
Mr. Yakym. I thank you for your time today. I thank you for
the call that we had earlier this week as well.
Ms. Young. Thank you so much.
Mr. Yakym. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Yakym. Now I would like
to recognize for 5 minutes my friend from Oklahoma, Josh
Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Young, thank
you. I am at the tail end, so I know you have been through a
grueling process. I am looking at the 2022 budget from the
President, so just to kind of put this in context, we are
talking a couple years ago, and noticing that you all have said
that you are going to save $3 trillion over the next 10-year
window, and the way that you are doing that is you are saying,
the CBO, if we change nothing, gets us to a $20 trillion total
debt load by deficit spending within 10 years, which would put
our national debt at $50 trillion in 10 years, to go from $30
trillion to $50 trillion, and you are saying that we will still
grow trillions of dollars in our debt. We just won't get to $20
trillion. We will get to $17, thus a $3 trillion reduction over
the baseline. Is that accurate?
Ms. Young. That is one way to say it.
Mr. Brecheen. Okay. So in looking at that, we are looking
at the 2022 budget from a few years ago. In the first year
change, you all laid out a 10-year window, and you had $100
billion increase from one year to the next, and then you
averaged about a $15 billion increase year after year. So what
you did was you front-loaded a large increase, and then the
next several years you averaged $15 billion. The reason why I
am pointing that out is in this budget, there is a very similar
tactic that you move from one year to the next of $150 billion,
the next year $75 billion, and then you project a 1.7 percent
increase, which is $35 billion over the next, you know, 7, 8
years. So what you have done is you say we are going to
increase a massive amount the first 2 years, but then we are
going to slow it to 1.7 percent growth of government versus the
first couple of years. If we average it from 2 years ago, it
has been 7 percent.
So my question is this. The greatest predictor of future
behavior is past behavior. How is this not a gimmick, and how
is this leading to a $3 trillion in savings ever going to be
realized when your past is going to predict your future? If you
have averaged 7 percent growth in government, and you say, hey,
we will get our savings in year 2, 3, and 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8 by
only growing 1.7 percent, is that not a gimmick?
Ms. Young. So I will point out our $3 trillion in savings
are heavily tied to our revenue proposals. Those are not plugs.
They are analyzed, scored by career staff at Department of
Treasury mostly. The growth in Medicare, Social Security, and
other entitlements, we get those estimates from our agencies
like the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid. So I say that to
say, you know, our level of being able to manipulate these
things are not high. The vast majority are scored that way.
Now, it depends on how we develop our policies. Are some of our
policies earlier years implementation? Yes, but that is how we
are proposing developing those policies. It is not meant to be
a gimmick. It is just our view of how best to implement them.
Some are actually the opposite way where we slowly ramp up.
Mr. Brecheen. Reclaiming my time----
Ms. Young. Sure. I am sorry.
Mr. Brecheen. Just I am watching the clock, and as a new
Member, I am trying to figure out how to manage my time here,
Mr. Chairman. So I am not saying that other administrations
haven't done this. I would just contend if you look at the
history and look at the future, then at 7 percent, instead of
saving $3 trillion, it actually adds $2 trillion more above the
baseline. So I just contend I think it is a great way to get
the numbers we want for our purposes of looking like we are
saving money, but I contend it is not ever going to be
realized, and it is going to be greater than this.
Let me ask you this. Congressman Norman mentioned $3
billion is going to be added in your budget proposal for gender
equity, climate change mentioned 42 times, LGBTQ mentioned 7
times. You all are taxing on the death tax. You are doubling
the death tax for farmers and ranchers. I am, a little small
ranch. My family lost a sizable piece of property years ago on
my mother's side because of the death tax. You all claim that
you are not going to see a tax increase for those who make
above $400,000. The average rancher/farmer, according to USDA,
makes $92,000 or less. So can you guarantee the American people
that a doubling of the death tax is not going to be borne by
the farmers and ranchers who make, on average, less than
$92,000 per year?
Ms. Young. Congressman, this President has an ironclad
commitment. Those making under $400,000 will not see more
taxes. I think you are talking about our stepped-up basis plan,
and certainly those smaller farms are exempt from that, and you
have my commitment to work to make sure we do commonsense
policies, but we have got to do something to make sure that
larger corporations, no matter what business they are in, pay
more into the system to make sure we can save those small
family farms.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Chair, I will just say I contend that the
small farmer and rancher will pay it. It will be borne by those
who make a small amount of money, who keep assets in their land
value, and I just think it is misguided to think the farmer and
rancher, the average person making a small amount, is not going
to pay this tax. I yield.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Oklahoma.
His time has expired, and I now want to recognize Ms.
Schakowsky from Illinois for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you so much. Director Young, it is
great to see you. Happy to be back on the Budget Committee. As
I know you know, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law that we
passed also included the Build America, Buy America Act, which
I am so happy is part of that legislation, that requires that
all Federal-financed infrastructure projects use American iron,
and steel, manufactured products, and make sure that we really
are buying and building America. In your role at OMB and really
implementing this, I wanted to just say that I think that it is
so critical that the Federal infrastructure programs maximize
the creation of good union jobs at the same time as we are
addressing the supply chain and making it clean and more
secure.
So while I understand that there are some exceptions in the
law of Build America, Buy America, I want to make sure that we
are implementing that in a targeted way, in a transparent way,
and a time-limited way, and so I just wanted to ask you if
there is any update on the implementation of the Build America,
Buy America and taking into consideration what I was saying
about some exceptions.
Ms. Young. If you want to hear the President get excited,
talk about Made in America, and I am happy to say the Made in
America Office, which was established by the President and made
statutory by the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, so I thank you
all for that, is housed in OMB, and for far too long, agencies
would just issue waivers, would buy America without real
analysis to see what products they could secure from American
manufacturers. The President, and I have heard him say it to
his Cabinet over and over, not on his watch, and if there are
waivers, they better be term limited, and they have to have
justification that it would imperil these projects. So we are
very much aligned to make sure that we not only take the spirit
of Buy America, which has been on the books, I think, what, 70
years, but actually do it, and you have our commitment to
continue to work together, be aggressive here.
Let me just give you one example. We worked extensively
with the Department of Transportation to develop their plan for
domestic content participation for EV chargers. That will
support investments in the supply chain, consistent with an
aggressive expansion of domestic manufacturing, because we all
said we wouldn't go down this route of having supply chain
shortages if we ever found ourselves in a pandemic or in other
complicated situations like we see with the invasion of
Ukraine. We need to make more here. We also see the updated
rule increase the percentage of value for manufactured products
from 55 to 60 percent this past fall. It will go up to 65
percent in 2024 and 75 percent in 2029.
Ms. Schakowsky. Good.
Ms. Young. So we welcome the collaboration. I am happy to
take input on where we could do better. We don't want to stall
projects, but people need to look for American products. They
are out there, and agencies have to take the time to find them
when they make sense.
Ms. Schakowsky. So with just a half a minute remaining,
what is an example of something that, at least right now, might
have to be an exception?
Ms. Young. So if we can't find enough minerals, for
example, as we ramp up our battery production in this country,
we might have to bring in some content. But the idea is that
won't be forever and that we need to do more here because we
have seen now that every American now knows what ``supply
chain'' means, and that was not the case before the pandemic,
and we should never find ourselves in that position again.
Ms. Schakowsky. And it would be limited in time, right?
Ms. Young. That is the goal for all of this. As we see our
manufacturing boost, almost 800,000 jobs in manufacturing added
under this President, so as we see these jobs come back to the
U.S., more Made in America, the idea is that will create
systemic, long-term change.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Chairman Arrington. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Great conversation, discussion, but let's now move to my Texas
colleague, senior physician in the House, Dr. Burgess, for 5
minutes.
Dr. Burgess. Well, I thank the Chairman, and I thank you
for your endurance today. I know it has been a long day. You
had a conversation with Senator Romney in the Senate hearing,
and you implied that we are going to need bipartisan effort to
work together to find common ground to save Social Security and
protect Medicare. Is that still an operational statement?
Ms. Young. You see an old congressional staffer here. All
of these things in the President's budget will require Congress
to act, so absolutely.
Dr. Burgess. So sometimes it is a little disconcerting that
some of the rhetoric that comes out directed at people like
myself, who have genuinely worked on this problem for a long
time, being accused of things that are just simply not true,
but I have to ask you, over the last 2 years, have there been
cuts in Medicare over the last 2 years?
Ms. Young. Congressman, there have not been cuts from the
President, presented in the President's budget, or
administratively.
Dr. Burgess. Any doctor in this country that you asked that
question will tell you that they have suffered significant
reimbursement reductions in the last 2 years, on top of a base
inflation rate that is unlike anything that has been seen in 20
years, and that is just simply a fact. So I think we ought to
agree that we can work together. No one's hands are completely
clean here, but we need to be focused on what can be done for
the future. Now, in previous budgets for President Obama and
President Trump, they talked about site-neutral policy in
payments in Medicare, site-neutral payment policy being that it
didn't matter whether the service was delivered in a doctor's
office or a hospital, the reimbursement rate would be the same,
and yet current law is that, under the patient payment rates,
it costs 3 times to do something in a hospital what it costs to
in the doctor's office, but wouldn't you agree that site-
neutral policy is something that we should be pursuing?
Ms. Young. Congressman, I am happy to look at those
proposals. Clearly, that is not reflected in the President's
budget, and yet he has a plan on solvency. So I offer to sit
down and talk to you about those, but those are not reflected
in the President's budget.
Dr. Burgess. Correct, and it was curious to me why the two
previous administrations talked about a site-neutral policy,
and this administration did not. Look, the fact remains over
the last 2 years, House and Senate Democrats and the
administration worked together on mammoth reconciliation bills
that didn't include any Republican input, raided money, $300
billion, from Medicare to pay for Green New Deal programs. Why
was it not a priority to fix these problems that you are now
talking about? Why was it not a priority to fix these problems
while the Democrats were doing their reconciliation bills the
last 2 years?
Ms. Young. Congressman, it is extremely beneficial to the
taxpayer and to seniors, the prescription drug benefit seen in
the Inflation Reduction Act, so we absolutely did address
Medicare in a substantial way. Seniors will not only see
reduced out-of-pocket costs, but also the taxpayer will because
we will pay less.
Dr. Burgess. Yeah. Just suffice it to say there is a
difference of opinion on that, and there is a difference of
opinion on what it does to the downstream effects of
innovation. However, those cuts that occurred in the Part B
Program basically affect physicians' offices, and those dollars
saved were basically used to go to pay insurance companies in
the Affordable Care Act, and it increased subsidies of the
Silver Plan in the Affordable Care Act, and it is that
fundamental unfairness that makes people suspicious of what the
administration has in store, what it has in the plan when it
talks about the future for Medicare and Social Security.
Ms. Young. Well, I hope they look at the budget because we
are very clear. It moves the net investment tax to the Trust
Fund. It raises the tax from 3.8 percent to 5 for those making
over $400,000, and that is laid out very clearly for those who
are concerned about what our policy is, and those policies will
extend the solvency by 25 years at least.
Dr. Burgess. But to look at other policies, like a site-
neutral policy, perhaps as the way the purchase of prescription
drugs occurs in CMS. There are other programs, there are other
approaches that would yield real savings right now, and it
seems like the administration is not interested in pursuing
those. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Texas and
now recognize Mr. Buddy Carter from the great State of Georgia.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Young, thank you
for being here. I appreciate it very much. This is actually the
third time that I have had the opportunity to ask you questions
since I have been on the Budget Committee, and I am sure you
don't remember, but the first 2 times, I made it clear that I
don't agree with the President on his priorities and spending.
I understand it, but certainly we have our differences on that,
but I think that we do agree that we should be protecting
Americans and protecting our citizens, and our number one
responsibility to the Federal Government is to protect our
homeland and protect our citizens.
And that is why I am so concerned about what is going on
down at the border, the Southern border, the Southwest border.
You see, I am a pharmacist, a healthcare professional, and, you
know, we are losing upwards to 300 people every day as a result
of drug overdose, much of it fentanyl poisoning. Poisoning. Not
overdose. Poisoning, not addiction, and it concerns me. Listen,
I can rattle off the figures with you, you know: 1.9 billion
people. That is enough to kill, fentanyl in our country, enough
to kill 1.9 billion people. You know, it has gotten so bad, if
you will look here, Ms. Young, I actually carry naloxone in my
backpack. You know, this will reverse the effects, if used
quickly enough, of fentanyl, and I actually carry it my
backpack everywhere I go.
And I believe there are two things that we have to do in
order to address this problem with the fentanyl poison in our
country. One is that you got to stop the supply, and most of it
is coming from the Southern border, and secondly, I want to
make sure that we have access to this. There is enough over
here now that we have got to make this available without a
prescription. We got to remove the barriers. This ought to be
like syrup of ipecac anymore. It ought to be in every medicine
cabinet, every emergency box. Where you see a defibrillator,
you ought to see that. That is how bad that problem is now.
That is why it baffles me that, that this budget seeks to spend
3 times as much money on zero-emission vehicles than combating
the fentanyl crisis. Can you tell me how this budget addresses
the fentanyl crisis in any serious way?
Ms. Young. Sure. Congressman, you have heard me rebut the
cut narrative on DHS, and I will continue to point out that DHS
grows by over 9 percent, but specifically on the border with
fentanyl, I think we have some common agreement here. I have
been to the border. I have seen them pop off the sides of cars
and drugs packed to the hilt. The cartels know that our land
ports of entry, because that is where most of the drugs come
through, don't have the technology in place to track, so they
are willing to drive things through, lose some of their goods
because they know they can get enough through. What are you
doing to get that equipment?
Mr. Carter. That is what I am asking.
Ms. Young. And we have----
Mr. Carter. And I appreciate the fact that you know, and I
hope you are communicating that to the administration.
Ms. Young. And that is why we have money to continue, and
thanks to the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, we have land ports
of entry money. This would add more of that NII equipment to
make sure we are scanning more cars that come through the
border, Congressman.
Mr. Carter. If you will, Ms. Young, I have been to the
border 7 times since I have been a Member of Congress, and the
last time I was there, we were told that only 5 to 10 percent
of the fentanyl that is coming in over that border is coming
through ports of entry. Now, granted we may be capturing 97
percent of that at the port of entry, but that is 97 percent of
only 10 percent of the total fentanyl. So what are we doing to
secure the border to stop fentanyl coming across that border to
stop killing our citizens? What does this budget do to address
that?
Ms. Young. One, I am happy to talk offline about your
analysis. Mine is that most fentanyl is coming through the land
ports of entry, so technology will help. What we also need to
do is make sure we are supporting the men and women down at the
border. This budget funds CBP to hire 350 more Border Patrol
agents. We have a border surge plan that I have not heard much
interest in taking up, but we think it is novel. As migration
flow changes, we are asking that, depending on how many
migrants are coming across, more money is released to help us
deal with what will most likely be an increase flow----
Mr. Carter. Okay. That is fine, but I am failing to see how
we are addressing this because we are allowing American
citizens to be killed as a result of fentanyl poison. You know,
if we were to lose 300 people in a plane crash, we would stop
every plane from flying right now until we got it fixed, yet we
lose 300 people every day to fentanyl poisoning, and we don't
do anything about it at the border.
Ms. Young. We agree with you, Mr. Carter. That is why we
have money here to help stop the crossing of fentanyl and to go
after these cartels. We agree with you.
Mr. Carter. I don't see it in the budget, though.
Ms. Young. After this, we can go through it, and I will
show you----
Mr. Carter. I will be glad to because I need to know that
this administration is serious about this.
Ms. Young. I have worked on these issues a long time, and I
am happy to work with you.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you to the gentleman from Georgia
and would like to recognize now my friend from Kansas, Mr.
Estes, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Director
Young, for being here. I know it has been a long day for you
and some of us coming in and out and going through the process.
So I just want to skim the surface on two or three things and
then a deep dive on a couple.
I mean, one of the things when we passed the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act was intentionally addressing companies being motivated
to leave the United States because of taxes, and we were seeing
a lot of inversions, and even the Obama Administration,
President Obama before President Trump came in, was talking
about how bad inversions were, and since the Tax Cut and Jobs
Act was passed in 2017, there have been no inversions,
companies leaving United States through that process, and that
was the intention of making sure that we do that.
So I am really concerned, some of the things in the budget,
going through and adding taxes back and defeating some of the
value that was in that program of helping make companies stay
here, and particularly, as we talked about, I mean, one of the
things talked about, raising a trillion dollars from the global
minimum tax under the theory that it would prevent a race to
the bottom in taxes around the world when, in reality, the
underreporting process is going to allow other countries who
have passed that law, which nothing has been brought before
Congress yet to be able to change U.S. tax law, to have that
process. So I am really concerned that the numbers in here for
revenue are going to be worse than what moves forward.
And part of the reason why that bothers me is, you know,
this past year, this current year, we are borrowing $1 out of
every $5 that we spend. I mean, $1 out of $5 we spend, and the
budget that is proposed for next year, $1 out of every $4 that
is spent is borrowed, and to me, it looks like, as I go through
the math, you are saying that the deficit is reduced by $3
trillion, but I just don't see that. When I look at the
numbers, I look at S.1, the table in the budget, and it talks
about a $1.5 trillion deficit this year. Next year that goes
up. The next year it goes up. A couple of years are stable,
right about the same as this year, but then it goes up and goes
up and goes up, and, you know, over the 10-year period, on that
Table S.1, it says that the deficit is increasing by $17
trillion. So I am wondering where the claim is that it is $3
trillion less when it is going up to $17 trillion over the 10
years.
Ms. Young. Congressman, if you look on S.2--we have S-
tables--I would point out if you look on S.2 at the bottom,
total proposals in the 2024 budget shows the year-over-year
deficit reductions, and it adds to $2.9 trillion of the nearly
$3 trillion we have talked about over many hours in this room.
Mr. Estes. Right, but if you look at the debt, it actually
continues to go up. Just because we didn't raise the deficit
$20 trillion, we can't claim that as a $2.9 trillion savings
because we are raising the deficit by $17 trillion.
Ms. Young. You can. I mean, yearly deficits, yearly, feed
into the debt, and you can't make deficits worse. It will make
the debt problem worse. So it absolutely does help get our
fiscal house in order to save $3 trillion with the President's
policies.
Mr. Estes. But it doesn't save $3 trillion. It just means
we spend $3 trillion less than we could have spent on other
avenues----
Ms. Young. The savings.
Mr. Estes [continuing]. Because the debt actually continues
to go up in this next 10 years, the breakdown for that. So I
know a lot of discussion around that. I don't understand that
math, that process going through there.
I do want to hit one other quick point. I know this is real
quick to go through in 5 minutes, and you have been hit with a
lot of different issues, but one of the things we talked about
earlier was Social Security, and I don't see anywhere where the
President proposes to save anything on Social Security. I mean,
you know, all the projections are out there that within 10
years, the Trust Fund will be depleted, that at that point in
time, the projections are there will be a 23-percent cut in
monthly payments. So if you are making $1,000 a month in your
Social Security payment, you will drop down to $770. So what
has the President done to fix that?
Ms. Young. So, Congressman, as we sit here in 2023, we
absolutely--the budget speaks to this--want to work with people
in Congress who have solutions for the Trust Fund running out
of solvency in 2033. Today, unfortunately, we believe the
largest crisis is those who have, as the Ranking Member pointed
out, had policies that would cut Social Security benefits. This
budget says the President will not do that.
Mr. Estes. Okay. So if I look at this, there is really
nothing in there that helps Social Security over the next 10
years.
Ms. Young. It helps seniors not lose benefits.
Mr. Estes. We will have to do that work.
Ms. Young. Yeah.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, and I yield back Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Kansas and
now yield 5 minutes recognition to Ms. Stephanie Bice from the
State of Oklahoma.
Ms. Bice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Boyle,
for hosting this hearing today, and thank you, Director Young,
for being here. It looks like we are close to the end.
Ms. Young. So are we. [Laughter.]
Ms. Bice. In Ranking Member Boyle's opening remarks this
afternoon, he questioned or suggested that the U.S. Senate
would be considering cutting Social Security, and he read a
list of Members, but I didn't hear a single House Member
mentioned, and in fact, Speaker McCarthy and Republican
leadership have expressly stated that they are not interested
in cutting Social Security benefits. So I find it a bit
insulting that the other side of the aisle would be so
disingenuous to sort of suggest that that is on the table. No
Member that I am aware of here has filed legislation----
Mr. Boyle. Sorry. Would the gentlelady yield just for a
second since she invoked my name----
Ms. Bice. I would not. I want to finish my line of
questioning.
Mr. Boyle [continuing]. Because I do have the quotes right
here if she wanted them from House Members.
Ms. Bice. And I wasn't allowed to finish, Representative
Boyle. There has been no legislation filed to suggest that
Social Security benefits are going to be cut. I find it
disingenuous to speak to such thing.
America is facing serious questions about the future with
the budget, the debt ceiling, and markets being on the
forefront of my constituents' minds. The President's answer to
the budget is to make history by raising spending to the
highest sustained level in American history, by increasing
taxes to the highest sustained level in American history, and
by bringing our Nation's deficits to the highest sustained
level in American history. This is not the direction the
American people want to see our Nation go, and this budget
shows the President is out of touch and doesn't care.
I want to pivot to energy. It is important to the State of
Oklahoma. The Small Business Administration recently filed
comments critical of EPA's oil and natural gas methane rule.
The comment letter states that EPA's proposal will have a
significant and disproportionate impact on small businesses.
Oklahoma has many small businesses that are part of our oil and
gas sector. The EPA's proposed rule will have a devastating
impact on the future viability of those businesses. OMB will
have an opportunity to weigh in on the EPA's rule before it is
published. What will you do to protect small businesses from
unreasonable and harmful aspects of the EPA's methane rule?
Ms. Young. So, Congresswoman, I am unaware of the letter. I
am happy to look at whatever you received. Was it from the
Small Business Administrator?
Ms. Bice. I believe that is correct.
Ms. Young. I would be surprised by that, but I am happy to
look at that, and when it comes into OMB, as you know, it will
be an OIRA, the regulatory office, review. We would not comment
on how we review that regulation. That would be improper. We do
take--as part of the 12866 process, from Members of Congress,
from outside organizations that have an interest in the rule,
we do offer meetings to make sure that all of their positions
are known and put into the record. So I promise you we will
follow that process and make sure we have a robust 12866
process.
Ms. Bice. Thank you. In response to Representative
McClintock's questioning earlier, you suggested that oil and
gas companies have made record profits this last year and
should pay their fair share. Is that accurate?
Ms. Young. A little more nuanced, but I said profits were
$200 billion last year, and----
Ms. Bice. Can you share with Members of this Committee what
the total losses for oil and gas companies were in 2020?
Ms. Young. I do not have that, but I----
Ms. Bice. Okay. Would you be surprised to know that with
just the five integrated super majors--ExxonMobil, BP, Shell,
Chevron--in total, the posted combined total losses for those
five entities was $76 billion in 2020, in one year, and the
reason I bring that up is that it is surprising to me that this
administration would think that taxing the oil and gas industry
would be a viable option in raising revenue. As you know, yes,
oil and gas companies have been able to make a profit this last
year, but this is a cyclical market.
I come from the great State of Oklahoma where 25 percent of
our State revenues come from oil and gas. Some years it is
great. Some years it is really bad, and 2020 was one of those
years. There were a record number of bankruptcies in the oil
and gas industry, a record number of job losses, and so to
suggest that taxing the oil and gas industry is a way for you
to be able to have a bigger budget and to a larger spend, I
think is a detriment to the American people because at the end,
that is going to require us increasing goods' and services'
cost, and that is a hit to Americans' pocketbooks.
So, Mr. Chairman, with that, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentlelady, and I would
like to yield 5 minutes to my friend Chuck Edwards from North
Carolina.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Director Young, thanks
for being with us this afternoon. I am not going to ask a lot
of questions about the budget. I know my colleagues have dug
into that quite thoroughly and certainly exposed it for what it
is. I have got two questions. One is going to be fairly simple,
the other might not. We heard the Ranking Member earlier this
morning mention that perhaps billionaires were not paying their
fair share. Do you recall that statement or something similar
to that?
Ms. Young. I do.
Mr. Edwards. And yet this budget places new taxes. Not only
does it raise taxes on the middle class by about $2,000 per
year, but it places new taxes on anyone making more than
$400,000 a year. Is that right?
Ms. Young. Yes, including to extend Medicare, but not on
middle-class families. Middle-class families don't make
$400,000.
Mr. Edwards. Okay. So let's talk about that for just a
minute. If our concern is with billionaires, why was $400,000
the number that was chosen to draw a line and add a new tax
bracket?
Ms. Young. Congressman, I think, and I don't want to speak
for the Ranking Member, but I will speak for the budget. One
tax proposal to raise revenue is a billionaire tax. It also
deals with hundreds of millionaires. That is one. Another goes
after large corporations, not taking their tax rate back to 35
percent before the 2017 tax cuts, but to 28 percent. So I think
we were talking about one particular focus, which was what we
call the billionaire tax, but the President has made an
ironclad commitment, while you continue to hear $400,000, is he
wants to make sure he communicates clearly to the American
people that none of these tax policies that are up for debate
will he negotiate to raise taxes, including when we go to the
extension of the 2017 on those making under $400,000. It is a
value statement.
Mr. Edwards. But it does raise taxes on farmers and small
businesses that might make $400,000, and I think that you hit
the nail on the head when you said that the ``intent of this,''
and I think this is most conservatives' problem is to raise
revenue that I know my colleagues have pointed out that this
government, this body should not be spending. Are you a small
business or a farmer?
Ms. Young. I am not either. Just a child and grandchild of
one.
Mr. Edwards. Okay. Are you aware that folks in those
positions that grow our country's food, that provide jobs for
Americans, do not have a regular income? They don't make
$400,000. Even if they make $400,000, they don't make it from
year to year to year. Are you aware of that? I said I would
only ask one question.
Ms. Young. Yeah.
Mr. Edwards. Okay.
Ms. Young. No, I am well aware that many assets are not
income and are land and other equipment.
Mr. Edwards. So I have asked one of my two questions. I am
going to try to keep it to just two, but I do have some
comments and I am going to ask you a question about in just a
minute because you and I here are both messengers. You are
messaging the President's budget. I am messaging on behalf of
small businesses, farmers, and folks in my district, and my
gosh, 5 minutes goes so fast. The reality is many years, folks
are struggling, and they have to go take out loans to keep
their business afloat, and to draw a line at $400,000, because
everybody is looking for that breakout year, to draw a line at
$400,000 is punitive to those folks for accomplishing what they
want to, which is to have that breakout year.
And after businesses and small farms have gone through what
they have gone through, and let's run through that real quick.
After enjoying the strongest economy ever under the Trump
Administration, they were hit with a pandemic. Many of them
were forced to close. They were hit with inflation. The
correction for the inflation was that interest rates needed to
be raised. Now they are paying more on their debt in addition
to the items that they were hit on inflation, and now they are
being told that they are not doing their part, that they are
not paying their fair share. I suggest that is a slap in the
face to small businesses and farmers, and it cripples growth,
it stalls our economy, and it limits the possibilities for our
American workforce, and my question is as a messenger, would
you take that back to the President?
Ms. Young. I will, but if I can, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. Please.
Ms. Young. I know we are over time.
Chairman Arrington. Please.
Ms. Young. With regard to American farmers, and I feel
strongly about this, and I have talked to Secretary Vilsack. As
you know, he has done this a long time, so I am privileged to
be able to serve with him in the Cabinet. You know, we have got
to do something where only 10 percent of farmers make money in
this country. What can we do to make sure these family farmers
stay around? So you have my commitment. If we want to find
solutions, they are going to take bipartisan effort. I know the
farm bill is coming up this year. What can we do to make sure
these family farmers stay around? So I commit to working with
you and others, and Secretary Vilsack and others, to look at
how to reauthorize the farm bill coming up this year.
Mr. Edwards. I would say we are talking about more than
farm. I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Chairman Arrington. I thank my friend from North Carolina,
and the time now has come, as much fun as I know you are having
and would love to go for another 2 hours. I don't mean to put
words in your mouth, Madam Director, but you have done, I have
to say, an outstanding job just persevering through the
questions. The President, I think, is well served by your
candor and your constructive tone, and, you know, for our first
hearing, Ranking Member. I want strong debate. I don't want us
to back down, shy away, pull punches. I just want it to be
about the policy differences, and I want the American people to
understand where we disagree and why we disagree, and the
principles behind it, and the policies behind it, and then let
the democracy, you know, have its effect, and I know you are
committed to that, too. In the spirit of civility----
Mr. Boyle. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Why don't you give some
closing remarks? I will give just a few, and we will let the
good lady go about her way.
Mr. Boyle. I am happy to. First, if we learned just one
thing over the last 3-and-a-half hours is that Shalanda Young
knows her stuff, so thank you for being so knowledgeable about
the budget, a consummate professional. It is an honor to work
with you. I also congratulate you, Chairman, chairing your
first Committee hearing. Between this session and the session
that we moderated in the CVC for all House Members of both
parties with the CBO Director, I think both were, by and large,
conducted on a bipartisan basis and were informative. So I hope
and believe that we have set a tone for hopefully the rest of
these 2 years.
One final comment I will make is I understand Director
Young has to do this all over again this afternoon in the
Senate.
Ms. Young. I do.
Mr. Boyle. I believe the----
Ms. Young. The House Approps is doing this to me.
Mr. Boyle. Oh, House Approps? I believe the Constitution
has an amendment banning cruel and unusual punishment, so,
Director Young, you might have a lawsuit that I would support
if you pursue it, but with that, I yield back to you.
Chairman Arrington. Well, I thank my friend from
Pennsylvania. Just a couple of comments because it was
mentioned multiple times about the Republicans' vision, budget
framework, and the values that that will reflect in comparison
or contrast with the ones that were articulated by you and
discussed by our Members today. Our commitment is there to get
that budget framework out, to have this same robust debate,
and, again, to make that comparison about our vision for a
stronger, safer, freer country, and to address probably most of
the problems we agree on in terms of the needs, but probably
disagree, and I know for me, in many ways, starkly disagree
with how to address those, how best to address them to satisfy
all stakeholders, and the public interest, and our taxpayers as
fiduciaries.
So that is forthcoming, and I commit to that to my Ranking
Member and to my colleagues, and the principles will be reining
in spending because we believe that is a big problem, and we
believe we can't get to the debt and we can't guarantee our
children that blessing of security, and a stable economy, and
future without doing it. We also commit to growing the economy,
among other things that I hope will be clear about our budget,
but thank you for your time, and your long suffering, and your
great attitude.
And with that, I will read my little remarks here. We have
got to get a bigger gavel----
Ms. Young. Oh yes. [Laughter.]
Chairman Arrington. This is so disrespectful to a Texan. I
think you know that as a good Louisiana country girl. This is--
--
Ms. Young. It is not right.
Chairman Arrington. This is not right, so we will let it
slide this time. I want to thank the Director again for
appearing today.
Please be advised that Members may submit written questions
to be answered later in writing. Those questions and their
answers will be made part of the formal hearing record. Any
Member who wishes to submit a question or any extraneous
material for the record may do so within 7 days, and with that,
the Committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
