- EXAMINING THE NEED FOR A FISCAL COMMISSION REVIEWING H.R. 710, H.R. 5779, AND S. 3262

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE NEED FOR A
FISCAL COMMISSION
REVIEWING H.R. 710, H.R. 5779, AND S. 3262

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., November 29, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-7

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-417                     WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania,
TOM McCLINTOCK, California             Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   BARBARA LEE, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         JIMMY PANETTA, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DAVID G. VALADAO, California         ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota,
RON ESTES, Kansas                      Vice Ranking Member
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma          DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            BECCA BALINT, Vermont
MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota        ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
RUDY YAKYM III, Indiana                  Virginia
JOSH BRECHEEN, Oklahoma              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Professional Staff

Gary Andres, Staff Director
Greg Waring, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

Page
Hearing held in Washington, D.C., November 29, 2023..............     1
Hon. Jodey C. Arrington, Chairman, Committee on the Budget...     2
Prepared Statement of....................................     5
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget.....................................................     7
Prepared Statement of....................................    10
Hon. William Timmons, U.S. Representative for South Carolina
District 4, statement submitted for the record.............    14
Ms. Romina Boccia, Director of Federal Budget and
Entitlements Policy, Cato Institute, statement submitted
for the record.............................................    16
Staff to the 1981-83 Commission on Social Security Reform,
statement submitted for the record.........................    19
Hon. Bill Huizenga, U.S. Representative for Michigan District
4..........................................................    29
Prepared Statement of....................................    31
Hon. Scott Peters, U.S. Representative for California
District 50................................................    33
Prepared Statement of....................................    35
Hon. Steve Womack, U.S. Representative for Arkansas District
3..........................................................    37
Prepared Statement of....................................    38
Hon. Ed Case, U.S. Representative for Hawaii District 1......    41
Prepared Statement of....................................    43
Hon. Jim McGovern, U.S. Representative for Massachusetts
District 2.................................................    45
Prepared Statement of....................................    47
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, U.S. Representative for Pennsylvania
District 11................................................    50
Prepared Statement of....................................    52
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................    56
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   161
Hon. Jack Bergman, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   182
Hon. Joe Manchin, Senator for West Virginia..................   185
Prepared Statement of....................................   188
Hon. Mitt Romney, Senator for Utah...........................   190
Prepared Statement of....................................   193
Hon. Brendan Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   198
Hon. Brendan Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   200
Hon. Brendan Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   203
Hon. Brendan Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   204
Hon. Brendan Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   206
Questions submitted for the record...........................   214
Answers submitted for the record.............................   218

EXAMINING THE NEED FOR A
FISCAL COMMISSION
REVIEWING H.R. 710, H.R. 5779, AND S. 3262

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon Building, Hon. Jodey Arrington [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Grothman, Smucker,
Burgess, Cline, Good, Bergman, Ferguson, Moore, Estes, Bice,
McClain, Fischbach, Yakym, Brecheen, Boyle, Schakowsky,
Blumenauer, Peters, Panetta, Scott, and Espaillat.
Chairman Arrington. The hearing will come to order. Today's
hearing will focus on the need for a fiscal commission. We will
discuss several legislative proposals to create a fiscal
commission and hear testimony from several of our capable
colleagues who have introduced legislation in the House and the
Senate. The Senate panel will follow the House panel. We will
have the colleagues testify this morning from the House.
Leading off is my dear friend Bill Huizenga from Michigan,
serves on the Financial Services Committee, and my other dear
friend, Scott Peters. Both of them are chairing, they are co-
chairs of a bipartisan caucus that focuses on how to reform
this dysfunctional budgetary process so we have more
responsible behavior by Members of Congress, better motivation
for a greater and more responsible outcome for the American
people. So, I appreciate y`all's leadership there. They have
introduced together, H.R. 5779, the Fiscal Commission Act of
2023.
Representatives Steve Womack and Ed Case join us as well.
Chairman Womack from Arkansas is chairing the Financial
Services and General Government Subcommittee at the
Appropriations Committee, former Chairman of this august body
and a mentor of mine, and I am grateful that you continue to
provide your insights to our Committee to give us the best
chance of success, and Ed Case, a great Member from Hawaii and
a leader on this issue. Mr. Case and Mr. Womack have introduced
H.R. 710, the Sustainable Budget Act, and we appreciate their
input and their leadership over the years on this particular
issue.
Then we have with us Representative Lloyd Smucker, our very
own from the Keystone State who serves not only on Ways and
Means but also this Committee, and has had an experience with
commissions, solving big problems, and he served as chair of a
commission in Pennsylvania that was successful, believe it or
not, and we want to learn about the best practices so that we
can construct a commission that will ultimately work.
As a friend of mine said in Washington, when all is said
and done, more is said than done, and we don't have much more
runway, Mr. Chairman, to talk about this issue and to not do
anything about it for the sake of our beloved country, its
future, and our children's future in America.
Jim McGovern is another leader on a number of issues. He is
our Ranking Member on the Rules Committee. I say our because we
are all on one team. This is not a Republican or Democrat
problem. This is America's problem. It is our problem, and we
have got to figure out how to solve it.
The second panel will include Senator Mitt Romney from Utah
and Senator Joe Manchin from West Virginia. They have
introduced Senate Bill 3262. I think it is the companion bill
of Mr. Peters' and Huizenga's, called the Fiscal Stability Act
of 2023. We look forward to hearing from them as well.
At this time, I would like to yield myself as much time as
I may consume for an opening statement, and I don't like to
read opening statements. It is tattooed on my heart, this
issue, like I know it is for you all as our witnesses and many
in this room who are deeply concerned about the bleak, fragile,
and rapidly deteriorating fiscal state of affairs in the
greatest Nation in human history.
Let me start by again thanking the Members who are
testifying for their leadership on what I believe is the most
significant challenge facing our Nation in the 21st century,
which is our runaway deficit spending and unsustainable
national debt that threatens not only our economy, but our
national security, our way of life, our leadership in the
world, and everything good about America's influence, and our
children's future.
I think it is worth repeating some of the startling
statistics that demonstrate just how fragile the situation is
and just how bad off we are from a fiscal standpoint. 120
percent debt-to-GDP. This is the highest level of indebtedness
in the history of our country, surpassing World War II, and we
are not at war. We are in relative peace and prosperity, and it
is only going to get worse.
The CBO projection 30 years out has our indebtedness at
twice the size of the largest economy in the world. Our annual
deficits have reached almost $2 trillion this past year. CBO
projects them to double. We will add $20 trillion if we just
keep the policies as they are today, $20 trillion, ten years.
Now hear this: half of that $20 trillion is interest expenses
alone. Chairman, we don't get another soldier or sailor
equipped for battle. We don't sustain the senior safety net. We
get nothing for that, and the interest, according to CBO, will
triple. It was almost three quarters of a trillion dollars this
past year. It is projected to be a trillion dollars. We will
eclipse what we spent on national defense on interest alone.
If that is not enough to wake all of us up and give us the
sense of urgency to act, I don't know what will. No responsible
leader can look at the rapid deterioration of our balance
sheet, the CBO projection of these unsustainable deficits, and
the long-term unfunded liabilities of our Nation, and not feel
compelled to intervene and change course. No responsible leader
can do that.
As I said from the outset, this is the 21st century
challenge for America. I believe this is our generation's world
war, and the cost of losing this war will be catastrophic and
irreparable, and I have three children. I imagine many of you
have children and grandchildren, and they are counting on us to
step up and be leaders and work together to solve the problem.
If we don't have this sense of urgency, we don't have a plan,
if we don't exercise political courage to execute the plan, we
will be the first generation of leaders to fail to leave the
country better than we found it.
What a sad commentary. I refuse to accept that, and I know
you do too. As I said before, this isn't a Republican or
Democrat problem. This is our collective problem to solve, and
it is a mathematic reality that will require real leadership on
both sides of the aisle and in both chambers. Unfortunately,
over the last several years, maybe even the last few decades,
too many Americans have become desensitized to the trillions of
dollars of accumulating debt, and too many lawmakers have been
disengaged with a false sense of security that we can continue
down this treacherous fiscal path without any real consequence.
However, the past two years, I think, have provided a
wakeup call. Record spending, $11 trillion, six of which has
been added to the national debt, has resulted in a cost-of-
living crisis for the American people, and because of inflation
and because of soaring interest rates, the American people are
waking up to the bad fiscal and monetary policies that are
impacting their own pocketbooks. There is a silver lining there
because they are engaged in this, which means we might have a
fighting chance to actually address it together.
As I have said before, this trajectory we are on is
unsustainable, but it is not unfixable, and I believe that, but
both parties have to acknowledge they have contributed to it.
Mr. McGovern, the Republicans have made their fair share of
contributions to get us in this financial mess, and I say it at
every hearing. We don't get a pass. We don't get a pass. Seven
years since I have been here, I have watched it, waiving pay-
fors, waiving spending caps, and the list goes on of fiscal
recklessness and irresponsibility of both parties.
So, now that I have called out both sides, Mr. Ranking
Member, I don't think a fiscal commission is the panacea for
all of our financial woes. I just don't think there is a silver
bullet. At the end of the day, we have to have the political
courage as a body to cut through the brinkmanship, the
weaponization, the fear mongering that we get from the outside
and the inside, and we have to hold hands, as they say, and
move forward with courage for the sake of our seniors who are
now in jeopardy of insolvency in two very important safety net
programs that they rely on, but also for our children.
I know I am going over time. I can see you kind of getting
restless, but I am just getting warmed up. No, I am kidding.
Guys, I have met with a lot of interest groups, some of them
with a very righteous cause, many of them with a mutual
interest. I have yet to meet with the people who represent my
children. I have yet to meet with the people who are concerned
about a country that has been bankrupted because of our
recklessness. We are sowing the wind and our children will reap
the whirlwind of this fiscal disaster if we don't work together
and do it quickly.
So, we are going to evaluate these proposals. We are going
to look for common themes. We are going to ask a lot of
questions about the various contours and constructs and
structural designs so that if we can move forward with a
bipartisan, bicameral fiscal commission, even though I don't
think there is a silver bullet out there, maybe, just maybe, it
will provide a forum, Ed Case, for constructive, like real
constructive, not posing for cameras and posturing for
different groups, but real constructive dialogue that could
lead to a real outcome with a real impact on the national debt
and put us on a more sustainable path for the sake of our great
country and our children. Amen? And the people said, amen.
With that, I yield as much time as my Ranking Member shall
desire to make his opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Arrington follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Boyle. Well, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate your passion for this issue, and I hope they know I
respect every single one of my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and appreciate their sincerity when it comes to this
issue.
I don't know how to go about this without being repetitive,
because we just had a hearing on exactly this topic a couple of
weeks ago, and so I don't want to repeat everything that I said
then, but some of that overlap will obviously be unavoidable.
For those of you who were at our last hearing just a couple of
weeks ago on this topic, you know that I have real skepticism
when it comes to the topic of commissions. I thought the panel
that we had a couple of weeks ago, of those Members, former
Members of the House and current Members, or current Member of
the House, who participated in prior commissions talked about
their experiences. Every one of those commissions ultimately
ended in failure.
So, rather than focus on a commission, which ultimately is
about process, I want to focus my remarks actually on substance
and very specifically on Social Security. Here is why. As
someone who watches the Republican presidential debates, I have
been--I have interesting viewing habits, I know--I have been
struck by how a number of the leading candidates have flat out
said they want to raise the retirement age. One of the leading
candidates who just got a major endorsement from a Republican
establishment group yesterday, she has repeatedly said we need
to raise the retirement age from 65. She seems to be entirely
unaware that the retirement age for Social Security hasn't been
65 for quite some time.
Almost a decade ago, when my father, after 50 years of hard
work at blue collar jobs from the age of 16 to the age of 67,
went ahead and retired, his retirement age then was 66. In a
few years, it will be 67 because of changes that were made in a
law that passed this body in 1983. So if someone wants to send
an email to the Governor of South Carolina and let her know
this, it would be wonderful.
I would also like people to know a few other facts about
Social Security, greatest antipoverty program in American
history. Just think, back in the throes of the Great
Depression, 46 percent of seniors lived in poverty. Today that
number is a fraction of that. So, those who are saying that in
order to save the program, we have to extract exorbitant cuts
or we have to raise the retirement age, I don't know, to 70, or
beyond, that is a little like saying we need to burn the
village in order to save it. It just isn't true.
And as I pointed out at the very last hearing, I have
actually put down a plan on paper that would extend the life of
the Social Security Trust Fund through the year 2100. I have a
piece of legislation with Sheldon Whitehouse, the Senator from
Rhode Island, who is the Chairman of our counterpart, the
Senate Budget Committee, he and I have a bill that would do
that for Social Security simply by bringing in more revenues
from those who make more than $400,000 a year.
Now, some might object to more revenues coming into the
Social Security pot. I would say two things in response. First,
and this comes up every single time I have a town hall, whether
it was in person or a tele town hall, maybe some of you have
had the same experience. For years and years, the Social
Security Trust Fund was running a surplus. In the 1960s and the
1970s and the 1980s and the 1990s, and here is where I would
agree with the Chairman. Congresses under the control of both
parties, instead of using that surplus to set it aside for
future retirees so it would be there, they decided to spend
that surplus to meet the needs of the current day. That is a
tragedy.
You know, I remember those great Saturday Night Live skits
about Al Gore and making fun of his lockbox in the year 2000,
but, you know, he was right. Had that surplus been saved in a
lockbox or whatever you want to call it, there would be more
revenue available now that those who were earning those wages
to pay those Social Security taxes back in the 1970s, 1980s,
and 1990s, making them available for their retirement today.
So, it is only fair that more revenue is brought into the
system when you consider back when there was more revenue than
was going out to meet the needs of retirees then, that money
was spent on things that were other than Social Security. So, I
think that it is entirely appropriate when it comes to
extending the life of the Social Security Trust Fund.
I would also point out, and this has come up repeatedly
throughout the year in the hearings that we have had here in
this room, when you take the 2001 George W. Bush tax cuts that
weren't paid for, the 2003 Bush tax cuts that weren't paid for,
the reauthorization of most of that a decade later, and then
the 2017 TCJA, I asked numerous witnesses, what is the
cumulative amount of those tax cuts that weren't paid for? And
the figure that was cited repeatedly at that table was $10
trillion. So, when we look at that national debt of about $33
trillion, remember, about $10 trillion of that is missing
revenue from the last 22 years of tax cuts that weren't paid
for.
So, I appreciate again the sincerity of those who believe
that a commission would be a better process, but as I pointed
out a couple of weeks ago, and I will repeat today, whether it
is a commission or some other process, at the end of the day it
will come down to individuals voting from a couple menus of
options, and the main menu will have either more revenues or
cuts or some combination of thereof, and you can have the
greatest, biggest blue ribbon possible and put that on a
commission, that won't be a substitute for the fact that
ultimately individuals will have to put up a vote either
saying, yes, this is how we are going to raise more revenue, or
yes, this is how we are going to enact cuts.
I am very clear the side that I come on. It would be very
easy and intellectually dishonest if I sat here and said, oh,
we don't need more revenues and things are going to be
perfectly fine. No, I acknowledge, as I have said, the Social
Security Trust Fund is projected to fall short of meeting 75
percent of benefits somewhere between the year 2033 and 2034.
The Trustees of Social Security say it is 2034. CBO says it is
2033. We can safely say in roughly a decade we will meet a
critical point. It is pretty clear on which side I come down.
More revenues into the Social Security Trust Fund, and we will
be able to say for the lifetime of my daughter, who in the year
2100, God willing, if she is still alive, would be 86 years
old, I will be able to look her in the eye and say, Social
Security will be there for the rest of your lifetime and beyond
that simply by bringing in more revenues from those who are in
the top one percent of earners.
I think that is fair. I think that is appropriate, and for
those who disagree, I would be very interested in seeing what
their plan is and their alternative, and with that, I will
yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Boyle follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank my Ranking Member. Just for the
audience and for context, the Democrats had total control of
Congress the last couple years, and none of that vision or
those proposals have come to fruition, and Republicans had
total control of Congress when I got here. Both sides have
contributed. Neither of them have passed a Social Security
proposal, a solvency proposal, and both parties have
contributed to our growing deficits and debt. I think that is
just a fact I think everybody needs to keep in mind when I say
no party gets a pass, but I appreciate the sincere views and
your vision for addressing the solvency of Social Security.
Now, let's move on to our panelists. If there are any other
Members or organizations who have written statements for the
record, I will hold the record open until the end of the day to
accommodate those who may not have had prepared written
statements.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Once again, I would like to welcome our
panel of witnesses on behalf of our Committee. Thank you for
your time and your insights. The Committee has received your
written statements. They will be made part of the formal
hearing record. You will each have three minutes to deliver
your oral remarks. I now yield three minutes to Representative
Bill Huizenga.

STATEMENT OF HON. BILL HUIZENGA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MICHIGAN

Mr. Huizenga. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. I
am going to go quickly on this with this three minutes, and as
has been acknowledged, our national debt is now $33.8 trillion
and climbing. Just the interest we pay on this debt already
exceeds everything we spend on children, and within three
years, the amount we pay on interest will eclipse our defense
budget. Social Security will become insolvent by 2034, forcing
a 23 percent mandatory cut. Medicare Part A will be depleted by
2031, even sooner than Social Security, resulting in an 11
percent cut. As has been noted, this isn't a Republican saying
this. It is not Democrats saying this. It is the Trustees of
these trust funds themselves.
So, I am not interested in a partisan food fight either. I
want results that protect our seniors and current beneficiaries
while preserving these key programs for future generations. If
the status quo holds and Congress does nothing, simply put, it
will result in a cut. A best path forward, in fact, the only
path forward, in my opinion, is a bipartisan, bicameral
solution, such as the Fiscal Commission Act.
Before you or the public, frankly, writes this off as,
``just another commission,'' know that we can learn from both
the failures and the successes of our Nation's long history of
utilizing commissions. For example, Simpson-Bowles suffered
from an atmosphere of partisanship, much like what we see now.
Yet, it focused the national conversation on fiscal reforms,
and whereas the Greenspan Commission benefited from a clearer
purpose, fostering agreement that helped rescue Social Security
was the end result.
Acknowledging these lessons, I introduced the Fiscal
Commission Act in September, along with my BFF, my co-chair of
the Bipartisan Fiscal Forum, Scott Peters, which has gained 20
evenly divided partisan co-sponsors. Our commission proposal
features equal representation from both chambers and both
parties, is transparent and focused on clear goals, retaining
Congress's Constitutional duties, and has real teeth.
Specifically, our bill forces Congress to vote on a package of
proposals offered by this bipartisan, bicameral fiscal
commission. It begins with the four corners of the
Congressional leadership, each appointing four members to the
commission, 16 appointees total. Three of each leader's
selections must be colleagues from our respective chambers, in
addition to one individual from the private sector.
This commission must craft a package of recommendations to
both improve the fiscal situation in the medium term as well as
to achieve a sustainable debt-to-GDP ratio in the long term.
For any recommendations related to Federal programs for which a
Federal trust fund exists, the commission must improve their
solvency for a period of 75 years. No stone can be, or
hopefully will be, left unturned, Mr. Chairman. In the first
week after the 2024 election then, the commission must vote to
report its proposal to Congress. After that, before the lame
duck session ends, both the House and the Senate must put the
proposal to an up or down vote without amendment and without
delay.
So, let's be clear, I don't expect that this will be an
easy vote for any of us, and frankly, Congress has proven it is
not able to simply pass a bill like many have noted. Yet, I
believe a fiscal commission may not be the magic potion, as the
Chairman had said, and it may fail. It may, but we cannot stop
trying, and I do believe this is the most practical and
immediate way Congress can break the status quo here in
Washington. With that, I yield back.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Michigan,
and now yield to the gentleman from California, Mr. Scott
Peters, for three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. SCOTT PETERS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Peters. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Ranking Member, for holding this hearing. Despite a healthy
economy, our country's deficit is growing. We are borrowing
nearly $2 trillion a year just to pay our expenses, and as a
result, this year we are spending more than $663 billion on
interest alone. That is more than we spend on Medicaid. That is
more than we spend on our children. Soon to be more than we
spend on defense. Democrats should be very worried about what
the ballooning debt and interest payments will mean for current
and future investments in our kids. These interest payments
crowd out the investments we want to make, like an expanded
child tax credit, crowd out investments like making college
affordable, and expanding apprenticeships, crowd out our
ability to ensure the clean energy transition leaves no one
behind.
I have heard many of my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle contend, sometimes emphatically, sometimes indignantly,
that we should get our debt under control through regular order
with the tools we already have, and of course, they are right,
we should do that, but I have been here now almost 11 years. It
is clear to me and everyone in this room that we are not going
to do that. That this process we have today, it doesn't allow
us to get to 218 and 60. To spend less and to keep tax policy
right, we are going to need something outside of that.
Indignity will not solve our problem.
And it is a problem of historic proportions. It did not
appear overnight. Our failure to manage the national debt is
not the sole responsibility of one party or one administration,
as the point has been made. Over the last 20 years, our
conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, President Bush's tax cuts,
President Obama's extension of the Bush tax cuts, the Trump tax
cuts, and vital COVID relief programs, on top of our trillions
in annual borrowing, remember, $2 trillion every year have
added more than $10 trillion to the national debt. When the
Trump tax cuts expire in a couple of years, we will have a lot
of pressure to extend those tax cuts. A commission with outside
experts can help ensure we are driven by the truth about what
really happens to the deficits when we do that.
Finally, a lot of folks have said that Republicans want to
cut Medicare and Social Security. I believe that some of them
do. Under current law, Republicans are in the driver's seat.
Current law says in ten years when the trust fund is insolvent,
there will be automatic cuts to close the gap, an overnight 23
percent benefit cut for the average recipient on the order of
$17,000 a year, and I worry that come 2033, a year before we go
insolvent, Republicans say, okay, let's compromise. Let's call
it a 15 or 20 percent cut, and they will have all the leverage
in the room.
The best thing we could do to protect Medicare and Social
Security is to act now, and to act now to get something that
can get 60 votes in the Senate and 218 votes in this House and
a presidential signature. A commission gives us a fact driven
venue instead of some waiting till the last minute, backdoor,
11th hour deal between party leaders to do that, and I think we
should take advantage of it.
So, I introduced the Bipartisan Fiscal Commission, which
Bill Huizenga has explained. I welcome your thoughts, input,
and recommendations to ensure we can make this process better.
A commission is a good start. I think it is the best chance we
have to deal with these problems, and I look forward to working
with all of you to get a resolution, not just on this process,
but on the policy. Thank you. I yield back.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank my friend from California and
now yield three minutes to the Chairman for opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF HON. STEVE WOMACK, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

Mr. Womack. I am not going to read my prepared remarks. I
seek unanimous consent that they be entered into the record as
submitted to the Committee. I just have a couple of
observations, and then I think it is important that we get to
the questions and answers. First of all----
Chairman Arrington. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Womack. Thank you. First of all, let me just say this:
with all due respect to my colleagues, the only people that can
fix this is the United States Congress, and to think that the
United States Congress is going to be willing to do this is
laughable. That is why I support a fiscal commission. We need
an outside group of experts to help us understand what the
absolute truth is. Now, I have advocated for, for a long time,
a Fiscal State of the Union, a joint session of Congress
specifically designed to target, I believe, the most important
and incredible threat to the Republic as we know it, and that
is the fiscal condition of this country. I personally think it
would be much more beneficial to have a Fiscal State of the
Union than that theater that we have once a year, sometime
early in the year, called the State of the Union.
I have got a couple of observations that I want to make. We
have spent, this Congress has spent the better part of this
year, going into last year, debating the spending on the
discretionary side of the budget. It is about a third of
government spending, probably a little less, but we have tried
to convince, through our actions, that the way we are going to
fix the fiscal condition of this country is by having these big
food fights on discretionary spending, and that is only going
to touch the edges.
The real issues out there are in the entitlement programs
and we have to do something. Now, I will say this, that if we
wanted, we, either Republicans or Democrats, wanted to cut
those programs, we would do exactly what we are doing today--
nothing, because those programs are going to be cut on their
own in due time.
So, I support a fiscal commission. Now, Ed and I, Ed Case
and I, have jointly worked since 2019 on this sustainable
budget formula and we will talk about that today, and that is a
way forward. Now, it uses a debt-to-GDP target. It doesn't go
after specific changes to get where we need, but we do need a
fiscal commission to help us outline what are the options.
Brendan Boyle talks about revenues. If revenues need to be
part of that discussion, the fiscal commission needs to tell us
revenues are part of that. If raising the age needs to be part
of that discussion, then the fiscal commission will tell us
that raising the age.
I would submit to you and then I will yield back my time,
that given the condition that we are in today, you cannot
rationally take any option off the table because it only
increases the cost of the remaining options. So, with that
said, I support anything that works to get us to an end result
that can save the fiscal condition of our country. I yield
back.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Chairman Womack. Now we will
enjoy the remarks of Ed Case, your partner in crime on this
fiscal commission, the Honorable Ed Case----
Mr. Boyle. Watch that phrase around here.
Chairman Arrington. Three minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. ED CASE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM
THE STATE OF HAWAII

Mr. Case. Mr. Chair, Ranking Member, good morning, aloha.
You have my written testimony, which I am not going to repeat,
but I will summarize it. Number one, our Federal finances are
in dire straits and declining. Number two, continued inaction
will prove disastrous. Number three, Congress has proven
absolutely unable to do our job, at least without some help,
and number four, a truly bipartisan inclusive fiscal commission
can and will help.
I would like to instead spend my time responding to some of
the principal arguments against a commission. The first
principal argument goes like this: we don't need it because we
are not in trouble to start with. This is denial at its most
insidious. We are in deep trouble and heading in the wrong way
by any metric whatsoever, and the consequences of inaction will
include forced and indiscriminate reductions in core base
Federal defense and non-defense spending and foundational
entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare, and
we do a disservice to the tens of millions on Social Security
and Medicare and the tens of millions more that are coming up
on it by not stating that very frontally. The American people
agree that this is a problem. In my reliable Democratic
district, it is one of the top issues that is of concern to my
Democratic constituents. This is not a partisan issue.
The number two argument goes like this: fiscal commissions
supersede Congress's role. No, we always retain our role at the
end of the day. We have not ceded our responsibility, but we
have not been able to do our job, and if we could do our job,
then maybe we wouldn't need a fiscal commission, but we
haven't, and we do. We have the ultimate decision. The question
is how to present that decision to us in a way that we will in
fact make the decisions that need to be done.
The third argument goes like this, and we heard it from my
respected Ranking Member, fiscal commissions have failed. They
don't work. Well, that is a matter of definition. First of all,
my colleague cited the successes in 1983 to save Social
Security for 50 years. That came about because of a commission,
the Greenspan Commission, which recommended the way forward to
save Social Security. That worked. The Simpson-Bowles
Commission, which is much maligned, actually did work in the
sense of framing the issues to Congress, which led to the
negotiations that did actually provide some a better path for
our fiscal situation, at least for some period of time. So,
they can work even if ultimately Congress doesn't agree with
them.
And fourth, substantively, the argument goes like this:
let's skip forward to the feared result of the fiscal
commission and therefore deny that we need a fiscal commission
to start with. Let's just start debating the merits. The fact
is that if we could actually have that debate on the merits in
Congress in a reasoned, inclusive, broad way, that we would do
so, but the fiscal commission needs to frame those issues, and
so, to skip forward to a presumed result against the commission
is the wrong way to look at it. We obviously need to make those
decisions, but we need the help of a commission to get to those
basic decisions to start with.
So, the bottom line here is if you do agree that there is a
major problem or a crisis, then how are you going to solve it?
Because you haven't, we haven't. A fiscal commission is the
best way forward through a difficult but unavoidable debate and
we can talk about how that commission gets put forward and put
together, but the bottom line is it is not really the process
that matters, but the putting together of the commission to
start with that we need to start there. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Hawaii and
now yield three minutes to the Ranking Member, Mr. McGovern.

STATEMENT OF HON. JIM McGOVERN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS

Mr. McGovern. Well, Chairman Arrington and Ranking Member
Boyle, thank you for inviting me to testify. I want to say that
it is an honor to be here alongside my colleagues, who I know
all care deeply about this issue, and I look forward to a
productive conversation. I may be a little bit of an outlier on
this panel, but let me say upfront that I am deeply skeptical
of a fiscal commission.
First, there already is a bipartisan forum where these
kinds of decisions should get made. It is called Congress, and
we shouldn't pass the buck to a fiscal commission to do the
work that we ourselves don't want to do. If we don't want to do
it, maybe we should leave. There isn't some secret formula. We
either cut spending, tax the rich, or a combination of both. We
don't need a commission to tell us that. We just need common
sense.
And I want to echo what the former Chairman of this
Committee, Mr. Yarmuth, said in October on the same issue: the
problem is not the process, it is the people. There is no
shortage of legislation to address our fiscal challenges.
Legislation has been introduced to extend Social Security
solvency indefinitely, to demand that the Pentagon actually
pass an audit, and to end the billions of dollars of subsidies
we give to big oil, just to name a few. Committees and
subcommittees of jurisdiction can hold hearings and markups.
That is what we are supposed to do. That is what the American
people pay us to do. The buck should stop with us.
We also don't need a commission to acknowledge a few simple
mathematical facts, and as the Chairman says, no one has clean
hands here, but for decades, Republicans have driven up the
debt with their tax cuts for billionaires and big corporations.
Of the $33.8 trillion national debt, $10 trillion, nearly a
third, is from the Bush and Trump tax cuts. My friends on the
other side promised that both of those tax cuts would trickle
down and pay for themselves. They were wrong. In fact, without
those tax cuts, revenues would have kept up with spending
indefinitely, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have and
will add another $6.5 trillion to our debt.
Look back further. Bill Clinton balanced the budget after
Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush racked up the debt, and
today Republicans are still pushing bills that would increase
the deficit. The very first bill this Congress considered was a
giveaway to ultra rich tax evaders that would add $114 billion
to the deficit, according to the nonpartisan Congressional
Budget Office.
So, I am a little skeptical of the sudden realization from
my friends that they care about this issue. My friends tell us
that millionaires and billionaires can't pay a cent more in
taxes and not a dollar can be saved from the Pentagon's blow to
budget, where we know, waste runs rampant, but when the time
comes to pay for it all, they want to nickel and dime American
families. Look at Social Security. It should be a national
scandal that middle and working-class families have to pay
Social Security taxes on all of their income, but millionaires
and billionaires do not.
And if we want to ensure long term solvency, there are two
choices. Some on the other side think we should cut benefits. I
think we should ask the ultrarich to pay their fair share. We
don't need a commission to tell us that, and my fear is that a
commission would be used by some as an excuse to slash Social
Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and other Federal antipoverty
programs.
I know some of you are thinking that I am just a tax and
spend Massachusetts liberal, but I think that investing in our
people actually saves us money. Look at hunger. It is not just
a moral problem, it is an economic one. Hunger in America costs
us tens of billions of dollars every year in the form of
increased healthcare costs, lost productivity, kids who can't
learn. I go on and on. Investing in our antihunger safety net
will actually save us money in the long term.
Now, I hear some of my colleagues say that they lose sleep
over the debt. Well, let me tell you what I lose sleep over.
There are 40 million hungry people in this country. Half a
million people who sleep out on the streets every night.
Seniors on fixed incomes who can't make ends meet. Those are
the things I lose sleep over, and so, yes, we ought to talk
about the debt and do something, but the real challenge here is
an increase in extremism and a lack of political will to make
the wealthy pay their fair share and cut our bloated and
wasteful military budget. I thank you, and I yield back my
time.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I think, Mr. McGovern, you are not just
a liberal from Massachusetts, you are a good man who happens to
be a liberal from Massachusetts, and I appreciate your
compassionate and thoughtful insight.
Now, to round the Committee, or panelists out with final
comments from our fellow Budget Committee Member and my dear
friend who cares a lot about this issue, Lloyd Smucker, tell us
about that commission in Pennsylvania. How did it work? How in
the world was that commission successful?

STATEMENT OF HON. LLOYD SMUCKER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this important
hearing and for the opportunity to share with you some of my
thoughts regarding a fiscal commission. I believe our debt and
our fiscal trajectory pose an existential threat to America's
future, and I think establishing a commission is our best
chance of addressing it, and I say that based on my experience
with a highly successful commission in Pennsylvania, which I
would say was perhaps the most successful legislative effort
that I have ever been part of. Now, I will acknowledge to those
who have mentioned they are skeptical of commissions, that many
commissions do fail. They are right on that, but this is one
that was very successful and everyone associated with it
believed that.
So, it was the Basic Education Funding Commission
established in 2014, and in this case, it was to address a
decades old problem that existed in Pennsylvania of how state
dollars were divided among the 500 school districts there. It
was bipartisan, bicameral, and it also included representatives
of the governor's administration.
The commission held hearings around the state for over a
year receiving testimony and input from all stakeholder groups,
from experts, and even any member of the public who wanted to
participate. It worked across two legislative sessions and
interestingly, also across two governors' administrations,
first a Republican governor and then a Democrat.
Recommendations were released unanimously by the commission
members in June of 2015, and they were enacted into law in
2016. So, in a relatively short period of time, this commission
solved a really very difficult and what had previously been
seen as sort of an unsolvable problem.
Some factors that were critical to its success. There was
broad bipartisan agreement in the legislature on the nature and
scope of the problem. For a fiscal commission to work, both
parties must believe that it is necessary, and that goes for
leadership as well. If either party or the President opposes a
fiscal commission, it just simply will not work. The right
people were placed on the commission. They were members who had
skin in the game, including the chairs and minority chairs of
relevant committees, and by the way, just to correct the record
slightly, I was not the chair of this commission. There were
two capable co-chairs. I was a member as the chair of the
Education Committee in the State Senate at that point, but I
suggest that our fiscal commission here should include the
Chairs and Ranking Members of relevant committees like the
Budget Committee, the House Ways and Means Committee, Senate
Finance Committee, and the Senate Budget Committee as well, as
well as Speaker appointees, and I think members of the
administration are critical as well.
Third point of why the commission was successful:
everything was on the table and all options were considered and
all opinions were welcomed. A fiscal commission must be willing
to consider all options. Democrats and Republicans alike are
responsible for where we are. The debt has increased under the
watch of both. So, we all share responsibility and must
consider options that we may not like.
Final point, public engagement. Public education was
absolutely critical to the commission's success and I would say
it was perhaps the most important key to success of the
commission and would be of the fiscal commission. The job of
the commission would be to convince the American public that
debt will impact them directly and that change is necessary.
This is done through a very transparent public process and at
the same time, amplifying the work of a debt commission with a
corresponding public relations campaign, which is what occurred
in Pennsylvania.
We know it is tough work. There is no guarantee of success,
but based on what happened in Pennsylvania and some other
commissions, we know it can be done. We can change the
trajectory. We can ensure the promise of America for future
generations, and in my view, we have no other choice. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank my friend, Representative
Smucker. Now, we are going to move to the Q&A portion before we
have the Senate panelists join us. I will yield three minutes
to myself to begin the Q&A portion.
Look, I wish that I saw more political courage demonstrated
on a lot of issues. Our country faces a number of challenges. I
just happen to think this is one that will undo the Republic
and will jeopardize every aspect of what we may disagree about
in terms of the constitutional core mission of the Federal
Government, but we can be sure that a sovereign debt crisis
will undermine all of it.
I think about the defense side. You are a defense
appropriator, Mr. Case. We talk about crowding out investment
in the private sector, which affects the economy, exacerbates
the current situation with inflation and interest rates, but we
are also crowding out important investment of taxpayer dollars
in the number one job and responsibility of a government, which
is to provide for the common defense or the safety and security
of the American people. Tell me if you see that happening right
now in terms of the impotence and--the impetus, not impotence,
the impetus and urgency to act and act quickly.
Mr. Case. Well, I think there is no doubt if you take a
look at the trends, that interest is crowding out all of our
discretionary programs. Interest is certainly crowding out
defense. My colleague on that subcommittee and I both see that
every single day, and it is certainly happening on the
nondefense side. So, when we have these budget fights over how
much to put into defense and nondefense, we are clearly dealing
with a reduced total pie that is going to noninterest payments
on our national debt. That is unavoidable by any stretch of the
imagination.
But I would go back to my colleague Mr. Womack's comment,
and that is that is just part of the problem. We have to deal
with Social Security and Medicare in this context, not only
because we have to save those programs from insolvency and from
forced automatic reductions, but because Mr. Boyle's comments
are correct because we are funding Social Security and Medicare
shortfalls out of that portion that would otherwise be
allocated to discretionary funding. So, we are having a double
whammy. So, we have to take this across the entire spectrum.
Chairman Arrington. That is well said. I don't know of a
time where Social Security's solvency and sustainability has
been addressed ever unilaterally by one party. I don't know if
it has ever happened. I don't believe it has, ever. So, we can
talk about all these grand proposals we have on both sides, but
it is just still talk and it is cheap, and cheap talk is not
going to give peace of mind to the seniors, to my parents, who
are both on Social Security.
So, Scott Peters, Bill Huizenga, the whole panel, just one
thing across the board. If we could do one thing differently
than we did with Simpson-Bowles and other commissions,
Greenspan, and others, that would help position us for the best
probability of success, just name one thing. We will go through
the board and then I will delegate the next set of questions to
my----
Mr. Huizenga. To me----
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Ranking Member.
Mr. Huizenga. To me, Mr. Chair----
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Huizenga [continuing]. One of the most significant
elements of this is having a proposal that is not amendable and
is forced to have a vote in both the House and in the Senate.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you. Scott.
Mr. Peters. I agree with a recognition that, you know, that
was 20 years before the programs go insolvent, now we are ten
years before. Pretty soon we are going to get pretty close to
insolvency and we are not going to be able to do anything about
it. So, with a sense of urgency.
Chairman Arrington. Chairman.
Mr. Womack. Up or down vote.
Chairman Arrington. Mr. Case.
Mr. Case. I agree with Mr. Womack.
Chairman Arrington. Mr. McGovern.
Mr. McGovern. I think we should bring legislation like Mr.
Boyle's bill or Mr. Larson's bill, or my friends have bills to
cut Social Security, bring them to the floor. Let's have the
debate and figure this out. We ought to do our job.
Chairman Arrington. In addition to the up or down vote,
what would you add to a commission so that it can work?
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, I have already mentioned, I think it is
very important to have members on the commission with skin in
the game, and that would mean perhaps leaders of the committees
through which the legislation will ultimately go, and then
secondly, I think we have to look at the commission as--a big
part of the commission is a public relations effort, building
support for the efforts of the commission with the American
people. I think it is really important.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you. Thank you all for the
indulgence. I yield three minutes to the Ranking Member for his
questions.
Mr. Boyle. I have really appreciated this discussion. I
mean, it is not exactly a coincidence or an accident that some
of the most outstanding Members who serve in this body are on
this panel. So, I am not going to grill anyone. Really, more
than anything, I just want to give you an opportunity to
address what I thought was one of the really key points in our
hearing a couple of weeks ago about a commission. Chairman
Arrington's predecessor, Chairman Yarmuth, served on one of
these commissions, and he read something in his opening
statement that I want to quote, and then I simply want to open
it up to any one of you to comment on why you think it is
either wrong or something is missing and what you would say in
response to it.
So, quoting him now: ``While some of the other Members of
that committee might take issue with my evaluation, I believe
the process illuminated one fairly obvious but unavoidable
truth. The problem is not the process, it is the people. In
other words, if Members of Congress are not willing to muster
the determination and courage to take on our fiscal challenges,
even the best ideas will never be implemented.'' So, I would
just open it up, if anyone wanted to, Mr. Huizenga, and then
Mr. Peters.
Mr. Huizenga. I will go real quickly because I know this
has been asserted that somehow we are ``new to this issue.''
This has been going on, and I quickly tried to get this sorted
in my head and I ended up going down a little bit of a rabbit
trail. I mean, it goes back to the 1930s where there were
proposals along with constraining spending. For me personally,
I got here in 2011, right after the 2010 election. I was one of
the founding Members of the Balanced Budget Amendment Caucus
that we put together, and part of that was to push through what
had been in 1995 a very consequential vote on a Balanced Budget
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.
It failed in 2011, when we even had David Dreier on the
Republican side, Steny Hoyer on the Democrat side, people who
were here in 1995, who voted for it then and voted against it
in 2011, but it also goes back to 1982. It goes back to 1985,
Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act.
So, there has been a pattern of this. I think that the
unfortunate element is we have proven that we can get it close
oftentimes, but we just can't get it across the finish line in
a timely enough manner, and that is why I do think the up or
down vote unamendable is helpful on that.
Mr. Peters. I think the problem is that the incentives
right now are exactly in the opposite direction. Congress has
gotten used to eating cake for breakfast and getting away with
it. So, what we do is we borrow money to pay our expenses. Now,
I want you to appreciate all the criticism we have had of these
tax policies and COVID relief pales in comparison to the $2
trillion we are adding every year because we borrow money to
pay our expenses and we get away with it because we go home,
say I would have done, but I blame the other side. We all get
re-elected. It is just not solving the problem, and I think
that is why putting a fact-based commission together with, you
know, experts on the ground, cops on the beat to force us to
deal with the issue, I think is the most constructive way to
get us away from those incentives.
Mr. Boyle. You wanted to say?
Mr. Womack. A couple of people in this room served on the
Joint Select Committee on Budget Process Reform in 2018. The
Chairman, myself, there may be somebody else in here. I don't
see them, but I am going to use it as an example to reinforce
what I said earlier in support of an up or down vote on
whatever a fiscal commission would bring to the U.S. Congress,
and that is in that Joint Select Committee for Budget Process--
and by the way, I think we would all agree, even my friends in
the red coats back here would agree that the budget process of
the United States Congress is broken. I mean, Exhibit A is the
fact that on January 19, we will have the first of a series,
probably, of discussions about whether or not we are going to
shut the government down again, and this is based on 2024
appropriations.
By the way, I think the fiscal year started October 1. So
just let that marinate for just a minute, but in the Joint
Select Committee on Budget Process Reform, this group came up,
16 Members, bipartisan, bicameral, came up with a set of
recommendations that would have gone a long way toward
establishing a process that actually could save us from
ourselves, but at the end of the day, when the final vote was
taken because we had to have five Republicans and five
Democrats to vote for it, we had five Republicans, but we only
had two Democrats, and, oh, by the way, one of those was Mr.
Yarmuth, who has been quoted here at this table today. The
other one, Mr. Kilmer, but four Members on these acceptable
proposals from my friends on the left voted present. Present,
which I think only illustrates and magnifies the importance of
whatever a fiscal commission is able to do, a panel of experts
to come back to Congress and say, these are the issues that you
have to tackle. These are the options that you have to consider
if you are going to fix the problem. Then I think an up or down
vote is going to be required, or else it will go the way of a
lot of commissions and be put on a shelf somewhere.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, and I know we are a good bit over
time for the questions, but I didn't want to cut off any of the
answers. I will just say this before handing it back to the
Chair. One thing I think we can all agree on, on a bipartisan
basis, is with the Social Security Trust Fund expiring or
becoming insolvent in about a decade, Medicare Trust Fund is
even sooner, we cannot solve these problems and wait until the
very last minute, a year beforehand. That would just exacerbate
the problem and make all of our options less desirable. So, I
fully agree with the impetus that we address these challenges
now, and with that, I will yield back.
Chairman Arrington. It was a Freudian slip for me to say
impotence and Congress in the budget process, I will say.
Mr. Boyle. I am not touching that one.
Chairman Arrington. Look, I know it may seem a little
undisciplined to let the clock go beyond our three minutes, but
I find that this is a serious issue and that we can have a very
candid--with our audience of fellow American citizens here--and
constructive dialogue to get to a real outcome. So, I am trying
to keep that flow going and manage moving it along, but I am
going to ask a couple more comments and then I am going to ask
my colleague from Wisconsin to kick off his questions, line of
questions for three minutes. Mr. Case, quickly.
Mr. Case. First of all, I want to commend to the Committee
this excellent report from the Manhattan Institute from 2019,
Why do Budget Negotiations Succeed and Fail? And what this
report concludes is that the marks of success are threefold.
Number one, some kind of forcing mechanism for the decision
makers to have to make a decision. I think that is really key.
Number two, public support, which Mr. Smucker spoke to, I think
it is really critical. I think the public does support this on
a bipartisan basis, and number three, healthy negotiations,
which does very much get to the people.
I think that in Congress and to your question, Mr. Boyle,
it is the people, not the process. If we all had confidence in
a polarized Congress to actually have people come together to
negotiate and decide this on a bipartisan basis that had
everything on the table as opposed to shouting down
alternatives up front to kill them off before we even start
with them, then we probably would feel better about not going
with the commission, but the fact is that we are dealing with
the world we have, and I don't think that the Congress is going
to get better at this in the next couple of years, and the
budget is declining rapidly. So, yes, it is the people.
Chairman Arrington. Well said. Mr. Smucker? Mr. McGovern,
did you have a comment? Go ahead.
Mr. McGovern. Well, but he----
Chairman Arrington. Go ahead, Mr. McGovern, then we will
have----
Mr. McGovern. Look, I think, you know, what concerns me
about some of the conversation we are having is that it is
about kind of getting the numbers aligned and, you know, on a
balance sheet, and we are talking about how much we spend and
not what we spend the money on, and there are some things we
can spend money on that actually will save us money in the long
term, and this is very much a values question.
So, it is not just about getting numbers aligned on a
balance sheet. It is about what our values are, and again, we
talk about everybody saying everything is on the table. Yeah,
we have Members who have signed pledges that no new taxes.
Well, then obviously revenue is not on the table. If you have
signed a pledge that you swear that you will never vote to
increase revenues at all.
So, again, I hope we don't lose sight of the fact that the
reason why people like me are so concerned about potential cuts
to Social Security is because I think it is a vital program and
people rely on it and cutting it would be devastating to
millions of people in this country.
Chairman Arrington. Good points. Mr. Smucker?
Mr. Smucker. So, I would just like to make two points, and
the first would be in response to Mr. Yarmuth's points. When
people are doing or behaving, they don't need rules, and when
we are doing our job in Congress, we don't need to look at
reform, we don't need to look at rules, but when we don't do
our job, and I think it is hard for anybody to argue that we
are, then we are going to need to look at additional reform in
the process, I think, to make this place work more effectively.
So, my argument would be different than Yarmuth's. We do need
reform.
Then secondly, you know, I sort of, again, based on my
experience, and it is only one experience, but I view the
commission as a body within Congress that is helping Congress
do its job, not as some separate organization that is taking it
away from Congress, and so, sure, we can have an up or down
vote. First of all, if people really believe that the debt is a
problem and we all engage in putting forward a commission, then
the role of the commission is, while it is doing its work, to
bring Members of Congress along with it and to understand the
problem, understand the potential solution, and by the way,
bring the public in as well.
So, it is almost like a special select committee. It is a
vehicle that we put in place as Members of Congress to help get
us to the point where we are able to negotiate. We are looking
at everything, putting everything on the table and then we are
presenting that as a package. So again, the argument of it
replacing what Congress should be doing, that is not the way
this commission should work, in my view.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from
Pennsylvania. All very good and important counsel from the
panelists. Now, to my friend from Wisconsin, I yield three
minutes for his line of questions.
Mr. Grothman. Well, thank you. A couple of comments first
as far as that tax cut. I was here when the tax cut was done. I
think a huge amount of time the Republicans sat in close
conference is making sure that nobody could say these were tax
cuts for the rich, and I can tell you on a personal level, the
complaints I almost always got on the tax cuts were from the
rich who got a tax increase because they lost their state and
local tax deduction. So, to me we did disproportionately deal
with that.
I also want to point out as far as the necessity of tax
increases, we just got done with a biennium in which the
Democrats had both houses and could have used reconciliation to
do what they have been promising to do for many years, and that
is raise the cap on what you tax, for tax revenue on Social
Security, and they didn't do it, and that would have been, I
guess you could say solely a tax cut on the rich.
Now, I am a little bit concerned, even though I am a co-
sponsor of the amendment--of the commission--people talking
about putting Social Security on the table. I agree that Social
Security is kind of a contract we have written with a good
segment of America and there are all sorts of parts of this
budget that should be unconstitutional under the 10th
Amendment, and really should be left to the states, and if the
programs are that good, the states would pick them up. I am
thinking particularly things like education, corporate welfare
under the Department of Commerce, the entire welfare safety
net, which is so utterly broken, should be left to the states.
Can you comment, one of you, and I share with Mr. McGovern
that sometimes we haven't really looked at the defense budget
like we should have. Could you comment on, when we look at
balancing the budget, the degree to which the 10th Amendment
should play a role and we should begin just shoving wholesale
items back to the states who can do things more efficiently and
are probably in a better position to judge whether these
programs are effective?
Mr. Huizenga. I will take the bait. I would say----
Mr. Grothman. Let me just say----
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. It really bugs me that we have
all these unconstitutional programs----
Mr. Huizenga. Sure.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. And I hear congressmen say we
got to bite the bullet and cut Social Security.
Mr. Huizenga. Yeah, and I know, Mr. Grothman, you are a
stalwart in bringing that particular issue up in closed
conferences and in other places, and I commend you on that. In
an ideal world, for me, as a constitutionalist, I would love to
have those things back at the state level, having served in the
state legislature, and I know you did too. I think we are more
effective at many of those. However, at this point, much like
my desire for a balanced budget amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, I think that might be a bridge too far or a
future bridge that needs to be crossed, that what we need to
deal with right now is the immediate and looming problems that
we are going to have with all of our--and by the way, it is not
just Medicare and Social Security, it is all of our trust funds
need to be examined, and there is a significant number of them.
Mr. Grothman. Anybody else? I think we got over 140
Republicans to vote to get rid of the Department of Education.
I was shocked, but any other comments on using the 10th
Amendment as a guide in getting us back to the straight and
narrow here where our forefathers would have wanted us ahead of
any, remotely touching Social Security?
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Wisconsin. I
think it is a great point and one that we can debate in a
commission or on this Committee, and now I would like to yield
three minutes to my friend who has been a leader on this issue
as well, Mr. Jimmy Panetta, from California.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to you and
the Ranking Member for not just holding this hearing, but for
the way you conduct this Committee and your focus on issues
that are very important not just to us and this Congress but to
the future of this Nation. So, thank you very much, and I am
pleased that once again we are focusing on addressing our debt
and deficits. While last hearing we had looked at the successes
and challenges of past fiscal commissions, it is good that we
are moving forward by actually talking and looking at specific
pieces of legislation thanks to our witnesses.
I admit as a steering Member of the Bipartisan Fiscal
Forum, I am proud to be an original co-sponsor of one of the
bills we are discussing, the Fiscal Commission Act that was
introduced by two of our witnesses, Reps. Peters and Huizenga.
This is a bipartisan bill that will create a fiscal commission
involving bipartisan Members of Congress and outside experts
who will propose a set of policies to put us on a fiscally
responsible path. These recommendations will then get an up or
down vote in both chambers. Now, this hearing also gives us an
opportunity to compare and contrast fiscal commission bills,
including those by Reps. Case and Womack and Senators Manchin
and Romney.
Now, while a commission will still require hard choices, I
think we have heard that and we understand that it will
facilitate the conversations that are necessary to discuss our
fiscal issues and solutions in a fair and honest manner, and
Mr. Chairman, you may say impotence, I say Viagra. That is what
this will be in regards to looking at Congress, in regards to
looking at our budget process. So, if we can empower a
successful commission through one of the legislative proposals
today, we may be able to set ourselves up for a more fiscally
disciplined and economically stable future.
Now, Mr. Peters, my colleague from California and good
friend, of course, there has been a lot of focus on general
revenues and annual spending, but we are facing a real cliff. I
think we know that we have heard that when it comes to Social
Security and Medicare in the near future, and I appreciate Mr.
McGovern's comments. I think all of us do.
And looking at the demographics, basically the issues have
to depend on demographics, which we are not going to control. I
think everyone here wants to ensure that retirees are held
harmless when it comes to Social Security and Medicare
benefits, but there are risks to doing nothing. There are risks
to doing nothing. So, Scott, will we protect our seniors from
benefit cuts if we do nothing to address Social Security and
Medicare shortfalls?
Mr. Peters. No, we will not, and that is the frustrating
thing for me about being a Democrat trying to save Social
Security and Medicare is that many people on our side of the
aisle say don't touch it. Social Security is in the hospital
bed with a weak heartbeat. We know it is dead in ten years. We
are talking about 23 percent across the board cuts if we do
nothing. So, those of us who want to save Social Security, we
need to act now. Because as people have made the point, the
longer we wait, the more expensive, the more difficult those
choices will be and the more likely cuts will be.
So, that is why I think it is really imperative for us to
get on this right now. People want to make it a political
issue. That has been successful, but now we are coming up on
the precipice of the actual cuts to seniors that are going to
take effect across the board. We have to act if we want to save
these programs, and if we don't, we will lose them.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, and thanks to all the witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Panetta. I now yield
three minutes to my friend from Virginia, Mr. Bob Good, for
three minutes.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for holding this
hearing. Thanks to our witnesses. I think it is laughable to
use a term that was used by one of our panelists already, the
notion that Congress will have the wherewithal to reform
mandatory spending when we have zero demonstrated willingness
to cut our discretionary spending at a time, think about where
we are today, at a time when we have historic deficits, we have
historic debt, historic debt-to-GDP, historic inflation,
historic interest rates, historic interest payment on the debt,
the amount we are paying just to pay the interest on the debt,
and historic downgrading of our debt, and yet, we have no
demonstrated willingness by this Congress to cut our spending
on the discretionary side, and I wish I had a nickel to help
the deficit, but every time I have heard this year with our
Republican majority, oh, it is not discretionary it is
mandatory as an excuse for our unwillingness to deal with
discretionary. Gosh, if we just didn't fund the stuff that is
not authorized, or if we didn't fund the stuff that is not a
Constitutional role of the Federal Government, that is a
foreign concept here, obviously, but the snowball effect now,
the snowball effect, it is going so fast now, the unprecedented
debt, the monthly deficit of over $200 billion now, the
interest rates, it is causing the debt to swell and surge like
we have never seen before.
We are on track as a Republican majority to have a year
from now, a $36 trillion debt by next year's election. We took
what, 200 years to reach $1 trillion in debt, and we have got
$36 trillion in debt now, 40 years later. Thank goodness, I
guess, we had the unlimited increase of the debt ceiling. So,
as much as we can spend and grow the deficit, we don't have any
limit to it until January 2025.
It would seem that since all the discretionary spending,
that is, you know, all of it, all $1.7 trillion or so, it is
all deficit spending. It is all borrowed, again with a $2.5
trillion deficit, that we would be willing to cut or reduce
some of it, but we don't even have a consensus now. We don't
even have a consensus now on to comply at least with the $1.59
trillion that was the FRA levels passed by two thirds of both
Houses, signed by the President. We don't even have a consensus
that that would be the top line level for the remainder of this
year. We are going to vote on no appropriation bills this week
in our majority. The President signed again that level, and
both Houses voted for it. We don't even have an agreement to do
that level.
So, no demonstrated interest in cutting our spending with
the Republican majority, let alone of course, it wasn't even
talked about the previous two years that I was here in the
Democrat majority. I guess maybe it is progress, Mr. Chairman,
that we are at least fighting over it to some degree, if
unsuccessfully, on cutting our spending. We can't even get
agreement in both Houses to pay for supplementals that we
wouldn't further exacerbate the issue we are talking about
today, but we can't even get consensus in here to pay for
supplementals, let alone on the House floor or in our friends
across in the Senate.
If not now, when? If not us, who? Do some of us just lack
an understanding? Do some of us just lack a care about what
this will do? As Mr. Chairman said in addition to the border,
this is the issue that will crush and destroy the country, and
none of the commissions matter. Whichever one's better, none of
them matter unless we are willing to implement them. So, I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Virginia. I
agree with his sentiments. The Speaker, I will say, our new
Speaker, I am encouraged by his willingness to set a precedent
that we will in fact pay for emergency supplementals, and I
thought that was a really good sign and I hope we can build on
that.
Mr. Good. That was historic.
Chairman Arrington. It was historic, and I would like to
now yield to my friend, also from the mother of all states, Mr.
Scott from Virginia for three minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I get a
little tired of this both sides thing. I just want to remind
everybody that for the last 60 years, every Democratic
Presidential Administration, every Democratic Administration
has left their Republican successors a better deficit than they
inherited, without exception, and every Republican during that
time, every Republican Administration has left for their
Democratic successors a worse deficit situation, without
exception.
So, it is not both sides. We have heard the mention of a
continuation of some of the Bush tax cuts under Obama. I voted
against that because I thought it was a bad idea, but even so,
the deficit as a percentage of GDP went down under Obama, and
when President Trump came in, he increased the deficit before
the pandemic, and so, it is not both sides.
And we have a problem and everybody knows what the problem
is. The problem is we need to cut spending or increase revenue
or both. A commission can say you need to cut a percentage of
this, a percentage of that. I assume they are not going to get
down too much into specifics, but Congress will still need to
make those decisions. The commission doesn't make that
situation any easier. It just gives temporary cover to those
who don't want to decide.
Now, some are suggesting that we have a spending problem,
not a revenue problem. Fact is, we have a pay for what you
spend problem, and if you compare Obamacare to Medicare Part D,
when we passed Obamacare, we paid for it. We raised enough
taxes to pay for that spending, and so, the decision was if you
want Obamacare, here are the taxes that are going to pay for
it. If you don't want to pay for it, you don't get Obamacare,
and we decided, yeah, we want Obamacare, and we took the taxes
along with it. Medicare Part D. How would you like a
prescriptive drug benefit? Sounds good to me. Well, how are you
going to pay for it? We didn't worry about it, and $500 billion
in spending not paid for.
Now, we have already heard that one major reason for our
deficit is the unpaid for tax cuts. Under Republicans, you
don't have to pay for tax cuts. Just how would you like a tax
cut? Well, let's do it. So, if we just paid for our spending
and paid for our tax cuts, we have heard that $10 trillion of
the debt wouldn't be where it is today. Mr. McGovern, let me
ask you a question. Can the conclusions of a commission be
manipulated by the appointment of Members who have preexisting
ideas like Social Security needs to be cut?
Mr. McGovern. Absolutely, and, you know, I have been
listening to some of the comments. Mr. Grothman, you know,
talked about the importance of a commission, but he also signed
a pledge saying that he will never raise taxes.
Mr. Scott. So, just----
Mr. McGovern. Yeah.
Mr. Scott [continuing]. Who is on a commission can kind
of----
Mr. McGovern. Yeah, absolutely.
Mr. Scott [continuing]. Predetermine what the conclusions
are? And does this up or down vote thing, Mr. McGovern, make it
more or less likely that Social Security and Medicare will be
cut?
Mr. McGovern. I fear that it will make it more likely it
will be cut.
Mr. Scott. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Virginia. I
now yield three minutes to my friend from Utah, Mr. Blake
Moore.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks for holding this. We
had a great conversation about this a month or so ago, and it
is even better to have actual official legislation on the books
with the House in a bicameral way and the Senate talking about
it today. Look, the Chairman highlighted my main point, and so
I will just quickly ask Representative Huizenga and ask
Representative Peters to weigh in as well. I work closely with
you both on the Bipartisan Fiscal Forum. I got four boys and
given a general timeline of how my wife and I want to see their
lives progress when they are raising their young kids, maybe
have their first major job, they are going to send, every tax
dollar they send to Washington, half of it is going to be
paying interest, and that is a different paradigm than what I
am doing now and what my parents did. It is a totally new
paradigm, and I look at it as we have ten years to address this
and have any chance to avoid that catastrophic effect. Do you
see this commission idea as the best way forward for us right
now to take action, Representative Huizenga?
Mr. Huizenga. Yes. I don't think it is going to be that
magic potion that has been acknowledged by the Chair and
others, but it has to be a piece of the puzzle.
Mr. Moore. Anything to add?
Mr. Peters. I think, too, as I said, I think the incentives
here are wrong for solving the problem. The incentives are to
avoid the problem. I also would just say, in light of some of
the previous comments, that having a cop on the beat, experts
in the room to inform us of what the truth is, is really
important here. I think that there are investments that do pay
that you should borrow from. We should understand that and not
use that as an excuse for borrowing to pay for the groceries,
is what we are doing.
The other thing is, I would say, just in response to the
Chairman, Democrats want a cop on the beat when you talk about
tax policy. The Speaker said that he was paying for the
supplemental, but what he offered was an IRS cut that would
have actually doubled the cost of it, and that is the kind of
thing I don't want to hear. I want a cop on the beat. Somebody
to tell me the truth about Republican tax policy. You want
someone, a cop on the beat, someone to tell you the truth about
the value of whether the value of Democratic investments pay
off. We don't have that today, and that is why we need a
commission.
Mr. Moore. I think you bring up a great point because we
are ships in the night, Republicans and Democrats, on how to
adhere to CBO, right? We have differences on how we believe CBO
actually addresses their projections, right? I personally wish
we were taking a longer-term perspective into consideration,
and I think we would have a more realistic approach to how this
stuff plays out.
We are, and I can speak for every single one of my
Republican colleagues, a strong supporter of economic growth
and making sure that we have pro-growth tax policy, and
sometimes that doesn't play out well with a line-item CBO
score. It doesn't, and we recognize that, and it is tough to
reconcile because we have this CBO score that we all have to
address, but we have to have strong economic growth. I don't
see the fiscal commission as anything that would deter from
that if we can continue to make sure that we have pro-growth
tax policies.
Representative Huizenga, anything else to add before I
yield my time back?
Mr. Huizenga. I would just say historically, deficit
spending happened when there was either economic or literal war
happening. We have been deficit spending in the good times when
we haven't had those. That has compounded the problem.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman. Just because I
was mentioned in a comment I made about the pay for, I would
just say to my friend from California that it is just a pay
for. It is, leaders make decisions. They don't pass the buck,
and the decision by the Speaker was to pay for it by offsetting
the $80 billion expansion of the IRS, and I think we all agree
that we should enforce tax policy. How we do it in the most
cost-effective way is another discussion and debate.
I think the Speaker would welcome a response from the
Senate. I bet we don't get one in terms of what alternative
options for pay fors are. So, I got to give the Speaker credit
for at least putting on paper what he believes would be a
responsible pay for, and I bet he is open to real dialogue
about other alternatives if alternatives were presented by Mr.
Schumer. With that, I would like to yield three minutes to my
friend Mr. Blumenauer from the great State of Oregon.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you. I must confess I am having
flashbacks. I have been doing a lot of reminiscing recently,
closing out 50 years of public service, and I have memories of
what I did chairing a tax committee in Oregon, working in local
government with thorny, very controversial issues and different
approaches that worked and then some that didn't. I think we
could with these six panel members, we could actually hammer
out an approach. It is helping Congress do its job as several
of you have mentioned.
I am deeply concerned that we as a Congress are not taking
advantage of opportunities that shouldn't be controversial. I
have raised savings in terms of a farm subsidy that I did
earlier with Speaker Ryan that could make a huge difference.
There are areas in the Defense Department. We have talked about
the battleship that the Navy doesn't want that is kept alive
just simply for the jobs in Florida. This is not rocket
science.
Now, I came in, I must say, skeptical about another
commission. Maybe it is the triumph of hope over experience, as
Benjamin Franklin said about second marriages, but I do think
that there is a role for what is being talked about here. There
is an opportunity for us to be able to fashion a consensus with
a different approach. One thing we haven't talked about, and
that is engaging the public in this mechanism, and some of you
have been involved with efforts that engage broad public
involvement in terms of where they would put Federal budget
priorities, quite different than what Congress does in the
controversies.
There are mechanisms about how people would solve the
Social Security problem, and it really would provide cover. It
is pretty balanced and effective, and it would work. They don't
tie themselves in knots, and I don't think we delegate it
entirely, but I think in actually having some mechanisms to
engage the public can cut through some of the falderal.
I reluctantly, I am not going to be here, but I do think
there is a role for a carefully crafted commission to provide
some guardrails to force some of these things going forward.
Because what we are doing now is adding to the deficit, not
just in terms of avoiding the problem, but there are costs for
the failure that we have. Every run up to a shutdown adds to
the deficit because of the unnecessary costs and confusion, and
Mr. McGovern wants us to think about how we are actually
spending the money. We don't do that in Congress.
So, I am hopeful that a commission can help. I do think
there needs to be a role to engage the public. I have had a
notion, a national Save Social Security Day, where we would
have high school students and college students come together on
one of those simulations and do something that would engage the
public in a broader sense. I do think there is a role for the
mechanism that we have with the Base Closing Commission because
it forces us to act. It used to be the third rail. It has been
extraordinarily successful, and I think a combination of a
commission, a mechanism that forces action, and engaging the
public would help us move it forward.
Chairman Arrington. Well said.
Mr. Blumenauer. Because I think this is an important thing
for us to do.
Chairman Arrington. Very thoughtful. Thank you, Mr.
Blumenauer. Look, our Senate colleagues are here, and I am
going to do something that is a little unorthodox. We haven't
done it, but we are going to attempt at a rapid round of just
thoughts, and I apologize for not giving my colleagues the
opportunity to ask questions of this group of panelists, but
you are our colleagues. We know where you live, as we say.
So, if Mr. Estes from Kansas, take a minute, share your
thoughts, your takeaways, anything you want to emphasize, and
then we are going to go to Mr. Espaillat and then Ms. Bice and
work our way through the list. Just a rapid round of thoughts,
please.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is important for us
to talk about this. Over the last year, we have borrowed
$90,000 a second, and it is important for us to come out and
address this. We know that over the last 40 years, there have
been several commissions implemented. Some of them worked, some
of them didn't. The Social Security Trust Fund that has been
talked about today would have been empty in 1983 without a
commission that successfully worked for that. So, we have got
to be able to focus on that. We have got to be able to make
sure that we take those lessons learned, whether it is from
Pennsylvania, whether it is from the discussions in 2018, and
how do we create a successful commission with the right checks
and balances and implementation schedule, up or down vote and
other issues, and make sure that works. So, with that, I will
yield back. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to talk
about this very important topic and appreciate all of you as
panelists being here.
Mr. Bergman [presiding]. Thank you. The batting order is
Mr. Espaillat, you have a minute.
Mr. Espaillat. I am glad I am the cleanup hitter, but thank
you, Mr. Chairman, and fiscal commissions have generally
failed. We saw how Speaker McCarthy's H.R. 5525 failed. Very
bipartisan stuff going on makes it almost impossible to
reconcile, but is it really service cuts, benefits are the very
needed, or is it a lack of revenue as a result of decades of
tax cuts to the very rich? Corporate welfare, if you may? That
is the question. Do we have enough revenue to help out AARP and
the seniors that are here today that are very needy?
I represent the district in the Heights. You may have seen,
Washington Heights, you may have seen the movie where we have a
significant number of people dependent on benefits and their
rent overburdens them. Over 55 percent of their salaries are
spent on rent, and so, is it really tax cuts to the people that
are starving, or is it a lack of revenue? Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Bergman. Ms. Schakowsky, you have a minute.
Ms. Schakowsky. Let me just say, I have had an experience
with such a study, such a commission. I was on the Simpson-
Bowles Commission many years ago in 2010, and this was about
coming up with a budget agreement and we couldn't do it, and I
have felt since then, and I was happy that we couldn't because
the proposal that was on the table was to include cutting
Social Security, which I said no, and I had my own plan.
But it seems to me that doing this kind of commission is a
way for Members of Congress to get out from under having to
take the blame for the kinds of cuts that may be presented, and
I think that this is the kind of discussion and John Yarmuth
certainly agreed that we have enough capacity to do with the
Committees that we have to do something, and I just wanted to
ask my dear colleague well, if I could just ask Jim McGovern to
comment on that. Do you think we----
Mr. Bergman. Ms. Schakowsky, we are at----
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Need this?
Mr. Bergman [continuing]. I am going to ask you to, we are
trying to roll this with a minute. Jim, you got a three-word
answer?
Mr. McGovern. I didn't hear the question because you
interrupted.
Ms. Schakowsky. The question is----
Mr. Bergman. I want her to repeat the question.
Ms. Schakowsky [continuing]. Do we really need such a
commission?
Mr. McGovern. No, I don't believe that we should have a
commission. I think we do have the capacity to be able to
resolve these issues and we have proposals that we should bring
to the floor and debate them and vote up or down on them.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, and Mr. Brecheen, you are
recognized for a minute.
Mr. Brecheen. Waive.
Mr. Bergman. Ms. McClain, you are recognized for a minute.
Ms. McClain. Thank you. One thing, I want to get a plug in
for all these horrible, awful businesses out there. As a
business owner myself, the business owners, last I checked, we
have a progressive tax system. It is the businesses who
actually pay taxes themselves. Not all of them are horrible,
and number two, it is the businesses who actually employ people
who, yes, they pay taxes, and I might want to remind everybody
that it is the economic system that gives us our social
program. So, I think we should incentivize businesses to be
profitable and to hire more people who, in essence, pay more
taxes, but that is a separate topic.
I also want to think and talk about, and I haven't heard
much of. I think the commission is a good idea, bad idea, it
doesn't matter. I actually seem to think it is a good idea, but
with that business idea, I would like to hear about two things.
How do we follow the rules? Because if we have a commission and
the commission says X, we in Congress have a tendency to raise
the rules.
Mr. Bergman. Will the gentlewoman yield? We are in a
minute.
Mrs. Mcclain. Yep.
Mr. Bergman. Quick round here, okay?
Mrs. McClain. So, rules and accountability. I would like to
hear a little bit more talk about that. Thank you.
Mr. Bergman. Okay, thank you. Without objection, I would
like to submit for the record a letter in support of a
bipartisan fiscal commission from my friend and colleague,
representative David Schweikert of Arizona, who is a partner in
fiscal accountability and as Vice Chairman of the Joint
Economic Committee. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Bergman. With that, thank you again, Representative
Huizenga, Representative Peters, Representative Womack,
Representative Case, Representative McGovern, and
Representative Smucker for appearing before us today. This
concludes our first witness panel.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, gentlemen.
[Recess.]
Chairman Arrington. Okay, ladies and gentlemen, let's
continue with our second panel of witnesses, our friends and
truly stalwart leaders on the issue of not just the debt
commission, but other strategies to address this looming crisis
and this unsustainable path that we are on. Both of these
gentlemen recognize that and we are all grateful for your
leadership. So, welcome Senator Manchin and Senator Romney.
They together have introduced Senate Bill 3262, which I
mentioned earlier, the Fiscal Stability Act of 2023.
We want to thank you again for your time today. I know due
to scheduling conflicts that we will only have you for a short
while, but it is going to be----
Mr. Romney. We will stay longer if you want.
Chairman Arrington. Well, we want to respect your time, but
we want it to be a meaningful experience. So, we are going to
start with your testimony, and then we are going to ask a
couple of questions before you have to go back to the upper
chamber. So, with that, let me yield five minutes to Senator
Joe Manchin, and again, we appreciate you being here.

STATEMENT OF HON. JOE MANCHIN, A SENATOR IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF WEST VIRGINIA

Mr. Manchin. Thank you, Chairman Arrington and Ranking
Member Boyle, for providing me with the opportunity to appear
before the House Budget Committee today, and all the Members
here. I appreciate being here. I would also like to thank my
friend and colleague, Senator Romney, for his dedication to
seeking solutions for our Nation's fiscal challenges, and thank
you to the Committee for steadfast commitment to improving our
fiscal health.
The Congressional Budget Act of 1974 sets a timeline for
Congress to follow when it comes to the budget process. So, we
have it in law that by April 15 of each year, Congress must, I
will repeat, must pass a budget resolution, and by September 30
of each year, Congress must pass all 12 appropriations bills.
Unfortunately, it is a timeline without any teeth.
On September 30, 1996, Congress passed all 12 appropriation
bills for Fiscal Year 1997. As the Committee is likely aware,
the national debt at that time was $5.4 trillion. Today, we
spend that much and more in one year, and the national debt
exceeds $33.7 trillion. On August 5, 1997, Congress and
President Clinton enacted the Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
which was negotiated in a bipartisan way by then White House
Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles and then House Budget Committee
Chair John Kasich. Among other things, it set enforceable
budget caps for Fiscal Years 1998 through 2002. What followed
those bipartisan compromises were balanced budgets and
surpluses of more than $550 billion.
Unfortunately, the United States of America has not posted
a surplus since. Over 22 years in the red, every year, we spend
more than we take in. There have been attempts to get us back
on track. In 2010, the Simpson-Bowles Commission published
recommendations that would have capped spending at 21 percent
of GDP and reduced debt to 65 percent of GDP by 2020.
Unfortunately, Congress refused to act for political reasons.
In August 2011, Congress tried again with the Budget
Control Act of 2011, which coupled a debt ceiling increase with
a mandate of more than $2 trillion in cuts. Unfortunately,
Congress again refused to act for political reasons, blowing
through those caps and spending another $1.3 trillion more than
we took in.
Now it is too late for another warning. In 2011, Standard
and Poor's downgraded the U.S. credit rating from a AAA to AA+.
In the past few months alone, Fitch has followed suit, and
Moody's Corporation is on the brink of its own downgrade. We
are the only AAA rated country in the world that does not have
a multiyear fiscal planning process. The only one.
We must reverse the catastrophic financial demise of our
own making before it is too late. As evident by the chart
behind me, in Fiscal Year 1997, revenues totaled $1.58 trillion
and spending totaled $1.6 trillion. Fast forward to 2023,
revenues totaled $4.4 trillion, while spending clocked in at an
astounding $6.13 trillion. Outside the fiscal years during the
COVID-19 pandemic, 2023 total deficit of $1.7 trillion was the
highest in United States history. Let me repeat that. Last
year's imbalance between spending and revenue was a record
high.
Years of fiscal irresponsibility have brought us to the
crisis we face today, which is more than $33.75 trillion of
national debt. In 2023, we spent more than $650 billion just on
interest alone. By 2051, if we maintain this trajectory, the
money that the Federal Government spends on interest to service
the debt will be greater than what we spend on anything else,
including defense, Social Security, Medicare. This is why
Senator Romney and I, along with Senator Sinema, Young,
Hickenlooper, Lummis, Warner, Cornyn, Tillis, and Shaheen,
equally Democrats equally Republicans, introduced the Fiscal
Stability Act.
More than 227 years ago, President George Washington
warned. He warned of two things really. The first thing he
warned about is beware of the political parties for they will
usurp the power from the people. The political parties will
usurp the power from the people. In his farewell address, he
advised also against accumulation of debt. Very much concerned.
Fast forward to 2011. In one of my first hearings in the Senate
when I came to Washington, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff was Admiral Mike Mullen. I just came from governor and I
didn't know a whole lot about on the national concerns that we
had on a national level with our defense. The question was
asked: what is the greatest threat the United States of America
faces? He didn't skip a beat, didn't waste a minute. He says,
the national debt, the debt of this Nation will take us down
before any foreign adversary will take us down with their
military might. He said, don't worry about the military might.
It will be we will take ourselves down, and he was so right.
So, every family in America understands this, and this is
what we don't seem to get right. Every person in America
understands that they have to live within their means. They
can't figure out why we don't even try. So, it makes the
sacrifices today to give the children and their grandchildren a
chance of life better than their own, we are basically, we have
just let our future generations, especially our children and
grandchildren, we have let them down so drastically. We are the
only generation that will turn it over worse than what we
received it, much worse.
So, it is the American Dream. We are in Congress. We have
an obligation to get our finances in order so our children and
all of them to come after will be in a stable situation, and
the time to act is now. So, I want to thank you all so much for
having me, and I turn it over to my dear friend from Utah and
he has the same passion I have for this.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Thank you. Thank you, Senator Manchin.
By the way, you just took my Ranking Member's place as my
favorite Democrat in this place.
Mr. Manchin. I don't know, Brendan's hard to replace.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you for your thoughtful and
insightful words. Senator Romney, thank you for joining us.

STATEMENT OF HON. MITT ROMNEY, A SENATOR IN CONGRESS FROM THE
STATE OF UTAH

Mr. Romney. Thank you so much. It is impressive to listen
to Senator Manchin. He said a lot. I hope we listen carefully
to what he had to say, with which I fully agree.
Chairman Arrington. Well, let's just say goodbye to our
friend who wants to do nothing and leave Social Security
beneficiaries with a 20 percent cut----
Mr. Boyle. May I----
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. As a result of our
inaction.
Mr. Boyle. May I just interject, Mr. Chairman?
Chairman Arrington. Please.
Mr. Boyle. Senator Romney, it must be refreshing to know
that you still animate some folks on the left as well.
Mr. Romney. Exactly right.
Mr. Boyle. So, it must be reassuring for you.
Mr. Romney. Exactly right. Well, I am actually here to
announce our candidacy for----
Chairman Arrington. Senator Romney, thank you for your
patience.
Mr. Romney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
appreciate the chance----
Chairman Arrington. Continue.
Mr. Romney [continuing]. To be with you and the Members of
this Committee. Let me underscore what Senator Manchin has said
about the urgency of us addressing our shortfall, our fiscal
crisis. I am going to start with three reasons that this is
something we need to do and do now. One relates to interest and
I am going to get there by showing you as a percentage of the
economy what has happened to defense spending, which is the
solid line, and domestic discretionary spending, which is the
yellow line, and where the CBO projects them to go over time.
As you will note, our spending on discretionary items has
come down both for the military as a percentage of the GDP,
both for the military, and for the discretionary domestic
spending, but because of baby boomers, what is going to happen
on Medicare and Social Security is a very different pattern.
Social Security is the orange line there and Medicare is the
blue line. You will see that Medicare over the next--by the
way, this first dotted line is current 2023. The dotted line
over here is 2030, which would be six years from now, the end
of the next group of Senators' term.
So, as you will see the pretty dramatic increase and you
will also note that we haven't yet layered on interest. If we
now turn to adding the interest line, here is the interest
line. The red line is interest, and you will note that as of
2030, as of 2030, only six years from now, interest expense for
the Federal Government will exceed either defense spending or
domestic discretionary spending. That is where we are headed.
So, we are going to have to do massively awful things
either in defense or domestic spending. This is a huge
increase. That is one reason we need to move soon. So, unless
we fix the fiscal calamity, we are no longer going to be able
to have a military leadership in the world and we would have
major consequences for our safety and our national security.
There is a second reason. Our mounting debt is placing us
in the same hazardous category as Greece and Italy. This shows
government debt, gross debt, and by the way, debt held by the
public, as a percentage of GDP out through 2028. Ours is the
red line. Here is Greece, Italy, Portugal, Ireland, Spain.
Notice they are all getting better. We are the one getting
worse, and we are now in a category as of 2028 where we are
going to have more debt as a percentage of our GDP than Italy,
and remember what Greece and Italy and the others went through.
This is the trajectory we are on unless we take action soon.
Simpson-Bowles told us about this crisis, but it is already
here, and our legislation has a built-in path to avoid some of
the challenges that were associated with the Simpson-Bowles
failure to actually reach a conclusion. Let me just mention
what they are. First of all, four corners appoint the Members
of this commission. Three will be Members, elected Members, and
then one will be an expert, but the expert will not be voting.
Only Members will be voting on the commission's
recommendations. The objective of the commission is to
stabilize debt as a share of the GDP. It doesn't talk about any
particular program. It just says, let's get our debt as a
percentage of the GDP at a stable level.
And finally, all spending is being considered and
everything is on the table. We don't say, this program has to
be added, that program. No, everything is on the table, and
finally, if there is a bipartisan consensus, if we have
Republicans and Democrats on this commission that vote together
on a bipartisan basis to proceed, then there is a privileged
process to take the legislation to the floor and to vote on it
in the House and the Senate. In the Senate, by the way, the 20-
vote rule would apply. So, it is the same numbers required in
order for it to become law, and, of course, the President would
then be given the opportunity to sign it.
If we don't fix this mess that our country is in, it is
hard for me to imagine a circumstance where America is able to
continue to lead the world. If we are spending more on interest
than we are spending on defense, then how in the world are we
going to keep up with China, which is already spending a lot
more on procurement than we are today?
So, this is a decision we have. We are either going to be
known as a generation that took on tough challenges and solved
them, or one that didn't. We all lived in the shadow of the
greatest generation. If we don't fix this problem, we are going
to be known as the worst generation. Our children, our
grandchildren depend on taking action and everything's on the
table.
I will just mention one thing, and that is, when Bill
Clinton was President, he looked to see what Republicans and
Democrats could do together. Each came together and found an
equal amount of tax increases, revenue increases, and spending
cuts and got a deal done and got us on track and actually got a
balanced budget. This is something we can do, but only if we do
it on a bipartisan basis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank both Senators. We are honored
by your participation today. I am inspired by your words and
your courageous leadership, and I hope we can get this done. I
really do, and I know you have a short time, so we will respect
that, and we will continue this dialogue as we move these
proposals through our respective chambers.
I am going to ask, because I have done a lot of talking
here at this hearing, that my friend, my best friend actually,
from Georgia, believe it or not, former Chief Deputy Whip Drew
Ferguson, we will yield three minutes to you for a line of
questioning, and then I will yield to the Ranking Member. So,
Drew?
Mr. Ferguson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and normally when I
sit down with Senators, I always say, as a Georgian, I used to
want two Bulldogs, two Atlanta Braves, and two Falcons to be my
pallbearers so they could let me down one last time. When I got
to DC, I figured I really needed six Senators, but I am just
going to let y'all, I am going to let y'all off the hook on
that because I appreciate you all being here today.
Bottom line, we have had a lot of discussion today on a lot
of topics, mandatory spending, revenues, all of the different
things, and we have had discussions about where should we be
making investments? Is it in our people? Is it in our systems?
Is it in defense? You cannot invest in anything if you are
broke, right?
And I go back, I am a process guy. I think if you develop a
good process, you learn to love that process. The process will
love you back. You stay on, you develop a good process, and I
go back and I look at the one thing that is a common thread
through every single person that has pledged to run for
Congress and has been elected, and we have all said we want to
be fiscally responsible. What is standing in the way of us? It
is a horrible budget process. It is a process where there are
50 acceptable pathways to failure and about one or two
acceptable pathways to success.
So, I think one of the things that I would, and I would
love to get y'all's opinion on this, as we look ahead, how
important is it that not only do we deal with a fiscal
commission as you have advocated, but let's talk about, as part
of that, do you see a budget reform process as being part of
that? Because quite candidly, we have a budget process that
yields an aspirational document that is really not ultimately
tied to appropriations or tied to the authorization, and none
of it is tied to the revenue stream.
So, Senator Romney, I would start with you on this. Talk to
us a little bit about process reform and how important it is to
put a process in place that rewards early success and punishes
late failure so that Congress is incentivized to do the right
thing.
Mr. Romney. I am not going to disagree with you. I am not
going to disagree. I agree with you that we need to have a
budget process which follows the law, and finding teeth to make
sure that that budget process is followed is going to be a
challenge which this commission can take on, among other
things. I would note that I don't think process is sufficient.
It is necessary, but not sufficient, and I say that because
increasingly people have found we can make things mandatory.
Both chambers have said, hey, we can put this outside the
budget. We can put it as a mandatory spending item, and now
almost 70 percent of our Federal spending is mandatory. So, if
we had a perfect budget process, we may do a better job taking
out some waste and abuse and excess in our spending. Although
you saw that as a percentage of the GDP, domestic spending and
defense spending is actually going down. Our challenge is we
have baby boomers, a lot of us, and just recognizing that
presents a real fiscal challenge for us, and we are going to
have to deal, not just with the process of dealing with our
budget, but also dealing with the non-budget, if you will, the
nondiscretionary items of our spending as well.
Mr. Manchin. Mr. Chairman, can I say one thing very quickly
to that?
Chairman Arrington. Please, sure.
Mr. Manchin. We have the budget on the laws right now,
Congressional Budget Act of 1974. It sets the timeline. It sets
it basically April 15 of each year. We are supposed to
basically pass a budget resolution and then again by September
30, pass our appropriation bills. No teeth. You have heard
about no budget, no pay, and all the different things. We have
got to find a way to put teeth to the law we have, and if it is
not going to be something as draconian as saying no budget, no
pay, makes sense to me and back in West Virginia, if you don't
do your work, you don't get paid, and if you do get paid, you
have done your work. Pretty simple.
But with that, why not have mandatory cuts if we don't do
it on time? That is what could be done, and the bottom line is,
if we don't, I am trying to preserve Social Security. I got
400,000 people. Out of 1.7 million people in my state, 400,000
depend on Social Security and Medicare. Social Security is
their lifeline. Within ten years, they are going to have a 20
percent cut. So, if Aunt Mary is getting $1,000 a month now,
she is going to open the mail and get $800 and say, what in the
hell happened? How come you all cut me?
I am trying to preserve that from happening. That is what
we should be talking about. How do you preserve the system? Not
this. Is he on your staff?
Mr. Romney. Not that I recall.
Mr. Manchin. Okay. The guy that was screaming back here,
okay, those people there, they don't want it because his
generation may have to have some adjustments made, but anybody
50 and over we have been talking about, we are preserving the
system that we have, and they are trying to weaponize it is
what they are trying to do. We can't let it happen.
Mr. Ferguson. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. I thank you all.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman, and I now yield
as much time as you may take for your line of questions.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Senators, for being here. First, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous
consent to include the following in the record, letters to the
both of us from the American Federation of Government
Employees, the Bipartisan Policy Center, and the National
Postal Mail Handlers Union. A letter to all Representatives and
Senators from the AARP, and finally, a letter to all Members of
Congress from the President and CEO of the National Committee
to Preserve Social Security and Medicare.
Chairman Arrington. These are all based in West Texas?
Mr. Boyle. I----
Chairman Arrington. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Boyle. Good organizations, but well, thank you again
and I very much admire both of your careers in public service.
Just a couple points and then I wanted to give you both the
opportunity to address something that my predecessor who served
on one of these commissions that didn't succeed said when we
had a hearing here a couple of weeks ago on exactly the same
topic.
First, I always point out to people because, you know,
sometimes through nostalgia sort of fairy tales get told about
a perfect past that was never so, sadly. Everyone points to the
great example in 1983 where President Reagan and Tip O'Neill
shook hands and they saved Social Security. That part is true.
The part that is often left out is that we were literally just
weeks away from Social Security payments being missed. That is
how close to the deadline they were.
So, I point out to people I have good news and I have bad
news. The good news is we have time. The Social Security Trust
Fund will become insolvent either 2033 or 2034 depending on if
you use the CBO figures or the Social Security Trustee figures.
So, we have about a decade. Medicare Trust Funds become
insolvent a little bit before that. So, the good news is we
have time. The bad news is we have time.
And given the way human nature is, given the way Congress
tends to act just basically based on deadlines, time in this
regard is not our friend. I would also point out that, and you
gentlemen weren't here for this, but in previous hearings and
in the previous panel, where we had three different bipartisan
sets of Representatives with their own commission ideas, which
actually are very similar to what you have come up with.
Ultimately, regardless of the shape and form of a commission or
if Congress just finally did its job in terms of the
legislative process, it ultimately will come down to a decision
of either more revenues or cuts or a blend of the two.
I have been quite clear I come down on the side of more
revenues. I have a piece of legislation. I put it right there
in writing what my plan would be to ensure Social Security is
there through the year 2100. Sheldon Whitehouse has the
companion piece of legislation in the Senate, and I think it is
important to keep in mind where the American people are on this
issue. According to Navigator polling from this June, when
asked about approaches to reducing the deficit, 82 percent of
Americans opted for raising taxes on the top one percent and
corporations, including closing tax loopholes, and only seven
percent opted for cuts to Social Security and Medicare. See,
the American people are pretty clearly overwhelmingly on the
more revenue side of this equation as opposed to cuts.
Now, finally, I just want to give you the opportunity to
respond to something. My predecessor, the Chairman of this
Committee, John Yarmuth, who served on one of these commissions
that unfortunately did not succeed, which has been the history
of the commissions, the various ones that have existed over the
last decade or two, and he said something in his opening
statement that I am just going to read, and I wanted to invite
the both of you to comment or point out where you think he may
be wrong. He said, ``While some of the other Members of this
Committee might take issue with my evaluation, I believe the
process illuminated one fairly obvious but unavoidable truth.
The problem is not the process, it is the people. In other
words, if Members of Congress are not willing to muster the
determination and courage to take on our fiscal challenges,
even the best ideas will never be implemented.'' So, I would
open up to the both of you to either agree or disagree or in
any way react to what Chairman Yarmuth said. So, I will yield.
Senator Romney, Senator Manchin?
Mr. Manchin. Let me just say on, you know, I look back in
history and try to figure out, Ross Perot ran as an
independent, okay? He ran on one item, the finances of our
country and made that his focal point of running. We were maybe
$2-3 trillion of debt at that period of time, if that, but that
was, he knew we were going in the wrong direction, and no one
was stopping it. So, that caused some concern. We should have
been alarmed, and we weren't. How many of us know people that
we talk to that says, I don't mind paying taxes, I just don't
like how you spend it? We hear that from everybody, people of
high net values and all. How did we do it in 1997? How did they
do it with Clinton and basically Newt Gingrich, putting
Erskine-Bowles, the most responsible, reasonable person, I
think one of the top ones I have ever met, and then having John
Kasich, one of the most sincere people I have ever met on that
side too, come together and form basically a rate, a tax rate
that basically did not cripple or hamper our economy
whatsoever. We grew under that. We were on a trajection that we
would have been basically debt free by 2006. Debt free.
We had 9/11 happen. We declared two wars, never paid for
them. We had two tax cuts we never took in consideration, and
then when those tax cuts, I was there when basically they went
off, the ten years, all President Obama had to do was be
silent, say nothing, and we would have been right back where we
were, same thing with 1997, but they had to interject, anybody
that makes less than $250,000 will not be affected in any way,
shape, or form.
Then, further down the road, just recently, as President
Biden says, anybody that makes less than $400,000 will not be
affected. We are all in this. We are all Americans. We are all
in this. So, if it worked in 1997 up to 2001, we had balanced
budgets, we had surpluses. Look at the last success we have had
and see how that would cripple us today or not, and if it
wouldn't, we have to start looking at how do we save the Trust
Funds?
I have got to answer to Medicaid and Medicare people depend
on in my state. The Trust Funds are going to be basically
insolvent, and we have talked about this. Take the cap off, the
FICA cap. Okay. Well, if you said you spend it strictly to save
the Trust Fund and not being going into the Treasury could be
spent for discretionary or non-discretionary, whatever, people
may be more acceptable. You have to look at everything and we
don't have to cut and basically scare the bejesus out of people
that we have in our home states right now.
So somehow, we have got to calm it down but we have got to
come to the realization someone is going to pay the piper here,
and one of the graphs that Mitt had here showed that where our
interest is going. When interest basically surpasses every
spending item that we have, that is as critical as it gets.
Mr. Boyle. Senator Romney, did you want to make a comment?
Mr. Romney. Yeah, just a couple of comments. One, that poll
is amazing. I can't believe there are eight percent of the
people who think we ought to cut Social Security.
Mr. Boyle. It was seven. It was seven.
Mr. Romney. Was it seven?
Mr. Boyle. Yes, sir.
Mr. Romney. It is astonishing. I would like to see who they
are because I don't know a single Republican or a single
Democrat who thinks we ought to cut Social Security, reduce the
funding for Social Security. They may exist out there, I just
haven't met them. So, there is zero interest on the part of
either side of the aisle to cut Social Security or cut Social
Security benefits. Both the leading contenders for 2024, former
President Trump, current President Biden, have both said we are
not going to touch Social Security, and Joe and I fully agree
and my guess is every Member of this commission would fully
agree.
The question is, well, how about for people in their 20s
and 30s, what should it look like at that point? How long will
they live? What should the tax be? I mean, what part of income
should it be? Should we lift the cap as Senator Manchin has
indicated? So, all those things are on the table for
discussion.
One thing that is not on the table is the idea that we are
going to cut benefits. That would simply be unacceptable. It is
not realistic. I do agree that we have to look to the people,
the people that have been elected to solve these problems. Your
quote about that is absolutely right, and what we found is that
over time, we have come closest to dealing with this challenge,
our taxing, spending, fiscal challenge, when there has been a
bipartisan effort.
Joe and I just worked together on a bipartisan effort on an
infrastructure bill where equal number of Republicans and
Democrats worked together, crossed the divide, if you will, and
got something done. So, a bipartisan effort is what I think the
Huizenga bill proposes, what we are proposing, they are very
similar pieces of legislation, is saying, hey, let's create a
bipartisan effort of elected officials to work together to see
if they can come up with something that passes muster on both
sides of the aisle, and if it does, let's vote on it, up or
down.
I do think that the urgency today, I mean, I didn't
underscore this urgency, but I spent my life in the private
sector, in the financial sector. It is going to get hard to
sell U.S. debt and we might want to lower interest rates, say
okay, we are over the tough times, inflation has been dealt
with, let's bring interest rates down. The Fed is not going to
be able to control interest rates if people don't want to buy
our treasuries. Interest rates are going to start going up all
by themselves, and you can have a spiral where interest rates
go higher, our deficit gets larger. We need to issue more
treasuries. We have to raise interest rates higher. We can find
ourselves in a Latin America type circumstance.
So, sometime during the next few years we can have failed
treasury auctions, interest rates going up. This is the
reality. I recognize Social Security Trust Fund runs out,
Medicare Trust Fund runs out down the road. We have time on
those, but the urgency of a potentially failed treasury
auction, rapidly rising interest rates, and not being able to
keep up militarily, that is with us right now.
Mr. Boyle. No one should misunderstand me and the Chairman
knows this because we have had a ton of hearings, I have never
suggested that the deficit or debt is nothing to worry about.
Clearly, and actually my colleague who was on one of the
previous panels, Mr. Peters from California, points this out
that interest taking an increased percentage of our budget
should concern both Democrats and Republicans alike, probably
for different reasons, but that is something on which we should
all agree.
I will say though, to your point, Senator Romney, I just
looked this morning, the yield on the 10-year is down to 4.3.
It was above five about a month ago, which was a peak. It
hadn't been at that level in over a decade. The demand right
now in the world for U.S. treasuries is still as high as it can
possibly be. So, I don't think that we are anywhere close to
the sort of nightmare Latin American-like scenario that you
described but I am by no----
Mr. Manchin. Congressman, if I----
Mr. Boyle [continuing]. Means suggesting that we have
nothing to worry about and that it will always be that way.
Mr. Manchin. If I can say just one thing.
Mr. Boyle. Yeah.
Mr. Manchin. On that there are basically if you look at how
much we have increased as far as the Treasury, how much of a
quantity of easing we bought ourself----
Mr. Boyle. Yeah.
Mr. Manchin [continuing]. We have never been in this
category. They went quite close to $10 trillion. They are about
8.3, 8.4 now, and we were about $3 or $4 trillion back in 2018,
2019. There is no reason in the world that we should be buying
this much paper of ourself. We raise cane about other countries
manipulating their dollar, their currency. We have been the
worst in the world of manipulating our currency. Buying our own
paper, and have false pretenses of what we have, and how strong
our demand is. Demand is pretty damn strong if you are
competing with us. We are competing with ourselves. That didn't
make any sense to me at all.
And I have said this, that if we don't stop and I think
they have been bringing it down to a certain extent, but not
fast enough, but go ahead, I am sorry.
Mr. Boyle. I am sorry, I didn't want to cut you off. Were
you----
Mr. Manchin. I am fine. I am fine.
Mr. Boyle. I can dispense with my further questions and
yield my time to my colleague Mr. Scott, if he had questions,
or if not. So, I will yield a minute or two to Mr. Scott.
Chairman Arrington. Let's make it quick, Mr. Scott, just
because they have got to get out of here.
Mr. Boyle. Okay.
Mr. Scott. Well, thank you. Well, I just want to make a
point about, we have heard about giving credit to Mr. Kasich
and President Clinton for that. I was there in 1993. I think I
am the only one on the Committee. In 1993, we passed a budget,
zero Republicans, House or Senate, and when we passed it, when
the 218th vote was cast in the House by Marjorie Margolies-
Mezvinsky, it wasn't, way to go, Marjorie. No, it was, bye-bye,
Marjorie. She lost her seat, along with a total of 34 Democrats
lost their seats along with the majority. First time in a long
time.
By 1997, the deficit had already about gone, and so we
didn't need a balanced budget amendment. The budget was just
about balanced by then. All the political price had been paid.
Now, I guess we give credit for George H. W. Bush because he
paid a price a couple of years before I got there, but all of
that heavy lifting was done in the 1993 budget without a single
Republican vote, and then everybody wants to jump on the
bandwagon after all the work has been done, after all the
political price has been paid, and try to get credit.
I did have one question, Senator Romney. I think everybody
knows we got a problem, and the solution is, as we have said,
revenues and cut spending, or combination of both. You have got
all spending, everything on the table. Is that suggesting that
there is no revenue as part of the solution?
Mr. Romney. No, no. Meaning all the spending categories,
mandatory, non-mandatory--discretionary, all of them are all
available to look at, and everything is on the table, meaning
revenues as well as spending. There are other ideas. There is
an arbitrage idea that has been put forward by a couple of
Senators. So, basically all ideas are open.
Mr. Scott. Including revenue?
Mr. Romney. Including revenue, yes.
Chairman Arrington. The gentleman's time has expired. I
think it is a good question.
Mr. Scott. Could I just make one last quick question?
Chairman Arrington. Sure.
Mr. Scott. The Ranking Member said we have got time. The
more time we take, the more expensive it gets. Thank you.
Chairman Arrington. I couldn't agree more. Boy, I have got
all kinds of good counsel over here. Listen, we can all talk
about this all day because we care about it and we just want to
find a path to success for the sake of the generations of
Americans. I love what you said. I couldn't say it more
poignantly and eloquently. People are counting on us to lead
and make sacrifices and make tough decisions and we may be the
only generation that fails to do that. The American spirit, the
American way of putting the interest of the country before our
political interest. That is really what this boils down to.
Can this commission help facilitate that courage and
getting to those decisions? I think we got to give everything a
shot.
Mr. Manchin. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. What is happening now doesn't seem to
be working. Mr. Manchin.
Mr. Manchin. If I may say this. We have two bipartisan
bills. You have one on your side----
Chairman Arrington. Yes, sir.
Mr. Manchin [continuing]. With Congressman Peters and
Congressman Huizenga.
Chairman Arrington. Yes, sir.
Mr. Manchin. We have ours with bipartisan support. We have
enough Members who aren't returning. They have decided to take
a hiatus, okay? There are enough people here that will bite the
bullet.
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Manchin. There are enough people that will bite the
bullet, do the right thing. It is a small price to pay for our
country.
Chairman Arrington. Amen.
Mr. Manchin. We are in absolutely, we have never been in
this condition before. We have never come close to this. So, we
got to figure out how we can do this. Put the right people on
that----
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Manchin [continuing]. That aren't afraid, that aren't
afraid to do something right, and I think it will be the most
rewarding thing we do for our country.
Chairman Arrington. Well said, and one last point. We have
got to sound the alarm because we have been sleepwalking----
Mr. Manchin. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Off the fiscal cliff and
we are numb to the trillions of dollars, and our young people,
they are especially numb to it because to date, we have had the
reserve currency. We still have it to date, but when the
dominoes start falling it is hard to put all the pieces
together again, right? So, at a minimum, at a minimum, this
commission can sound the alarm and have a national campaign to
tell the American people and generations of Americans what is
going to happen if they don't put pressure on us to have the
political will to do the right thing for them.
So, with that, any last word and then we will call this--
Mr. Manchin?
Mr. Manchin. The only thing I would say--go ahead.
Mr. Romney. I am good.
Mr. Manchin. The only thing I would say on that is if the
people in America know what would happen to the United States
of America if we do not maintain the reserve currency of the
world if they know what a factor that is and what it plays into
our national defense, God help us.
Chairman Arrington. God help us.
Mr. Manchin. You want to raise the alarm, that is the way.
Mr. Romney. We are going to sell our treasuries as long as
we are the reserve currency of the world, but a famous person
in a wonderful book once said in terms of going bankrupt, first
you go slowly and then you go suddenly.
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Romney. This is something we are going to have to deal
with at some point. I hope it is not real soon, but we have to
deal with and we need to be responsible enough, and we were
elected to deal with the challenges we face. This is clearly
one of them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you for being generous with your
time.
Mr. Romney. I appreciate it, Ranking Member.
Chairman Arrington. I appreciate all the comments. This
concludes today's hearing, and with that, this Committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
