- MEDICARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY: EXAMINING SOLVENCY AND IMPACTS TO THE FEDERAL BUDGET

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEDICARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY:
EXAMINING SOLVENCY AND IMPACTS
TO THE FEDERAL BUDGET

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., JUNE 13, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
56-921                     WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania,
TOM McCLINTOCK, California             Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  BARBARA LEE, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               JIMMY PANETTA, California
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
CHIP ROY, Texas                      SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah                 ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota,
DAVID G. VALADAO, California           Vice Ranking Member
RON ESTES, Kansas                    DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            BECCA BALINT, Vermont
MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota        ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
RUDY YAKYM III, Indiana                  Virginia
JOSH BRECHEEN, Oklahoma              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina        THOMAS R. SUOZZI, New York

Professional Staff

Gary Andres, Staff Director
Greg Waring, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held in Washington, D.C., June 13, 2024..................     1
Hon. Jodey C. Arrington, Chairman, Committee on the Budget...     2
Prepared Statement of....................................     4
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget.....................................................     6
Prepared Statement of....................................     9
America's Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), submission for the
record.....................................................    13
Bipartisan Policy Center, submission for the record..........    18
Taxpayers Protection Alliance, submissions for the record....    22
Mr. Paul Spitalnic, Chief Actuary, Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services..........................................    24
Prepared Statement of....................................    26
Mr. Stephen Goss, Chief Actuary, Social Security
Administration.............................................    41
Prepared Statement of....................................    43
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget, submission for the record..........................    56
Questions submitted for the record...........................    88
Answers submitted for the record.............................    93

MEDICARE AND SOCIAL SECURITY:
EXAMINING SOLVENCY AND IMPACTS
TO THE FEDERAL BUDGET

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 13, 2024

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 11:15 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon Building, Hon. Jodey Arrington [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Grothman, Smucker,
Cline, Good, Moore, Estes, Brecheen, Boyle, Schakowsky, Kildee,
Peters, Doggett, Panetta, Balint, and Suozzi.
Chairman Arrington. Well, good morning, everybody. This
hearing will come to order. Welcome to the Committee on the
Budget's hearing on examining the solvency of Medicare and
Social Security and the impacts to the Federal budget, to our
seniors, to the future of our country, and to the seniors of
tomorrow and beyond. I can't think of a more important
conversation and information, as important as you all will
deliver to us today to debate, discuss, and to make decisions
so we can put our country and our seniors in the best position
going forward, so thank you all for being here.
Before I begin, I want to welcome the newest Member of the
Budget Committee, representing New York's 3rd District. I don't
know if--there he is. Look at him. Tom Suozzi, one of my
classmates and a true friend and a former Member of Ways and
Means. I don't know if you are going to get back on Ways and
Means or not, but I hope you do because you are a great Member
and I am excited that you are on our Committee. This Committee
continues to grow in heft and the caliber of people on both
sides of the aisle, Mr. Ranking Member. So thank you for
committing to getting quality people on this Committee.
So, Tom, again, congrats on your win and welcome to the
team. Also joining us today is Representative Houchin of
Indiana, and I am going to, I don't know if she's actually here
yet, but I am going to ask unanimous consent that
Representative Houchin be permitted to participate in today's
hearing. We discussed this before, so without objection, so
ordered.
I also want to welcome our witnesses, Mr. Paul Spitalnic,
who serves as Chief Actuary for the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, and Mr. Stephen Goss, thank you all for
being here. He serves as Chief Actuary at the Social Security
Administration, and we appreciate your time and your insights
this morning.
I am going to yield to myself for an opening statement. I
always say I am going to attempt to make it short, but since we
have been delayed this morning, I will simply say thank you for
being here. We try to start, my Ranking Member and I started
this conversation in the 118th Congress in his new role, in my
new role, with a few things, commitments. One was for good
debate, but productive debate, and try to dispense with some of
the ancillary partisan stuff, and so, focusing on policy and
substance.
The other was, let us agree on the math on our balance
sheet. Democrats may have some of their own ideas on how to
address our rapidly deteriorating fiscal health, and
Republicans may have their ideas, but we should all, I think,
at least acknowledge and we have, that the situation that we
face is unsustainable and something has to happen. I was
encouraged also that, and that I give my Ranking Member as much
credit as anybody, that we were going to try to work together
as much as we can, where we can find agreement to fix a budget
process that has failed us and is failing, I should say, maybe
to motivate Members to do what every American family, business,
state and local government has to do, and that's develop a
budget, enforce the budget if you will, live within your means.
That's just not happening in Washington, and it hasn't
happened.
And speaking of things that haven't happened here, we got a
budget out of this Committee, albeit a Republican budget, and
it was a budget that was passed on a partisan basis. So I
acknowledge that it's our sort of Republican blueprint for how
we would manage the fiscal affairs of this country. Okay, and
address the deficit and the debt, but we haven't had an
oversight hearing, gentlemen, in over six years. So, we are
going to exercise our oversight responsibility.
The third thing that I would suggest is a new phenomenon
here, sadly enough for this Committee is you all haven't
presented in 12 years, is my understanding.
They haven't presented the numbers on the Trust Funds to
the Budget Committee who is supposed to steward the nation's
resources, and by the way, purely analytical here, this is just
a purely analytical statement, and I would like for you guys to
confirm it or deny it in your comments and in your remarks this
morning, but of the 30-year unfunded liability that our nation
has on its books and that represents, Mr. Scott Peters, $140
trillion, 98 to 99 percent of it are the two programs that are
represented by these gentlemen. So there is that fiscal impact
and then there is the deeper and maybe even just more personal
getting away from the numbers, the impact of doing nothing.
That is, Republicans claim we have plans to address it, but
words are cheap, and we haven't enacted any of those plans. So,
as we say, Scott, in the church, faith without works is dead.
And I've heard a lot of plans from the Democrats, my
Democrat friends, and no matter how well thought out those
plans may or may not be, faith without works is dead. So just a
lot of lip service from a lot of people. Which is why we also
did something that was unprecedented in a decade. We passed a
bipartisan commission that would have knuckleheads from both
sides of the aisle who would, in all seriousness, thoughtful
leaders in a bipartisan way, looking at two of the most
important programs for our seniors, retirement security, health
care security, 60 plus million people today counting on it,
10,000 people a day counting on it.
And if we do nothing, and let us make sure this is clear,
and then I am done. If we do nothing, Ms. Schakowsky, nothing.
If we do nothing, I don't want to touch it, because if
somebody's going to send out a mailer that shows you all
throwing grandmother off the cliff and we are not going to
touch it because some organization on the outside is going to
say it's a backdoor way to tax the American people and stab
President Trump in the back and all these crazy things. This is
how this town keeps us from being the kind of leaders that our
nation needs now more than ever.
So, my prayer is we unite not as Republicans and not as
Democrats, but as Americans.
And Tom Suozzi is capable of that. That's why I am
encouraged. He's an add. He is an add. He is a value add to
this Committee in that regard. So I won't get everything I want
to solve it, probably. They probably won't get everything they
want, but we must do it or there will be an automatic cut. We
will have not only not saved the program and strengthened it,
we will have caused it to basically collapse in terms of
insolvency, and there will be an automatic cut to beneficiaries
on Social Security within ten, and we got a little bit of grace
in the last set of numbers on Medicare, but that's going to
happen in that program, too, if we don't do something about it.
God bless America. Let's get to work. Our Ranking Member now,
as much time as you may consume.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Arrington follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6921.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T6921.002

Mr. Boyle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank our
witnesses, Mr. Goss and Mr. Spitalnic, for both being here
today. I also want to welcome back my good friend Tom Suozzi,
welcome him to the Budget Committee, and just let me already
depart from my prepared text, which will probably be the rest
of my remarks, departing from my prepared text.
From the very beginning, a year and a half ago, Jodey and
I, the Chairman and I, both said remarkably similar things our
first day, and I do feel that we have largely, 18 months later,
stuck to that, essentially trying to split issues into two
different camps. That on the first set of issues we were really
going to try to work in a genuinely bipartisan way, that there
were things that this Committee could and should be doing, such
as oversight, especially in areas that hadn't taken place in
quite a while. That we should be in the habit of doing markups,
which we have done, finding bipartisan wins, recognizing that
the House is narrowly Republican, the Senate is narrowly
Democratic, if anything is going to be passed and signed into
law, it is going to be, by its nature, bipartisan.
And also doing so in a way that shows the seriousness of
the work of this Committee. There are plenty of others on
Capitol Hill where they engage in the food fight and the
nonsense. That's not why I am here. I know that's not why the
Chairman is here, and I think that that tone that we have both
worked to set has really been followed through by the Members
of this Committee, and I was so pleased when yesterday someone
interviewing me complimented both of us, who has been watching
our hearings and has noticed, and commended both of us for
that. So that's on the first thing.
On the second, though, quite appropriately, there are also
a set of issues that do lend themselves to strong partisan
differences because they reflect the honestly held ideological
differences between a proud conservative from West Texas and a
proud Democrat from Pennsylvania, especially one who grew up in
a labor family, and I do think Social Security and Medicare
certainly are in that latter category.
When I think of two of the main reasons why I am a
Democrat, Social Security and Medicare would be two of the
first things that I would mention. They represent the core of
the coalition Franklin Roosevelt put together a century ago,
and that really is the heart and soul of the Democratic Party
to fight for hardworking Americans like the families in my
district and certainly the family in which I was born and
raised. Social Security is the greatest anti-poverty program in
American history.
And then Medicare, the idea for it, of course, was first
laid out by Franklin Roosevelt, wasn't achieved in his
presidency. Harry Truman really picked up the mantle and fought
valiantly for it, wasn't able to get it done, and then finally
in 1965, Lyndon Johnson, with a retired and much older Harry
Truman standing right next to him, was able to sign that into
law.
So, I believe deeply in Social Security and Medicare and
what they represent, even beyond the paychecks. What they say
to the American people is that we have a basic commitment to
all of those who are in our society, that we are going to take
care of you when you most need it. We are not going to allow
you to retire into poverty or essentially die prematurely in
old age because you lack health insurance and can no longer
work.
So that is what I believe, and with those principles
guiding me, I have certainly worked to do everything I can to
ensure that Social Security and Medicare will be there, not
just today for my father, who is on both after working in
manual labor jobs for more than a half century, paying into the
trust funds for both, but that it will be there for myself when
I retire and my generation, as well as the generations to come.
Now, we have, as I am sure we will hear more about, the
good news that we have until 2035 for the combined Social
Security and Disability Insurance Trust Funds, as well as 2036
for Medicare, but ultimately, Congress must ensure that these
programs have the resources to continue paying full benefits.
As you gentlemen know, I am attempting to put our money where
my mouth is and not just saying that we should have more funds,
but actually putting legislation into place, or at least co-
authoring it to ensure that we would have that. I am proud that
I have introduced a bill along with my counterpart, the lead
Democrat on the Senate Budget Committee, Sheldon Whitehouse.
The name of the legislation is the Medicare and Social
Security Fair Share Act, which honors the commitment that I
have just spoken about by closing corporate tax loopholes and
equitably applying the payroll tax to the top two percent of
earners. Both the actuaries with us today have verified that my
bill would extend the solvency of Social Security and Medicare
indefinitely, and all without raising taxes even one penny on
Americans who are making under $400,000 a year.
So that is one approach, and it is the approach that poll
after poll has shown is supported by the vast majority of
Americans, even a sizable number of Republicans who are polled,
when asked about that approach.
However, to be fair, that is not the only approach that is
out there, and in the interest of bipartisanship, Mr. Chairman,
I believe the Republican Study Committee Budget is not getting
as much attention as I think it should. So let me help my
Republican friends with that and get a little more PR for their
budget.
And I would say while it's the Republican Study Committee
Budget, not the budget that was passed out of this Committee,
80 percent or so of House Republicans are a part of the
Republican Study Committee, including, I believe, every member
of Republican leadership. So it's not exactly like we are
talking about some small group. Their proposal, and I give them
credit for honesty because they put this out, and put it in
black and white. Their plan cuts Social Security benefits for
257 million people. That's three out of every four Americans.
They would do that by raising the retirement age from what will
soon be 67, all the way up to 70.
That is completely unnecessary, and let me be clear,
represents a cut and a substantial cut, because, of course,
Americans would never earn back the revenue they would have
received without some sort of an increase in the retirement
age. I finally want to make this point and pause it there.
There is a lot of confusion when people bring up about deficit
and debt and understandably get concerned about some of the
projections, get concerned about the $34 trillion debt figure.
Let's be clear: Social Security has not added one penny to
our national debt. So let us not make the mistake of confusing
a conversation about our annual deficits or the cumulative
deficits, meaning our national debt, and the solvency of Social
Security or the solvency of the Medicare Trust Funds, which are
entirely separate issues.
With that I see I've already gone over my time. I
appreciate the indulgence, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Boyle follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I may be accused now from my colleagues
of letting you go three minutes and 45 seconds over.
Mr. Boyle. That's the first time I've spoken longer than
you in a year and a half.
Chairman Arrington. You are due at least three and a half
minutes, I admit. So let us introduce our guests and then we
will start the questioning with the limited folks who are here,
and by the way, we have got a lot of things happening. I know
this is an important issue for every Member on the Committee,
so we want to get to your presentations. In the interest of
time, if any Member wants to give an opening statement, I ask
that you submit it for the record, and we will hold the record
open to the end of the day to accommodate those Members who may
not yet have prepared written statements.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Once again to our witnesses, thanks for
being here today. We are going to yield five minutes for your
opening comments. So, Mr. Spitalnic, would you please kick us
off with your presentation, your opening remarks, sir. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF PAUL SPITALNIC, CHIEF ACTUARY, CENTERS FOR
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES

Mr. Spitalnic. Good morning. Chairman Arrington, Ranking
Member Boyle, distinguished Committee Members, thank you for
inviting me to testify about the financial outlook of the
Medicare program. It is my pleasure to represent the 100
professionals working in the Office of the Actuary at the
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. One of our many
responsibilities includes to support the Medicare Boards of
Trustees in their annual report to Congress. I am pleased to
speak to you today regarding the key findings from the 2024
Medicare Trustees Report. Medicare helps pay for health care
services for the aged, disabled, and individuals with end-stage
renal disease. In 2023, Medicare covered 66.7 million people,
59.1 million aged 65 and older, and 7.6 million disabled, and
for the first time in history, Medicare expenditures exceeded
$1 trillion, amounting to $1.037 trillion, while total income
was $1.025 trillion. Assets held in special issue US Treasury
securities decreased by $12.4 billion to $396.7 billion.
The Medicare program has two separate Trust Funds, the
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, HI, and the Supplementary
Medical Insurance Trust Fund, SMI. HI, or Medicare Part A,
helps pay for inpatient hospital, hospice, skilled nursing
facility, and home health services following hospital stays.
SMI consists of Medicare Part B and Part D. Medicare Part B
helps pay for physician, outpatient hospital, access to drug
insurance, home health, and other services for individuals who
have been voluntarily enrolled. Part D provides subsidized
access to drug insurance coverage, also on a voluntary basis.
Medicare also has a Part C, which allows beneficiaries to
enroll in and receive care from private Medicare Advantage
organizations, with payments being made from both the HI and
SMI Part B trust fund accounts. About 48 percent of all
Medicare beneficiaries chose to enroll in a Part C plan in
2023.
The financial statuses of the HI and SMI Trust Funds are
evaluated separately because HI and SMI are financed in very
different ways. Within SMI Part B and Part D, beneficiary
premiums and government contributions are established annually
to cover expected costs for the following year. In contrast, HI
is subject to substantially greater variation in asset growth
since employee and employer tax rates do not change or adjust
to meet expenditures under current law. The HI Trust Fund is
projected to be depleted in 2036 when revenues are projected to
be 89 percent of expenditures.
If assets were depleted, Medicare could pay health plans
and providers of Part A services only to the extent allowed by
ongoing tax revenues. To date, Congress has never allowed the
HI Trust Fund to become depleted. The Trustees also estimate
the long range HI actuarial deficit to be 0.35 percent of
taxable payroll under current law. With the financing
established annually, the SMI Trust Fund is always in actuarial
balance. As SMI per capita benefits grow faster than average
income or per capita GDP, the premiums and coinsurance amounts
paid by beneficiaries represent a growing share of their
income. Similarly, rapid SMI cost growth places a greater
demand on the federal budget. Government contributions to the
SMI program are estimated to constitute 16.9 percent of federal
income tax receipts in 2023 and to exceed 30 percent in roughly
four years.
The financing challenges to the Medicare program include
the projected depletion of the HI Trust Fund, this fund's long
range financial imbalance, and the growth in Medicare
expenditures. Furthermore, should certain price updates
specified under current law prove to be problematic,
expenditures could be even greater than those presented under
the intermediate assumptions of the 2024 report. To help
illustrate the potential magnitude of this understatement, a
set of Medicare projections has been prepared under a
hypothetical alternative in which Medicare spending reflects
less than full implementation of reductions to provider payment
updates required under current law.
Under this illustrative alternative scenario, Medicare
costs as a percentage of GDP continue to increase from 3.8
percent of GDP in 2023, reaching 6.4 percent of GDP in 2050,
and 8.4 percent in 2098, considerably higher than the values
under current law of 5.9 percent of GDP in 2050 and 6.2 percent
of GDP in 2098.
I welcome the opportunity to assist you in your efforts to
ensure the future financial viability of the nation's most
critical program to promote the health and income security of
our senior and disabled populations. I look forward to
answering your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman and now yield
five minutes to Mr. Goss for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN GOSS, CHIEF ACTUARY, SOCIAL SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION

Mr. Goss. Thank you very much Chairman Arrington, Ranking
Member Boyle, Members of the Committee, thanks for the
opportunity to talk to you today about the financial status of
the Social Security Trust Funds or solvency and implications
for the federal budget and debt. Social Security is off budget,
of course, as we know technically, and its operations are
accounted for in the context of Trust Funds, which are separate
legal entities from the general fund of the Treasury. The only
sources of revenue for OASI and DI Trust Funds are the
dedicated taxes paid by covered workers and beneficiaries,
which are invested daily in Treasury securities, plus the
interest on those securities. Future benefits are not promises
or really liabilities. They can only be paid to the extent that
they there are asset reserves in the Trust Funds. As Social
Security has no borrowing authority, should reserves become
depleted at any point, benefit payments would be limited to the
amount of continuing receipts. In this case, Trust Funds would
not run out of money, they would simply need to pay less than
the full amount of scheduled benefits. It is for this reason
that the Congress has always acted timely to avoid Trust Fund
reserve depletion over the 85-year period, 1940 through 2024.
The total federal debt subject to limit is the result of
borrowing required by the general fund of the Treasury to
finance federal expenditures from the general fund in excess of
collected revenues other than those dedicated to the Trust
Funds. The current level on your webpage of total federal debt,
subject to limit, is near 35 trillion at this point. In
contrast, Social Security can only hold positive Trust Fund
reserves, $2.8 trillion at the beginning of 2024, which are
invested in or loaned to the general fund on behalf of future
beneficiaries, that is, the public, that lessen the amount that
Treasury would otherwise have borrowed directly from the
public. Redemption of Trust Fund reserves to pay benefits has
no effect on total federal debt. It just replaces debt owed to
future Social Security beneficiaries with debt owed directly to
the public. In addition, if Trust Fund reserves were allowed to
become depleted, current law would not allow transfers from the
general fund, thus increasing publicly held debt in order to
pay full scheduled benefits. The often-cited Balanced Budget
and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 says to assume that
resources will be adequate to make payments required by law.
Social Security benefits beyond the balances available in the
Trust Funds are not allowed, much less required.
The 2024 Trustees Report indicates that the cost of paying
currently-scheduled OASI retirement survivors benefits will
exceed income in all future years, causing the OASI Trust Fund
reserves to decline from $2.6 trillion at the start of 2024 to
reserve depletion in November of 2033, at which point 79
percent of scheduled benefits would be payable. This projection
is slightly improved from that in the 2023 Trustees Report
because the economy and employment grew much more in 2023 than
had been assumed in the 2023 report. The DI Trust Fund reserves
are projected to continue rising in the future, with annual
income exceeding cost of paying scheduled benefits through 2100
and beyond. Now, on a combined basis, the OASI and DI Trust
Fund reserves will decline from $2.8 trillion at the beginning
of 2024 to depletion in June 2035, at which point 83 percent of
currently scheduled benefits would be payable. We note that the
current projection of OASDI Trust Fund reserve depletion in
2035 stands in contrast to the projection for reserve depletion
in 2063 that was made at the enactment of the 1983 amendment.
While OASDI cost as percent of GDP is now five percent lower
than projected back in 1983 and will be through 2035, OASDI
cost as percentage of our taxable payroll, our tax base, is now
five percent higher than had been projected back in 1983 and
will be through 2035. The primary reason is that the earnings
of the top six percent of workers whose earnings exceed the
taxable maximum level under Social Security unexpectedly grew
considerably faster than for the other 94 percent of workers
between 1983 and 2000, lowering the percent of covered earnings
that is actually taxable from 90 percent in 1983 and expected
in the future then, to just 82.5 percent by the year 2000 and
thereafter.
The changing age distribution of the population, due mainly
to reduced birth rates since 1965 and the improvement in life
expectancy were well anticipated and accurately anticipated
back in 1983 but were not fully addressed with a permanent
solution at that time. With the reduced share of earnings now
subject to OASDI payroll tax since 1983, the need for further
legislative change has been accelerated, and we look forward to
working with you on developing these changes.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Goss. We will now move
to the question and answer portion of our hearing. I'll start
with five minutes and we will have our colleagues also have
five minutes to dialogue. Mr. Goss, let us start with where,
pick up with where you left off on the Social Security Trust
Fund. How many people are going on to this earned benefit
program a day? Is it true that it's 10,000 a day, the retirees
that are entering that program as beneficiaries?
Mr. Goss. I think that's very, very close to the market. It
depends a little bit on the nature of the economy at the
moment. Job opportunity, but yes, because of the surge of the
baby boom, are reaching retirement age now. We are having a
large influx.
Chairman Arrington. My understanding, it's the largest
generational retirement in the history of the world, and so
that's an important trend I think we need to consider as we are
talking about making this program work not only for seniors
today, but solvent and effective for the retirement of seniors
in the future. The only responsible way to look at this right
is to think about seniors today and our children, and let us
talk about another trend. Worker trend. Worker per retiree or
per beneficiary. Is that a ratio that's going up or down? The
worker per beneficiary ratio?
Mr. Goss. The workers per beneficiary is indeed going down.
Really just because of the demographics.
Chairman Arrington. Okay.
Mr. Goss. One thing that's saving us a little bit on that
is while the so-called baby boom generation is reaching
retirement age, I mean, they are starting to get benefits. They
are also working longer to higher ages than prior generations.
So we are getting some help on that, but the worker to
beneficiary ratio is definitely declining over time.
Chairman Arrington. Okay, so that's a pretty challenging
set of forces on the solvency of the program. 10,000 a day
coming onto the program and the basis of revenue stream to
support it, and it was set up to be self-sustaining, but that's
not a self-sustaining set of trends. That math won't work, and
it won't work. Even according to the Trustees and your report,
it will become insolvent by when? 2033? Where we aren't
bringing enough revenues in to pay the full benefit to every 60
plus million beneficiary who has earned this benefit from this
program.
Mr. Goss. 2033 is exactly right for the separate OASI fund.
On a combined basis it's 2035.
Chairman Arrington. So on the current path, with the
current trends, by 2033, what will be the cut. What did I say
20?
Mr. Boyle. Well, 2035.
Chairman Arrington. 2035?
Mr. Goss. So 2035 for the OASI and DI funds on a combined
basis.
Chairman Arrington. Okay. Within roughly ten years, there
is going to be a point at which we are not able to pay
beneficiaries their full amount. How much will they take in an
automatic cut if we, as Congress, don't do something? Whether
it's a programmatic reform to make it more sustainable or a pay
for to make it sustainable. What's that cut look like?
Mr. Goss. We are confident you all would make these
changes, but if, as you are suggesting, we did not have such
changes, we would be in a position in 2035 of being able to pay
only 83 percent or a 17 percent reduction in total expenditures
that could be made compared to what's intended for the full
scheduled benefits. That does not necessarily mean----
Chairman Arrington. What's the cut that seniors will take?
What's the cut to their benefit that they will take?
Mr. Goss. 17 percent automatic cut on average.
Chairman Arrington. Automatic cut. Seniors need to hear
that. 17 percent automatic cut if we do nothing. Correct?
Mr. Goss. Yeah.
Chairman Arrington. Okay, and you have more confidence in
Congress than most of our constituents, but it happened. It
happened back in the 1980s. When was the last time when this
program was close to insolvency, what happened? When did that
happen and what happened? And how did they address that
solvency? And who addressed that solvency?
Mr. Goss. Well, the last time was really in 1982 when the
combined program was approaching this and the Congress did act.
There was the so-called Greenspan Commission, which came up
with some ideas. Congress extended that and completed that, and
we had the----
Chairman Arrington. Let me ask you this, Mr. Goss. Was the
Greenspan Commission, did it precede the final deal that was
voted on by the Congress? That is the Greenspan Commission, and
was it a bipartisan commission?
Mr. Goss. It was a bipartisan commission.
Chairman Arrington. Okay, so there is a bipartisan
commission. They are looking at ways to find consensus to make
this work, and then let me just kind of fast forward, get to
the punchline. President Ronald Reagan, beloved Republican
leader of our country, an American leader of our country, and
Tip O'Neill, and Democrats and Republicans all came together to
support it, to do what was right for our country, for our
seniors. Were revenues and expenditures part of that combined
reform initiative to make it solvent into the future?
Mr. Goss. They were indeed.
Chairman Arrington. Okay, so I am going to yield, and, just
to put the sharp point here on the end of this conversation,
the last time we were facing insolvency, Republicans and
Democrats came together through a mechanism of a commission,
bipartisan, and then you had a Republican, very conservative
President and a liberal Speaker in Tip O'Neill, and they struck
a deal to save Social Security, and they had both pay fors and
programmatic reforms as part of their overall initiative. I
suspect that's probably what's going to happen in the future if
we are going to do it. So with that, I am going to ask my
Ranking Member for his Q and A.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, and Mr. Chairman, before I start my
questions, I ask unanimous consent to submit a statement from
Max Richtman, the President and CEO of the National Committee
to Preserve Social Security and Medicare, that the statement be
submitted into the record.
Chairman Arrington. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Boyle. Thank you. So just a few different points that I
want to kind of drill down on first with this conversation
about 2033, versus 2035. Some of the confusion might be that
the projections from CBO just a couple of years ago were that
we had until 2033. We have gotten good news of late, both when
it comes to Social Security and Medicare, that actually we have
a couple more years of full solvency. 2035, Social Security,
2036 when it comes to Medicare, that is because of stronger
economic growth than was projected just a couple years ago. So
did you want to speak about that and draw the link between the
two and why it is that now we do have until 2035 and 2036,
respectively, instead of a date that is closer?
Mr. Goss. I think over that time period, the improvement we
have had is largely because of the economy. There has been
improvements in productivity and the labor force that has
brought in more revenue, and it has resulted in increases in
costs, and also employment rates have been very strong, and one
of the things that's been really good is, as mentioned already,
with the retirement of the baby boom generation upon us, elders
are working to higher ages now, which is a very, very positive
effect.
Mr. Boyle. So it's not just in Congress. I don't know if
you have anything you wanted to add to that.
Mr. Spitalnic. There is a very similar story on the
Medicare HI Trust Fund as well. Just four years ago, the
Trustees were projecting that the HI Trust Fund would become
depleted in 2026, and as you noted in the 2024 report, the
depletion date is now ten years later, 2036. That is a dramatic
change, and there has been a dramatic change in the underlying
finances of the program, both on the income and on the
expenditure side. On the expenditure side, the projections from
2020 to 2036, the point of where we are now projecting HI
depletion date, expenditures are now projected to be 3.2
percent lower than what they were just four years ago in the
2020 Trustees Report. At the same time, the income projections
are up 11.6 percent, and so there is just a dramatic change in
the income projections coming into the HI Trust Fund.
Mr. Boyle. Yes, quickly, before, because I want to get to
my next topic.
Mr. Goss. If I could just add, actually the Social Security
combined Trust Fund reserve depletion date has been projected
within the range of 2033 and 2035 for the last 13 years. We are
at the top end of that now. So it is more positive, but it's
been a very stable projection.
Mr. Boyle. Well, whether it's Medicare or Social Security,
obviously the good news of this strong economy, obviously
helping us and giving us more time to grapple with this issue
here in Congress. Now, let me transition to immigration. Very
simply, does immigration help or hurt the financing of Social
Security and Medicare?
Mr. Goss. Well, let me start at least. Immigration
typically is for people who are in their twenties to maybe late
thirties. So generally speaking, when people enter the country
as immigrants, along many cases with children, but people of
working age tend to be of younger age. Therefore, when they
come to the country, they tend to come here for economic
opportunity and enter the labor force, and that's very much a
positive. That actually helps with having more revenue coming
in. Eventually, they will develop insured status and be able to
get benefits.
Mr. Boyle. Although not necessarily all of them. You will
have some people who are actually paying, literally paying into
the system, but will actually never receive benefits decades
later.
Mr. Goss. Absolutely, and another positive is that people
enter in their twenties, thirties, et cetera, as immigrants.
They may have children along the way, and that adds to the
births that we have in our country. That helps solve some of
our problem of the low birth rates.
Mr. Boyle. Especially given every country in the western
world is challenged from a birth rate perspective and will
increasingly be challenged over the next 40 to 50 years. We
discussed this separately. It turns out I mentioned this in my
opening remarks, and you also touched on it as well, but I just
want to make it again, crystal clear for everyone. Social
Security does not add one dime to our national debt. Can you
just briefly again explain why that is?
Mr. Goss. Well, that's exactly right. Social Security does
not have any authority in the law to have any borrowing. Again,
it can only spend, the money that goes into the Trust Funds is
dedicated just to go into Trust Funds, and it can be used only
for one purpose, for paying expenses of Social Security. It
can't be used for any other reason. This is because of the laws
that you all have passed. So again, any money that comes into
the Trust Funds and builds up reserves that we have now, the
$2.8 trillion, actually helps cover some of the roughly $35
trillion of overall debt we have. If we spend on the Trust
Funds, that doesn't increase the total debt subject to limit.
It just simply means that it gets shifted from a little bit
less of it or over time, less of it being covered by the monies
that are owed by the general fund of the Treasury to future
beneficiaries, to more of it being covered by borrowing
directly from the public, but both of those borrowings are both
in the public interest, obviously.
Mr. Boyle. Thank you, and I'll yield back.
Mr. Moore [presiding]. You still have three more minutes, I
think.
Mr. Boyle. No----
Mr. Moore. That's a joke.
Mr. Boyle. Oh, okay. All right.
Mr. Moore. The gentleman yields. The gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman is recognized.
Mr. Grothman. Is this on? I guess it is. Okay. Mr.
Spitalnic, the Medicare Trustees Report states that the
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund expenditures will rise faster
than income in the next decades. Can you explain reasons why
expenditures are going up quicker than income? Then I am going
to give you a question I don't know that you are qualified to
answer.
Mr. Spitalnic. Sure. There are several reasons why
expenditures out of the HI Trust Fund are growing faster than
the income. My colleague Mr. Goss mentioned a most significant
one, and that's the changing demographics that as the baby boom
generation in particular has been retiring, they are moving
from the employed, paying into the program, into beneficiaries
receiving benefits from the program, and so that demographic
shift is the largest component of why that shift is occurring.
Mr. Grothman. That makes sense, but how much are we
spending, say, per 70 year old? Per 72 year old, whatever. How
is the health care spending per person going up relative to
inflation?
Mr. Spitalnic. On a per capita basis, spending in the
Medicare program has actually been tracking pretty closely to
the general inflation rates. So there has been pretty
consistent increases in the recent past. In the Trustees
Report, there are projections that those per capita costs will
increase at a faster rate in the near future and into the
future, mostly because health care costs tend to increase
faster than other sectors of the economy.
Mr. Grothman. That's exactly what we are trying to get at,
but there are a few years lately that hasn't been going on, but
in general, health care costs are going up quicker than a
general inflation rate, right?
Mr. Spitalnic. Yes.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do Medicare costs vary dramatically
from one part of the country to the other?
Mr. Spitalnic. There are certainly regional variations.
There are differences in Medicare spending, urban areas versus
rural areas, for example, but there are consistencies across
areas as well.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, could you give me some examples? Like
some states that are low, some states that are high, and the
degree to which there is a variance from state to state.
Mr. Spitalnic. The one that jumps to mind is in particular
with respect to the Medicare Advantage program. When Medicare
rates are set, they are set at a county level. So, for example,
Medicare spending in Miami County is typically higher than in
most other parts of the country. So that's just one example.
Mr. Grothman. Give me an example of how much higher, just
dollar wise. I've heard that before. Miami is high.
Mr. Spitalnic. I'd be happy to give you the follow-up with
the details on that.
Mr. Grothman. Is it, do you know, just is it great? Is it
like five percent higher, 25 percent higher?
Mr. Spitalnic. It is many percent higher.
Mr. Grothman. Like 25?
Mr. Spitalnic. I don't want to misspeak. So I'll----
Mr. Grothman. Okay. It's not fair because you didn't come
prepared for that today. I wonder, though, if you do get the
answers for the Committee, if you could. Yeah, tell us where we
would be at, could we solve this problem? If everybody were at,
say, the lower fifth of spending per person on Medicare, would
that be enough to make a real dent in the problem?
Mr. Spitalnic. There have been theoretical exercises of,
can you, if payments in the highest county were replaced with
payments at the lowest county, would that solve the Medicare
problem? I think from a theoretical perspective, that's
accurate. From a practical perspective, it's not really all
that meaningful.
Mr. Grothman. I don't know, but that's an interesting
thing. Okay. We would love to have that. Mr. Goss, labor force
participation rate. Can you tell us what, right now a lot of
people, they retire and as a result, the restrictions on how
much they can make before we begin to reduce the Social
Security benefit, right? Where's the cutoff there? $19,000?
$20,000? Where do we begin to say you get less money the more
you work?
Mr. Goss. Excellent question. I think it's in the order of
between $15,000 and $20,000. I don't have that exactly at my
fingertips, but an important part of that is the reduction from
the retirement earnings test only applies for people up to age
67, at 67 and above, where people are going to receive benefits
without any effect.
Mr. Grothman. Are you sure 67 could be higher than that?
Mr. Goss. Well, currently it's 67. It's at the so called
normal or full retirement age, where the retirement earnings
test stops applying, but the good news is that if anybody
receives a reduction in their benefit, if they start receiving
benefits before 67, and then they receive a reduced monthly
benefit at any point before 67, we will recompute your benefit
as of 67 and for thereafter, and take away the reduction for
having received benefits in earlier months.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, and I would just go on record as saying
the idea that the normal retirement age is 70 is crazy.
Mr. Moore. Gentleman yields. Thank you, the gentlewoman
from Illinois, Ms. Schakowsky, is recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Schakowsky. Oh, there we go. Okay. Thank you. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman. Whoever is here, glad to see you. So let me
say to my Republican colleagues, when you talk about cutting
Social Security and Medicare in any way that is reducing the
benefits, I say to you, make my day. These are, as our Ranking
Member said, the most popular programs in the country. The vast
majority of Americans rely on them, and the very idea that the
only way that we can solve our economic problems is to cut
these programs. Make my day, and let me just say this. There
are 67 million Americans right now who rely on Social Security,
and let us once again say that this is not an entitlement
program. These are people who have paid every paycheck to have
this earned benefit, and the idea that it would be cut, we did
confirm, and you have confirmed several times that Social
Security does not add a penny, Mr. Goss, to the deficit that we
have, but what I did want to say to the Chairman of the
Committee, who was saying we have to do something, there was
also discussion. There is a something, there are a number of
somethings that are going to be done, and I wonder if you could
just briefly talk about there--we do need to act and that there
are plans to do that.
Mr. Goss. Well, plans, there are a number of potential
plans. We have developed estimates that are up on our webpage
for various kinds of approaches. Back in 2016, we developed
estimates for a plan by record, then Ways and Means
subcommittee Chair Johnson, for changes which were largely
benefit reductions. We developed estimates for a number of
Members of Congress, including Ranking Member Boyle and others
here, many people in the Senate and in the House who've
developed proposals that would largely bring in additional
revenue, as Chairman Arrington mentioned. Obviously, there are
a lot of possibilities here, and we have estimates that would
close the gap, and I think as, as Mr. Boyle already indicated,
the estimates that we developed about a year ago for the
proposal would not only close the 75-year gap, but also put us
into something referred to as sustainable solvency. So we would
be projecting that the Trust Funds would not be declining and
becoming depleted anytime in the foreseeable future. So there
are many possibilities here. We just need to----
Ms. Schakowsky. Many possibilities, and I want to get on to
your bill that I think is a really good one. I wanted to ask
Mr., I'll get it, Spitalnic is that right? Something like that.
Mr. Spitalnic. Spitalnic.
Ms. Schakowsky. I am sorry.
Mr. Spitalnic. I would say close.
Ms. Schakowsky. Spitalnic. Okay. I am sorry. So when it
comes to Medicare, I wanted you to say, to tell me, do you, are
we seeing that the, even just the talk about negotiating for
lower drug prices has decreased the number? I know that we are
going to, the full effort of negotiating for lower drug prices
is going to be coming in in full force, but aren't we seeing
that even the hint of it has lowered the cost of drugs?
Mr. Spitalnic. So the Inflation Reduction Act, which
introduced a whole host of provisions affecting prescription
drugs and the Medicare program, has a lot of different effects.
Some are benefit expanding and therefore cost increasing onto
the Medicare program, and others, such as the negotiation
provisions and the linkage of prices to CPI, are cost reducing.
The net effect of those plays out over time. Initially the
impact of the Inflation Reduction Act is actually cost
increasing, but ultimately we do expect those negotiation
provisions and those other cost containments in the Inflation
Reduction Act will lead to spending reductions.
Ms. Schakowsky. Great. Am I almost out of time? I guess I
am. I did want to just say I think we have to do something
about Medicare Advantage, and I think there needs to definitely
be some more control over Medicare Advantage that we have right
now and oh no, I am not out of time. Okay, good. I wondered if
you could talk a little bit about that. We have seen that there
is overpayment right now in, am I not? Oh, I am overtime. Okay,
I yield back.
Mr. Estes [presiding]. Thank you. Now recognize the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Good for five minutes.
Mr. Good. Thank you Mr. Chairman, and thank you again to
our witnesses. I am disappointed to hear the previous Member
that was speaking from the minority side said that talk of
cutting Social Security and Medicare benefits makes her day.
She's the first person I've heard mention that today, so that's
kind of disappointing. That would be exciting to someone about
talking about the opportunity to cut Social Security, Medicare
benefits would make her day. Mr. Goss. Is it Goss or Goss? I am
sorry.
Mr. Goss. Goss.
Mr. Good. Goss. Thank you, Mr. Goss. Were you suggesting
earlier that we have true cash reserves in the Social Security
Trust Fund versus an IOU and those funds aren't being
effectively used to cover other deficit spending?
Mr. Goss. We certainly do. We have $2.8 trillion of excess
taxes that were paid in by American workers and beneficiaries
and were invested in the Trust Funds, all of that.
Mr. Good. What's our unfunded liability now on that? On the
Social Security?
Mr. Goss. Well, we actually, per the Federal Accounting
Standards Advisory Board, we don't really talk about it as an
unfunded liability, but an unfunded obligation in the future. A
little semantic difference there, but that is, I don't have the
number exactly, but it is many, many trillions of dollars. All
that represents is the shortfall in the future of the total
amount of scheduled benefits under law versus what we have
scheduled for revenue, and we know we have to better align
those in the future.
Mr. Good. Yeah. So wouldn't it be true that Social Security
and other mandatory programs are matching, if not exceeding
total tax revenue at this point?
Mr. Goss. I am sorry, could you?
Mr. Good. Total mandatory programs, including Social
Security, Medicare, do they not match or if not exceed total
revenue coming in at this point?
Mr. Goss. Well, this one, Social Security at this moment is
in fact, its expenditures are exceeding the amount of revenue
coming in. That's where the Trust Fund reserves comes in to
play.
Mr. Good. Because every discretionary dollar we vote on is
borrowed. Every single discretionary dollar is borrowed. Right.
We recognize that. Would either of you venture an estimate on
what's the typical lifetime payment into Social Security versus
the lifetime typical benefit, dollar wise, how much is a
typical person has paid into Social Security now versus over
the lifetime, what the recipient benefit is?
Mr. Goss. We have a number of actuarial notes up on the web
addressing that, and the interesting part of that is it's a
question of whether you compare the amount that individuals
have and are expected to contribute under current law, tax
rates versus, then the question is, versus the benefits that
are simply scheduled in the future or the benefits that will in
fact be payable under current law. If you look at the scheduled
taxes for an individual to pay at various different earnings
levels compared to the scheduled level of benefits, which, as
we know, we are under financed for actually paying those, that
looks very generous, but it's not possible under current law,
and of course, the ratio of what you can expect to receive to
what you've paid in does vary because we have a progressive
payment system for Social Security. As we are all well
familiar, the benefit formula favors those with the lower
earners.
Mr. Good. The typical person paying Social Security pays
about how much per month for, say, 40 years, and so therefore,
at the end of when they retire, they've paid how much in versus
how long they typically receive Social Security and how much
that monthly benefit is. Surely you have some estimate of how
those two numbers compare.
Mr. Goss. So try to do a little bit of arithmetic real
quickly here. If we have a $60,000 a year worker or $5,000 a
month, and they are paying 6.2 percent of that themselves.
Mr. Good. So $300 a month, $3,600 a year, take that times
20 years, that would only be $70,000. All right, that person at
retirement is going to receive how much of a monthly benefit on
average?
Mr. Goss. I don't have that number right off hand, but
it's----
Mr. Good. Well, it's going to be a lot more than if you,
let us say an average recipient's 20 years at $1,500 a month,
that's $18,000 a year. $18,000 a year times 20 years is
$360,000. You just told me they were paying $70,000 in and
receiving with that estimate anyway, $360,000. When Social
Security first began, how many payees, payers paying into it
versus the recipients? What was that number like?
Mr. Goss. Well, when Social Security first began, the ratio
was something----
Mr. Good. 30 to one, something like that.
Mr. Goss. 40 to one. But of course----
Mr. Good. 40 to one?
Mr. Goss. Yeah.
Mr. Good. What's the payee versus recipient now?
Mr. Goss. It's between two and three and we are heading
down towards two.
Mr. Good. Two or three to one, right?
Mr. Goss. Yeah, but of course, remember at the very
beginning, beneficiaries could only get a benefit in 1940 if
they'd worked for at least two out of the three years prior to
that. So not many 70 to 80 to 90 year olds were eligible for a
benefit. That's why that number is kind of a little bit
distorted.
Mr. Good. So would you suggest Congress does need to act to
preserve and protect Social Security so that it's sustainable?
Mr. Goss. It absolutely does need to act.
Mr. Good. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, and now I'll recognize for five
minutes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Kildee.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you Mr. Chairman, and thanks to our
witnesses for being here and following on my colleague Mr.
Good's comments, which I think do a good job of daylighting the
fact that we have a problem. I think where we maybe diverge is
how we address that problem, what the solution looks like. I
represent people in Michigan. In my home state, over two
million seniors rely on Social Security and Medicare just to
make their ends, make ends meet. For many of those seniors,
it's their most important source of retirement income. Some,
it's their only source of retirement income and Medicare is
their sole health care coverage. These programs aren't
handouts, as we know. Americans contribute to Social Security
and Medicare with every paycheck and have a right to expect
that they'll be there as promised when they retire. That's sort
of the deal that we made. When you work hard, you play by the
rules, you make the contributions, you ought to be able to
retire with dignity. That was conceptually why Social Security
and Medicare were put on the books in the first place, to
prevent the kind of senior elder poverty that was so prevalent
before these programs were in place.
Now we have put forward on this side of the dais our
solutions to shore up the Social Security Trust Funds to, and
simultaneously, by the way, increase benefits for future
retirees, and we do so by making the wealthiest Americans pay
their fair share. Now, not everybody has to agree with that,
but we put our plan on paper and have presented it, and it
stands in pretty stark contrast to proposals by Republicans.
Maybe not all, but the Republican Study Committee, which
represents 80 percent of Republicans in the House, recently
released their budget plan, and under that plan, they proposed
cutting benefits in order to deal with this problem, $1.5
trillion, in fact. Their proposal, which raises the retirement
age, listen, everybody out there, raises the retirement age and
cuts benefits, is not the way to solve this problem for
millions of the people I represent, just getting by, that kind
of talk scares them. So the answer, I don't believe, is to cut
benefits, but to deal with the problem at its core. So if I
could start with Mr. Goss, for a person making $400,000 a year.
This question, by the way, may seem familiar to you from the
hearing at the Ways and Means Committee, but for a person
making $400,000 a year versus, say, a person making $50,000 a
year, can you just spitball what percentage of a person's
income in those two cohorts, what percentage of their income
goes to Social Security?
Mr. Goss. Well, the person making $50,000 is easy. They pay
12.4 percent, half by themselves and half by their employer.
For a person making, I am sorry, that was $400,000?
Mr. Kildee. Right, $400,000.
Mr. Goss. Because payroll taxes are only paid this year, up
to $168,600, that would leave you in a position of the payment
on that amount of their earnings, would cover about five
percent of their total $400,000. About 5.2 percent, maybe 2.6
percent by them and 2.6 percent by their employer.
Mr. Kildee. Great. So if you could just also comment on
what enacting our proposal, you don't have to opine on its
merit, but the enactment of our proposal to lift the payroll
tax cap on people making over $400,000. What effect would that
have on the solvency of the trust funds?
Mr. Goss. It would have a considerable effect. In fact, in
Mr. Boyle's bill and from the Senate side also. Let us see. I
think I have a number here of what we have. It would actually
reduce our long-range actuarial deficit from 3.5 percent of
payroll by 2.26, by almost two thirds. So it would reduce our
long term shortfall by about two thirds. So it'd be a big start
towards aligning revenue and cost of the future.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you. Similarly, Mr. Spitalnic I wonder if
you might comment how, and this follows on Ms. Schakowsky's
questions, how repealing the power to negotiate drug prices
would affect seniors' out of pocket drug expenditure costs.
Mr. Spitalnic. So, as I mentioned, the IRA has a number of
provisions, some benefit enhancing, which are cost increasing,
but the ones you mentioned, the negotiation provisions, the
linkage to inflation, those are cost reducing. If those
provisions specifically were repealed, that would increase
Medicare costs.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you. I am out of time. Nobody has to like
our plan, but the fact of the matter is we have been willing to
put one on paper that solves the problem. Now we are waiting
for the alternative to show up, and until it does, we are going
to stick with this because I think this would get us where we
need to go. With that, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, and now I recognize myself for five
minutes to follow up on some questions here. I actually want to
start off, Mr. Goss, as kind of a follow up with some of the
questions that Mr. Good had asked earlier, and I know it may be
a quick thumbnail sketch, or maybe it's something that you need
to provide to the Committee after the hearing's over, but
talking through that hypothetical example of a person making
$60,000 a year and what they pay in versus what they receive in
benefits and how that impacts the Social Security trust fund,
can you elaborate on that a little bit? I know you, if you
don't have at your fingertips a little bit more than what you
answered to Mr. Good, maybe I'd ask you if you could kind of
thumbnail sketch that over a 35-year career of paying in versus
payment out at current life expectancy.
Mr. Goss. So we do have a couple of items up on the web
that we redevelop pretty much annually, the money's worth
ratios, which is just what we are talking about. The present
value of the contributions you and your employer made relative
to the amount of benefits you might expect, or the internal
rate of return. What kind of rate of return would be required?
Looking at the money's worth ratios, if we look at that
compared to what the benefits are scheduled to be in the
future, then those are in reasonable alignment. What we
currently have, though, is a situation where our scheduled
benefits are in excess of what are payable in the future based
on the contributions that have been made and will be made in
the future, largely because of the changing life expectancy.
Not life expectancy, but really largely because of the changing
age distribution of the population. Yeah, and we can submit
much more for the record on that. Thank you.
Mr. Estes. Yeah, and that may be something. Get some follow
up information or research on that, because to some degree,
it's kind of a math problem on Social Security, is the amount
of money going in has to equal or be greater than the amount of
money going out to make sure that process, and there are two
factors to that. One, the number of workers versus retirees and
what's being paid in, and also the life expectancy. As you
mentioned earlier, what was the life expectancy when Social
Security was created and 65 was set as the age in which the
full retirement payment was made? What was the life expectancy
at that point in time?
Mr. Goss. I'd have to probably go back to the Trustees
Report and pick that number up, but I can share with you this
one, I think, interesting detail, which is back in 1983, at the
time of our last major amendments, when we were foreseeing what
would happen, we were projecting that by about 2015, 2018,
before the pandemic, the life expectancy at age 65 would rise
to, I believe the number was 16 or 16.1 years. It was much
lower than that back in 1983 and earlier, and we projected
would rise to about 16.1 years. Lo and behold, that turned out
to be very accurate. So our projections about life expectancy
and decline in mortality rates has been very, very accurate.
Mr. Estes. Okay. Yeah, I was thinking life expectancy in
1937 was about 63 years, and that was kind of what I was trying
to confirm versus today, life expectancy, as you mentioned,
it's closer to 85, 86. Depends on when you calculate it on the
actuary tables, which has an impact on the amount of time that
you have, payements going out.
Mr. Goss. Very much so. We try to focus to a great extent
on what life expectancy is as of, say, age 65 being important,
because much of the improvement in life expectancy from many
years back was because of a reduction of early childhood and
infant mortality. So a lot of that restriction, down to maybe
only 60 something, was because many people were unfortunately
perishing at a very young age, even before they would enter the
workforce.
Mr. Estes. Right, right. Shifting gears just a little bit.
So, in, it's correct that in 2033, the trust, the Old Age and
Retirement Trust Fund is going to be depleted. Right. Run down
and at that point in time, what was the latest expectation of,
or estimate of what the shortfall was? Was it in the 22 percent
to 23 percent range?
Mr. Goss. A little bit, was. I think we are at, what, 79
percent payable at that point for the OASI fund.
Mr. Estes. So, yeah, and I think there are some competing
numbers between CBO and, and Social Security, which, you know,
sometimes that just depends on how you are estimated, and I
guess my concern about that is that if nothing's done, somebody
who's currently getting a $1,000 check a month is going to have
their check cut to $790 if it's a 79 percent payable. Right. If
nothing changes between now and then. So that's the, I guess
the driving force and the concern I think on the part of a lot
of folks, is that we need to, we need to step up and do
something about this. We have got to make some changes in order
to make sure that the folks that have paid in can get the
payment out that they are expected, and that's the problem that
we have a concern with. So I've run out of time and so now I'll
yield to the gentleman from California, Mr. Peters, for five
minutes.
Mr. Peters. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thanks for having this
hearing, and it has been too long a period. I didn't realize
how long it's been before we, since we have heard from you and
your teammates. We have talked a lot about Social Security and
Medicare in this Committee during the 118th Congress. They are
vital programs we have to protect. They are going to need some
reform for us to be able to pay our obligations and for us to
be able to ensure that they are available for future
generations as well, who are very cynical about the prospects
for getting Social Security and Medicare. I think on this side
of the aisle we all agree that the Republicans' proposals are
far too extreme. The Republican Study Committee's 2025 budget
proposal would slash Social Security benefits and transform
Medicare into a premium support program. That's not what I
want, and while the most recent Trustees Report showed some
improvement in the Social Security's finances, Trust Funds
remain in trouble and beneficiaries are still staring down a
barrel of around a 20 percent across the board cut, benefit,
benefit cut in the next ten years, whether you are 72 or 92,
whether you are rich or poor.
For a long time, Congress has been kicking the can down the
road, and now we are kicking an oil drum down the road because
this problem is only getting worse and closer to us. Let us
assume that there are people who would like to cut Social
Security, and I worry that in 2034, those people will say on
the eve of a 20 percent cut, they'll say, okay, let us
compromise and call it a 15 percent cut instead, and they have
all the leverage in the room the more time we wait to fix this
problem. The best thing we can do to protect Social Security,
Medicare, is act now, but the longer we wait to start this
process, the more leverage those of us who want to preserve
benefits lose and more expensive a solution becomes. I co-lead
the Fiscal Commission Act with my colleague Bill Huizenga from
Michigan. We introduced the bill last September, have 26
bipartisan cosponsors, including Congressman Panetta and Suozzi
here on this Committee. Any enduring efforts to strengthen
Social Security are going to require bipartisan buy in. I think
everyone said that so far, and this is not working. I mean, as
much goodwill, particularly among the two leaders of this
Committee, there is, we are not getting closer to a solution
from a legislative standpoint. I believe our best shot is an
open door, public, productive dialogue through a bipartisan
commission, and if we don't act to create a commission and work
through these problems, what we are going to get is not what
the commission says, which is an open process. We are going to
get another backdoor 11th hour deal between party leaders, and
if that's not what you want, that's the road we are on. Mr.
Goss, we know that a quantifiable cost to acting to save Social
Security through tax increases, if we wait until just before
insolvency. Can you please explain why that is the case?
Mr. Goss. I am sorry. If we wait just to the point of 2033
or 2035, we know the extent of increase of taxes that would be
required where we have about a 20 percent shortfall. Either
benefits would be reduced by about 20 percent or the increase
in revenues would have to be, at that moment, increased by
about 25 percent, but that's at that point because the
demographics, things get a little bit worse thereafter. We
reach the point many years later in the 2060 to 2080 period,
where we would have to have a reduction on the order of more
like 25 percent in benefits and about a 33 percent increase in
revenue.
Mr. Peters. Okay, so I remember, you can't maximize two
variables. Let us just say we are going to leave benefits as
they are and just do this all through tax hikes. How much
harder is that going to be to do in ten years than it is if we
acted today? What would the quantity--describe for lay people
what the difference would be?
Mr. Goss. Well, the advantage of making changes in either,
but in this case, particularly tax rates early on would be we
would have the next ten years in which we would have more
revenue coming in. We would not be depleting our reserves
during the next ten years, and we would be maintaining them,
and that would help us out in the amount that we have to have
taxes increased at a later point in time, but the bottom line
is between 2035 and 2100, there is a certain amount of
shortfall we have. We have to make that up. If we start
earlier, we can spread that out a little bit more across more
generations, as it's often said, but the same total amount
needs to be generated.
Mr. Peters. Right, and I would just say if we don't start
something and pass it, it's great for us to all have our
righteous opinions about what should happen in a perfect world,
but, you know, this requires compromise. It requires 218 votes,
60 votes, and a signature. We are not really doing anything. So
I just want to express my appreciation to you for your work and
to my colleagues, my willingness to sit down and I think
through a commission would be the best route to figure out how
to make sure that this program survives, and as Democrats, I
think we are particularly proud of it and we owe it to our
constituents to save it. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Estes. Thank you. I now recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen, for five minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. There is
an education piece to this that the American people deserve.
They deserve to know what's going to happen. They deserve to
know who's caused the problem. So I appreciate both of you here
speaking towards Medicare and Social Security solvency. So I am
going to run through some points here because the people that
back home, they don't know what we have been talking about in
the last, you know, hour. Social Security is going to be
insolvent by 2033, Medicare by 2036. These programs have
sustained American seniors for generations. Initially an anti-
poverty program, they have been fundamentally altered, notably
1983, to the point that we thought we would have solvency, but
we are seeing that's not going to be the case. Social Security
started again as an anti-poverty program, not a retirement
program. According to the Social Security Administration, the
average life expectancy at birth in 1940 was 61 for males and
65 for females. The few Americans who made it to 65 when it was
expected they could no longer work, lived on average for
another ten years. Social Security was designed to ensure that
seniors were not living in abject poverty and could live out
the remainder of their days with some needs met, their basic
needs met. In 2024, the life expectancy at birth is 73 for
males, 79 for females. Men who reach 73 on average, live well
into their eighties, and women who reach 79 live on average
until 90 years old. Social Security has been transformed into a
retirement program culturally.
Some individuals are living on their Social Security checks
nearly as long as they were employed. This is putting a
tremendous strain on the program, especially when you consider
the difference of the ratio of worker to recipient from when
the programs began, notably 1935 Social Security to now. Not
long after its inception in 1940, 160 workers covered the cost
of fully providing benefits to one Social Security recipient.
In 2024, there are just two workers that cover the cost of
fully providing benefits to one Social Security recipient. It
is totally unsustainable, and it shows us what is really
undermining the system. We have a larger retirement population
than ever before in the United States at a time when we have a
tremendous labor shortage and a lower birth rate than ever
before. At the same time, this problem is facing Medicare. More
recipients, longer lifespans, fewer workers are paying into the
system. Something that I think is important for people to know
that Medicare Part B is not supported fully by the payroll tax.
It receives contributions from the general fund. That's an
important note as we are trying to categorize those that are
supported fully by the payroll, that which receives some
funding from the general program, which that does have an
impact on how we are going to figure that out for Congress for
the general purse perspective.
So, what happens when Social Security is going to go
insolvent? According to the Peter Peterson Foundation, Social
Security recipients will see a 21 percent cut in their
benefits. Mr. Goss, you talked about they'll pay out 79
percent. There'll be a 21 percent cut. So how does that factor
into what the average payment is? The average Social Security
check in 2024 was $1,900 a month. Is that correct, Mr. Goss?
Mr. Goss. I think that's right.
Mr. Brecheen. Okay. A 21 percent drop would make that
$1,500 per month, and that ultimately, if you are receiving
$1,500 a month, multiplied against 12 months, that's $18,000 a
year. CBS News estimates that Americans need to make $96,000 a
year to live comfortably within a major United States city, and
of course that's not rural areas, but within a U.S. city. When
Medicare goes insolvent, hospitals are going to have an 11
percent cut in payment for Medicare Part A, which the hospitals
are derived out of. This Committee held a hearing a few weeks
ago specific to concerns over hospital consolidation, and, you
know, for the rural areas, the rural hospitals, that's going to
be a bigger hit, a bigger impact in the economy of scale than
it's going to be for the bigger ones. Congress has known that
insolvency is going to hit this century, yet it's not acted,
largely because to discuss these program reforms amounts to
what many people in elected office consider political suicide.
Luckily, I self-term limited eight years, so I am not going
to--I've got an insurance policy to make sure, hopefully, that
I am operating in truth and not political calculation.
When insolvency does hit us, the federal government will
have to pay back this $2.6 trillion borrowed money it owes to
the Social Security Administration, and politicians are looking
to save their careers, I am concerned, are going to print that
$2.6 trillion just to make that payment, and, you know,
inflation will increase, which is going to ride the program.
Why don't I just end with this, because I am out of time for
the rest of this. Mr. Goss, give me in five seconds what you
think, two different things that you think we ought to do to
secure up Social Security.
Mr. Goss. Well, I am sorry to indicate to you that as the
sort of, dare we say, umpires in the ballgame, we try not to
take any sides onto what ought to be done, but we do know that
over the long term for Social Security, we are going to have to
have some combination of, it could be all one or all the other,
or some combination of, on the order of a 25 percent reduction
in the level of scheduled benefits for the future or a 33
percent increase in the revenue for the program, and it's
really up to you all, as the elected representatives of the
American people to decide which way we go on that. Currently, I
would just indicate, by the way we oftentimes look at the
benefits of Social Security about how much of your career
average earnings it replaces, and in general, it's around 40
percent or so, higher for low paid folks and lower percentage
for high paid folks, and it's really that kind of thing that I
think we would all want to be talking about, about what kind of
benefit replacement levels is appropriate. Is what we have now,
right? Is that what we want to sustain or is there a
possibility of making that lower? And of course, the side of
that is because of the changing age distribution of the
population. If we don't make changes in the benefit side
because we have so many fewer people of working age relative to
the elders, because the low birth rates largely, we are simply
going to have to have higher tax rates to be able to sustain
the obligations.
Mr. Estes. Thank you, and the gentlemen's time's expired.
Now I yield five minutes to the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Doggett.
Mr. Doggett. Thank you. Very much. Thank you for your
testimony today. Clearly, the programs that you play such an
important role in are vital to retirement with dignity for
millions of Americans, and we need to be concerned not only
about the dignity of existing seniors, but about our
grandchildren, our great grandchildren, to ensure that Medicare
and Social Security are there for them. I was sworn into this
Congress the same day that Newt Gingrich was sworn in as
Speaker of the House, and his famous comment that he wanted
Medicare to wither on the vine I think has guided Republican
opposition to so many Medicare reforms throughout the decades.
Because I served as the Chair of the Health Subcommittee on the
Ways and Means Committee and hope to do so again, I will focus
my remarks on Medicare, even though I realize how very vitally
important Social Security is.
The Republican Study Committee Report and recommendation
that this Congress should shift those who rely on Medicare to a
voucher system where they have no guarantee that they will be
anything other than the victims of scam plans by private
insurance brokers that do not guarantee that the doctor that
they've relied on, they can see, or that care will be timely
delivered, is part of letting Medicare wither on the vine and
would be a serious mistake that we have to resist at every
opportunity. What we have here is not so much a spending crisis
as a political crisis. We have got one party that is intent on
providing an extension of Trump tax cuts that benefited the
wealthiest few in our country and the giant corporations. They
are willing to spend trillions of dollars in order to continue
those tax breaks for those at the top and claim that we have to
make significant changes in Medicare and Social Security to
balance things out. The good news is that there are plans that
can assure a stable fiscal approach for Medicare for over 20
years. Some of those are embodied in legislation that I've
introduced that's backed by 61 Democratic co-sponsors. The
Assuring Medicare's Promise Act and what it would do is to
extend the solvency of Medicare by requiring that those who are
currently avoiding the net investment income tax can no longer
do so, and redirecting all of the revenue from that tax into
Medicare as was originally intended. We actually did that in
the House through the Build Back Better legislation, which
unfortunately did not get approved over in the Senate.
The President's Medicare proposal goes a step further, and
I believe that you have done an analysis of it and presented it
to us indicating that the President's initiative, which does
involve some additional taxation, I believe the memo here from
the CMS office is that that would fund the HI program. It would
be sufficiently funded indefinitely, is that correct?
Mr. Spitalnic. That is correct. The work that we did in
analyzing the budget proposal included in this year's budget
suggested that that additional revenue would make the HI Trust
Funds solvent indefinitely.
Mr. Doggett. My concern, of course, is not only that of
solvency, but of coverage in Medicare and the fact that as
important as it is and as many people as it serves today, that
it does have a number of serious gaps for health needs of our
seniors. Two thirds of Americans suffer from hearing losses,
yet only about 30 percent of the people who require a hearing
aid can access one. Vision loss is another chronic condition
among older adults and is leading to injuries from falls, loss
of cognitive function, and depression, and we have got about 70
percent of our seniors who suffer from serious periodontal
disease, and one in four don't have any teeth at all. I believe
we can cover the cost of this kind of care, of strengthening
and improving Social Security, by lowering outrageous
prescription drug prices, prices that are higher than anywhere
else in the world, and I believe you have also indicated that
to the extent that Congress might choose to cover more drugs
than is covered by the very narrow provisions of the law that
is in place on drug negotiation, to the extent it removes some
of the, what I consider to be outrageous restrictions on the
types of drugs that can be negotiated, that anytime we expand
negotiation, we not only save money for seniors, but it will
mean a better position for the Medicare Trust Fund.
Mr. Spitalnic. It is certainly possible that including more
drugs subject to negotiation could generate additional savings
to the Medicare program.
Mr. Doggett. And the other area that the independent MedPAC
has recommended as a way to strengthen the fund is to look at
the Medicare Advantage program, which was presented to us as a
way to save money but cost more money for every recipient we
cover costs much more than covering through traditional
Medicare.
Chairman Arrington. The gentleman's time is expired. If he
wants to ask another question or make another comment, I am
okay with it, but then we are going to have to cut it off.
Mr. Doggett. I appreciate it and I appreciate your
testimony. I think we have a prescription for a better future
for Medicare, strengthening, expanding it, not undermining it
with a voucher system. And I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank my friend from Texas and now
yield to, I think, the last remaining Member here, although
they may trickle in, my friend from California, Jimmy Panetta,
for five minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Chairman Arrington. And some change maybe. There you go.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you. Appreciate you and the Ranking
Member and the way you do things on this Committee and having
hearings like this as part of it. So thank you very much.
Obviously, this is one of the many important hearings we have
had here on the Budget Committee, given the long-term solvency
challenges to Medicare and Social Security Trust Funds. I think
we all know, and as we have heard today, Americans pay into
these Trust Funds for most of their working lives, and in
return, in return they expect to receive the benefits from
these two Trust Funds, Medicare and Social Security. However,
as we have been hearing, and as we know, the insolvency of
these Trust Funds threatens the future of the programs. So
clearly we got to act soon. I think we are hearing the issues
today and ideally what we want to get, as I always say, we want
to get to solutions.
Now the Old Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund is
expected to deplete its assets in 2033, and the Hospital
Insurance Trust Fund is expected to deplete its assets in 2036.
We have basically nine years before the first Trust Fund faces
insolvency, but as you know, delaying action on financial
matters often makes those matters worse. Mr. Goss, how would
delaying action affect the scale of the changes needed? And if
changes are made at the projected date of Trust Fund solvency,
what kinds of changes need to be required?
Mr. Goss. Our Trustees have consistently, for many, many
years, indicated the great advantages of acting sooner. Which
are, first of all, that there are more options on the table the
sooner that you all act. The other is we give more advance
warning to individuals who will be affected, and the third is
that it, actually the level of reductions that are necessary at
the point of reserve depletion might be somewhat less, but not
dramatically less. As indicated on one of the earlier
questions, if we were to actually enact and effect changes
immediately, that would help us in terms of satisfying the
reductions necessary as a whole over the next 75 years, but the
key thing really, I think what the Trustees have put forth is
to enact as soon as possible so that we will have lots of
options to consider. We can spread the reductions or the cost
over more generations, and that will give advance notice to
people as to what they will be facing. The actual scale of the
reduction that we need over the next 75 years is basically the
same total amount of money, in present value, but there are
great advantages to enacting and even starting to have some
effects earlier.
Mr. Panetta. Great, thank you, and Mr. Spitalnic, on
Medicare, the same question.
Mr. Spitalnic. Unfortunately, it's the same answer, that
delaying of response means that there needs to be a more
dramatic response later on, and so the shortfalls are different
in the Medicare program, specifically for the HI Trust Fund,
but delaying action means that more action would need to be
taken at that point.
Mr. Panetta. Now, I want to talk about a question dealing
with the payroll tax cap. Obviously, the Old Age and Survivor's
Insurance Trust Fund, Disability Insurance Trust Fund, and
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund, they receive most of their
income from payroll taxes. However, according to the Social
Security and Medicare Trustees Report, the income from payroll
taxes, yes, it accounted for approximately 90 percent, 97
percent, and 88 percent of each Trust Fund's total income,
respectively. Yet there is $162,000 cap on the income that is
subject to Social Security payroll taxes. Mr. Goss, again on
Social Security, how has this cap grown in relation to the
income of the average American worker?
Mr. Goss. Well, in fact, as specified back in the laws in
the early 1980s, the taxable maximum has been indexed
automatically to the growth of the average wage level of all
workers, in total, in the economy, and it has grown at that
rate. Our issue is that there has been a redistribution of
earnings across the top six percent of earners and the bottom
94 percent of earners. That was not anticipated back in 1983,
and with that shift of having a much greater share of all
earnings going to the top six percent, that's above our taxable
maximum. An issue that is not suffered by the Hospital
Insurance Fund but for the OASI and DI Trust Funds. That's an
issue. Just a little note on that. The top six percent between
1983 and 2000 over that 17-year period, the real growth, over
and above inflation for the average earnings for a person, for
people who are in that top six percent, was 62 percent real
growth over that 17 year period. For the bottom 94 percent, it
was 17 percent real growth in the average earnings. So it's
been really that shift that has really changed us from having
an expectation of reserve depletion way back in 1983 for OASDI
of 2063 to now 2035. It's the lion's share of the issue.
Mr. Panetta. Thank you for that explanation. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from California.
I think we have exhausted everybody who has been present, their
questions and comments. I think Ms. Balint was trying to make
it back. Mr. Peters, do you have another comment or question
that you'd like to ask? Mr. Panetta? Okay, well, let me just
close then. If she gets back by the time I finish my one minute
closing remark, we will try to get her question and her
comment, but I am going to end where I began, which is, and
with the affirmations from you, Mr. Goss, the last time we
addressed these issues in a meaningful way and in a sustainable
way, there was a bipartisan commission called the Greenspan
Commission, and there were leaders like Tip O'Neill and Ronald
Reagan willing to work together. No party has been able to, on
a unilateral basis, address this issue, no matter how grand, of
the plans that they promote, they haven't been able to get it
across the transit, not within the Republican Party or the
Democrat Party. So I am from West Texas, and it just seems to
me a commonsense deduction to arrive at a mechanism like a
bipartisan commission and the kind of leadership that we need
to bring the two parties together and the various strategies to
solve the insolvency and unsustainability of these programs.
Ms. Balint is here. I have done my best act. My best. I did my
best Senatorial act, and filibuster. Yeah, no one's better with
friends like Scott Peters, ladies and gentlemen. Ms. Balint,
you have five minutes, and then we are going to wrap this up.
Ms. Balint. I appreciate that very much. I apologize. Often
in Congress, you are running between two Committees, which was
the case today for me. So I appreciate, Mr. Chair, your efforts
and very happy to be here. This is an important issue for me. I
represent Vermont, and we have about 640,000 people in Vermont.
We are tiny. Tiny but mighty. Out of that roughly 640,000
people, 183,000 are people over 60. So, Medicare, Social
Security, incredibly important to my constituents, and what I
found is there are a lot of myths regarding Social Security in
particular, that distress many seniors in my state, but also
younger people who really fear from the rhetoric that they hear
around Social Security, that there will be nothing left for
them when they get to be retirement age. One study recently
found that 74 percent of Gen Z fear that Social Security will
run out of funding in their lifetimes, and 45 percent believe
they won't get any Social Security benefits, and millennials
roughly feel the same. The Social Security and Medicare Board
of Trustees Annual Report showed that combined Old Age and
Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Disability Trust Fund
will be able to pay 100 percent of scheduled benefits until
2035, and afterwards, 83 percent of, you know, benefits will be
met. So, the question that I have, Mr. Goss, do you believe
Social Security will completely run out of funding before
younger adults can receive Social Security benefits? I think
it's very important for us to address this head on.
Mr. Goss. I would say if you say completely run out of
funding, I mean, clearly not, because even if we do reach the
point where we deplete our now $2.8 trillion of reserves and
have that savings account in effect depleted, we will still
have coming in on a daily basis the revenues from payroll taxes
and income taxes that beneficiaries pay on their benefits, that
would continue coming in, but as you indicated, covering at
that point of reserve depletion, about 83 percent of the
continuing cost of paying full scheduled benefits. So it would
not go to zero. It wouldn't be that there would be running out
of money or having no benefits but a reduction unless you all
act to counter this.
Ms. Balint. Right, and so, you know, I just think it's such
an important point because when we use rhetoric like it's
bankrupt, it's collapsing, it's, you know, there will be
nothing left. It certainly raises anxiety for people, but also
I think it fundamentally paralyzes us from being able to do the
work that we need to do to make sure that people can retire
with dignity and security. So Democrats have put forward a plan
to protect Social Security for future generations. The Social
Security 2100 Act. It was a bill championed by my colleague
Congressman Larson, and it will increase benefits two percent
on average for all Social Security beneficiaries for the first
time in 52 years, and so, from your perspective, what is it
that Americans don't understand about Social Security
generally, and how can we be better about messaging for them?
You know, basically what it has done for them, what it will do
for them, and how do we go about protecting it and get, move
beyond the rhetoric? And that's to both of you.
Mr. Goss. Yeah, well, let me take a little shot at that.
First of all, I think one of the things that's important for
people to hopefully understand is from the very beginning,
Social Security was intended to be what we sometimes refer to
as a floor of protection. It wasn't intended to provide
everything that you will want or need in retirement. Generally,
financial planners say you should expect to have maybe 75
percent to 80 percent of your earnings level that you had when
you were working, continuing. Social Security in general is
intended to provide only about two thirds of that, only about
40 percent or a little bit higher than that. So it's expected
people have some personal savings and hopefully have some
employer provided plans. Some of those are not working out as
they should. So Social Security has become all the more
important, but we should really, I think, make sure that people
very much understand that.
The other thing that people should understand is that
Social Security is not a bank account. All the money that you
put in is not saved up for you for when you retire. It's sort
of what we call a pay as you go system. It is
intergenerational, and the reduction in the birth rate and the
changing age distribution as a result is really putting
pressure on doing that, which simply means that if we have
fewer workers per beneficiary because the birth rate was lower,
we are going to have to either have lower benefits per
beneficiary or higher taxes per worker. There is really not a
lot of way around that. We just have to make the adjustments.
Ms. Balint. Appreciate that. I see that I am out of time,
and I don't want to keep anyone longer than we already have.
The other piece of this though, if I could, Mr. Chair, is
absolutely, it is supposed to be supplementary. I think the
challenge for all of us right now is the wealth gap in this
country has become a chasm and so we are not seeing that most
working people have anything left over to put aside for
retirement. Thank you Mr. Chair. I really do appreciate that
you gave me time.
Chairman Arrington. You bet. This is important. We need the
fullness of our discussion and understanding, and to your
point, whether we agree or disagree on the approach, we need an
understanding by the American people and just the points you
hit about its supplemental nature, and not to put all your eggs
in one savings in one basket per se, but among other things
that we need to educate the American people on in this regard.
So thank you for your comments, and now to our last Republican
Member and then our last Democrat. I know I keep promising we
got one more, but they just keep coming. The hits keep coming.
Lloyd Smucker from the Keystone state for five minutes.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Mr.
Goss and Mr. Spitalnic. Did I have that right? Close, I guess.
Sorry I couldn't be here to hear much of the discussion here
and I apologize if some of my questions have already been
covered, but this is a really important topic. I was part of
two other hearings and so, but I am really grateful to the
Chairman for continuing to talk about this and to each of you
for being here. We obviously all want to work to ensure that
the promise of Social Security and Medicare, people have been
paying into these systems. We want those promises to be kept,
but we also know that structurally going forward, if the
changes aren't made we won't be able to do that, and so, it's a
very important conversation.
I do want to talk about, Mr. Spitalnic, the ``Medicare
funding warning'', this year the Trustees issued a Medicare
funding warning. Can you explain what that is and what does
that require as a response from the legislature or the
President? Is it a trigger of some sort that is intended to
require some action? So, give us a background on that.
Mr. Spitalnic. Sure. I think it started back in the
Medicare Modernization Act back in 2003, put in this
requirement where the Trustees would evaluate the proportion of
revenues that were dedicated sources, and when that proportion
exceeded 45 percent, this warning would effectively be
triggered if certain conditions were met over two consecutive
years, effectively, if there was more than two consecutive
years of general revenue, general government contributions into
the Medicare program, when that exceeded this 45 percent, it
was somewhat of an arbitrary.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, I was going to say, why did we pick
those numbers? Arbitrary, as you said, but the idea is, why do
we do it?
Mr. Spitalnic. So when this was, in response to a Medicare
funding warning, the Congress has asked that the President, in
response, in their subsequent budget, would provide proposals
that would address that particular circumstance, so they would
get the proportion of funding dedicated down to that 45 percent
level. My understanding is that executive, the executive
branch, under different party leadership, have each concluded
that in their opinion, that provision, that requirement that
they actually provide a proposal in response to that trigger is
unconstitutional. I am far from a constitutional lawyer, and so
I will not opine on any of that, but as part of the work of the
Board of Trustees, they do calculate and determine whether this
trigger is reached or not.
Mr. Smucker. I would certainly like to understand that. It
doesn't seem to me like it would be unconstitutional. It would
require action by the executive branch, by the President, by
the Administration, when we have crossed some threshold, even
if it is arbitrary, when we know there is going to be problems
going forward. So certainly, that would have been the intent of
the previous Congresses, who put that into law. So I hate to
see it ignored. I mean, and we also know that the longer we
wait, the harder this is going to be to resolve. You would both
say, I am sure, that it's important for the Administration to
work with the legislature to come up with proposals to solve
this, and the sooner the better. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Spitalnic. I would completely agree that the nature of
the problems, the issues surrounding both the Medicare and the
Social Security program, require bipartisan collaboration in
terms of addressing.
Mr. Smucker. Sure, this Committee, probably was talked
about before today, but passed out of Committee here, a bill
that would create a commission that would be intended to do
just that, where there would be bipartisan and maybe even
members of the Administration who essentially hold a
conversation with the American people about what we are faced
with. Like if action isn't taken, in nine years, people will
get 80 percent or something like that, of their check, Social
Security check that they should receive. Do you both support
that? Do you think that would be valuable for that to occur?
Mr. Goss. As back in 1982, the so-called Greenspan
Commission, there was also a commission back in 1979 which made
a big head start on having that conversation which is really
important. We have, because of many, many Members of Congress
putting forth proposals for affecting Social Security, we have
a large list of provisions and proposals up on our website to
sort of look at and choose from, a commission that would look
through all of those possibilities and come to a consensus
would be a really good thing, and your point about sooner
rather than later to inform the American people would be a very
good thing.
Mr. Spitalnic. I'd also agree that the sooner these
problems are discussed and ultimately addressed, the less
significant those changes will need to be. So the earlier,
certainly the better.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Pennsylvania
and his leadership on the bipartisan fiscal commission that
would look at these various provisions and find consensus, and
our newest Member, Tom Suozzi from the great state of New York.
You have five minutes for your questions, sir.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank you Mr.
Spitalnic, Mr. Goss. Appreciate your time. I want to try and
learn something new from you guys here today, if possible. So
with any issue that has to do with budgets, the only way to
solve it is to either raise revenues or reduce expenses. There
are no other choices, right? That's the only thing you can do.
So to reduce expenses, some people are proposing that we should
raise the retirement age. I don't like that idea because people
who work in outdoors or blue collar jobs, once their bodies
turn 65, they can't work in those conditions anymore, even
though I know the life expectancy is longer and things like
that, but blue collar people are very vulnerable. The other
thing you could do is you could reduce people's benefits and
nobody's going to like that idea. That's, you know, that's a
very unattractive thing to reduce people's benefits. Another
way to reduce expenses is to negotiate the prescription drug
for the Medicare program is to negotiate the prescription drug
prices, which would hopefully reduce prescription drug costs
for the Medicare program. Are there any other ways that you
guys know of that you can reduce the expenses? Other than those
three things that I talked about? Either one of you, that
people are talking about?
Mr. Spitalnic. I think abstractly you have it exactly right
that the only way to improve the financial condition is to
either increase income or to decrease expenditures. There are a
number of ways to go about considering decreasing expenditures
and there is a long list.
Mr. Suozzi. Could you give me a couple of them? Just so I
know.
Mr. Spitalnic. Decreased prices is one way.
Mr. Suozzi. But that's the one I talked about already. Are
you talking about for all kinds of health care costs?
Mr. Spitalnic. Well, don't necessarily have to negotiate
drug prices. So, much of the Medicare program have their prices
updated each and every year, often related to inflation, and so
there are certain provisions in the current law that have some
of those updates increasing slower than rates of inflation. So
that's already baked into existing estimates that some----
Mr. Suozzi. Could those be cut more than they are? Could
those costs be reduced more?
Mr. Spitalnic. The funding deficiency? So the current
deficit accounts for already those reduced.
Mr. Suozzi. Could they be reduced more beyond the existing
numbers, the existing projections?
Mr. Spitalnic. It is certainly theoretically possible to.
Mr. Suozzi. What would happen? You'd make the
pharmaceutical companies mad, or what would be the other.
What's the theoretical thing stopping you from doing that?
Mr. Spitalnic. Well, you all have the privilege of
establishing what the payment rates are.
Mr. Suozzi. Oh, it's up to us.
Mr. Spitalnic. It is up to you.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Are there any other ways to reduce the
costs other than that?
Mr. Goss. Well, what I would add is the retirement age
change, which we had back in the 1983 amendments. One little
clarity on that is the Greenspan Commission did not recommend
an increase in the retirement age. That was the one third of
the changes in the 1983 amendments that did not come out of
that commission that was developed in conference committee. It
was a joy working with Moynihan.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay, but I mentioned that one before. You
could increase the retirement age.
Mr. Goss. So increase the retirement age is certainly an
option here, but there is one thing to be aware of. We had a
bipartisan commission back, the Simpson Bowles Commission, in
2010, where there was talk about retirement age, and there is
an aspect of that that could be considered to the extent that
you look at retirement age changes, which is not to have it
apply to everybody in the same fashion as the 1983 amendments
did.
Mr. Suozzi. Make it different for blue collar versus white
collar jobs.
Mr. Goss. Exactly. We couldn't actually differentiate by
the type of work, but long career people with low earnings
levels. That commission came up with a way that we worked with
them to have less or maybe no increase in the retirement ages
for people long career, low income. So that's a way that you
can mitigate the effects if you do have that.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. So the other way is to raise revenues,
and the way to raise revenues is to increase people's taxes,
which nobody likes that idea, or to apply the existing tax rate
to people above $400,000, which we heard a lot about today, and
what about getting more people to actually pay into the system?
Are there a lot of people who live in America today that are
not paying into the Social Security system or the Medicare
system?
Mr. Goss. Well, one thing we have is that there are about
one fourth of state and local government employees currently
are in plans, so that they are not paying into Social Security.
They are on a separate plan. They are covered by their state
and local pension plans, and that's about four percent of total
workers.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay, we are probably not going to mess with
that one. Okay, how about other people? How about, like, the
undocumented workers in the country right now? Are there a lot
of those folks that are not paying Social Security taxes or are
most of them paying Social Security taxes?
Mr. Goss. That, of course, is difficult to say, of the
something like, 10 or 11 million individuals that we have who
are undocumented in the country. A substantial share of them
are actually paying in taxes, and as one of the Members
indicated earlier, by and large, they probably won't even be
getting benefits. So that's very much a plus, but there are a
number of people who are working in the so called underground
economy and not paying taxes.
Mr. Suozzi. Is there a way to improve those numbers to get
more people paying in? Is it just an enforcement issue? Is
there--let us say for example if you could get five million
more people paying into the system that we have currently, what
kind of dent would that make in the problem? You talked
earlier, about two thirds of the problem will be addressed from
the--what did you say before? The two thirds of it will be
addressed from, oh, paying people over $400,000 paying in.
Mr. Goss. Right.
Mr. Suozzi. So, if you added five more million people to
the system, paying into Social Security, would that take care
of the other third or would you need more than that?
Mr. Goss. If we have five million more people paying on a
base of about 150,000 million workers paying in now, that would
be about a three percent increase in the number of people
working. They would probably not be at the average earnings
level that we have for everybody else. So it would be much less
than a three percent increase.
Mr. Suozzi. So, for a third, you'd need 50 million more
people you are saying?
Mr. Goss. We need a lot more people.
Mr. Suozzi. Okay. Thanks very much guys.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from New York and
I really appreciate the line of questions, and I think there is
a body of work of questions on pay fors and programmatic
reforms in total, that if the likes of a Tom Suozzi and a Lloyd
Smucker, for example, could sit down and have the conversation
about where there is consensus within those two buckets of
ideas, I bet we could come out and solve it.
In fact, I bet if you just randomly selected, this is a sad
commentary, but I'll end on a criticism of this institution. I
bet if you randomly selected ten high school students from
around the country and you gave them the same set of
considerations and reform ideas, I bet they could come out with
a consensus solution that would be something that most
Americans would accept as logical and common sense and on
balance, good for the public good. So, it seems to me like the
question is then, why can't thoughtful leaders who were elected
by the people?
I would suggest there are political forces that keep us in
our respective corners instead of at the table with our sleeves
rolled up and ready to do the people's business and solve this
problem, but that's our problem at this point, to some extent,
I should say. Not necessarily yours, you are just bringing the
numbers. Thank you for doing that this morning, Mr. Spitalnic,
Mr. Goss. We appreciate your time, and this--I have to say
something before I gavel. Thank you again, okay got that.
Please be advised that the Members may submit questions to
be answered later in writing. Those questions and your answers
will be made part of the formal hearing record. Any Member who
wishes to submit questions for the record may do so within
seven days, and with that, we are adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:14 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
