- REIGNITING AMERICAN GROWTH AND PROSPERITY SERIES: INCENTIVIZING ECONOMIC EXCELLENCE THROUGH TAX POLICY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REIGNITING AMERICAN GROWTH AND
PROSPERITY SERIES: INCENTIVIZING
ECONOMIC EXCELLENCE THROUGH TAX POLICY

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, D.C., JUNE 22, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-5

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Budget

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

53-465                     WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET

JODEY C. ARRINGTON, Texas, Chairman
RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina         BRENDAN F. BOYLE, Pennsylvania,
TOM McCLINTOCK, California             Ranking Member
GLENN GROTHMAN, Wisconsin            BRIAN HIGGINS, New York
LLOYD SMUCKER, Pennsylvania          JANICE D. SCHAKOWSKY, Illinois
MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas            EARL BLUMENAUER, Oregon
EARL L. ``BUDDY'' CARTER, Georgia    DANIEL T. KILDEE, Michigan
BEN CLINE, Virginia                  SCOTT H. PETERS, California
BOB GOOD, Virginia                   BARBARA LEE, California
JACK BERGMAN, Michigan               LLOYD DOGGETT, Texas
A. DREW FERGUSON IV, Georgia         JIMMY PANETTA, California
CHIP ROY, Texas                      JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia
BLAKE D. MOORE, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
DAVID G. VALADAO, California         ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota,
RON ESTES, Kansas                      Vice Ranking Member
STEPHANIE I. BICE, Oklahoma          DAVID J. TRONE, Maryland
LISA C. McCLAIN, Michigan            BECCA BALINT, Vermont
MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota        ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
RUDY YAKYM III, Indiana                  Virginia
JOSH BRECHEEN, Oklahoma              ADRIANO ESPAILLAT, New York
CHUCK EDWARDS, North Carolina

Professional Staff

Gary Andres, Staff Director
Greg Waring, Minority Staff Director

CONTENTS

Page
Hearing held in Washington, D.C., June 22, 2023.................     1

Hon. Jodey C. Arrington, Chairman, Committee on the Budget...     1
Prepared Statement of....................................     4
Hon. Brendan F. Boyle, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Budget.....................................................     7
Prepared Statement of....................................     9
Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee, Member, Committee on the Budget,
statement submitted for the record.........................    13
National Association of Manufacturers, statement submitted
for the record.............................................    17
Dr. William McBride, Vice President of Federal Tax Policy and
Stephen J. Entin Fellow in Economics, Tax Foundation.......    22
Prepared Statement of....................................    24
Mr. Kyle Pomerleau, Senior Fellow on Tax Policy, American
Enterprise Institute.......................................    36
Prepared Statement of....................................    38
Mr. Kevin Kuhlman, Vice President of Federal Government
Relations, National Federation of Independent Business.....    51
Prepared Statement of....................................    53
Hon. Mark Mazur, Former Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy,
U.S. Department of the Treasury............................    59
Prepared Statement of....................................    61
Hon. Rudy Yakym, Member, Committee on the Budget, submission
for the record.............................................    88
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   119
Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   214
Hon. Michael Burgess, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   256
Hon. Michael Burgess, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   263
Hon. Michael Burgess, Member, Committee on the Budget,
submission for the record..................................   269
Questions and Answers submitted for the record...............   276

REIGNITING AMERICAN GROWTH AND PROSPERITY SERIES: INCENTIVIZING
ECONOMIC
EXCELLENCE THROUGH TAX POLICY

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 22, 2023

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Budget,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 12:04 p.m., in Room
210, Cannon Building, Hon. Jodey Arrington [Chairman of the
Committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Arrington, Norman, McClintock,
Grothman, Smucker, Burgess, Carter, Cline, Good, Bergman,
Ferguson, Moore, Estes, Yakym, Brecheen, Edwards, Boyle,
Higgins, Schakowsky, Blumenauer, Kildee, Panetta, Omar, Balint,
and Scott.
Chairman Arrington. I want the record to reflect we are
waiting on my Democrat Ranking Member.
And I also want to take this opportunity to wish one of our
Committee Members, Mr. Blake Moore, a happy birthday. So,
please join me in wishing him a happy 55 years.
Mr. Moore. It has been a lovely 30 years.
Chairman Arrington. 55 years. He is----
Mr. Moore. Thirtieth, my 43.
Chairman Arrington. It was the fifth anniversary of an
announcement of our budget resolution when I was a freshman on
the Budget Committee, and sad to say and report that I was
unrecognizably younger and more vibrant than I am today. So, we
are going to do----
Voice. Did you say vibrant or violent?
Chairman Arrington. Yeah, and violent. Yeah, and violent.
Thank you all for appearing today. We will get started
momentarily.
The hearing will come to order. Today's hearing will focus
on tax policies that will strengthen our economy, our balance
sheet, and our Nation's financial health now and into the
future.
And I would like to now yield myself such time as I may
consume for an opening statement.
I want to thank our members and the witnesses for being
here today. This hearing is the second in a series on growth,
entitled Incentivizing Economic Excellence Through Tax Policy.
Economic growth and prosperity, I believe, is the tide that
lifts all boats with more and better jobs, higher wages and
income, lower unemployment, lower poverty rates, and an overall
improved standard of living for all Americans.
As we have discussed, and I think most of us believe, a
vibrant and flourishing economy would also strengthen our
balance sheet and improve our Nation's fiscal health by
generating revenue to the Treasury, as we have witnessed since
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. Also, that revenue will help
us pay our bills and fund our priorities, it will also reduce
our financial risk, lower our interest payments by bringing
down our debt-to-GDP ratio, and then ultimately helping us
stave off a debt crisis.
Last hearing, we examined the effects of excessive and
overreaching regulations and how they compromise our freedom,
quench the entrepreneurial spirit, and suppress economic
growth. We noted that President Biden, his regulatory track
record at this point is two times the previous President Obama
and the overall cost is at $360 billion. That is a major drag
on the economy.
We are going to focus today on the relationship between tax
policy and economic growth, and again its fiscal impact on our
country and our country's future.
Unfortunately, we are far from a rigorous and thriving
economy today, as our Nation continues and our working families
continue to suffer from sustained 40-year high inflation, and
inflation is coming down, I want it to come down, but core
inflation is sticking, and it is about the same as it was over
the first year of this Administration. We have seen the fastest
pace of interest rate hikes in history. We have experienced
three consecutive quarters of economic decline with the most
recent quarterly output at just around one percent.
This is a direct result, in my opinion, of too much
spending and wrong-headed policies, and I will spare you all
the litany of failed economic policies and the $11 trillion in
spending that I believe it put us in this tough spot, and then,
for me, and I think most of our members, it has added $6
trillion to the national debt, which is already on an
unsustainable course.
We have to examine the relationship between good tax policy
and our budget process. Congress has the power to tax. In 1913,
the 16th Amendment gave us the power to tax directly, through
income, but what we pay for, scope, mission of our Republic,
who we tax, and how we tax, is of the utmost importance as we
seek to responsibly pay our bills and encourage growth and
ensure the financial health of the United States.
History is replete with the evidence that when you reduce
the tax burden on job creators and consumers, the economy
grows. Kennedy did it. Clinton did it. Bush did it. Reagan did
it, and whether it was significant or modest, the result was,
the economy grew.
In fact, President Kennedy said that economic growth in the
post era was, post-war era rather, was the most urgent task
facing our Nation, which is why he proposed a tax reform
package that, by the way, included a significant reduction in
the corporate rates. He said it was to step up the growth and
vigor of our Nation's economy, increase job and investment
opportunities, and improve our productivity. As President
Kennedy said, completing this task was about protecting the
security of our people.
Let me jump to the most recent example, the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act. Very proud of what we did. Would it have paid for
itself? It is a good question. I think that will probably be
raised by some of my colleagues. I don't know. I know that the
economic feedback is positive. I know that we brought in more
revenue than was projected and had to be upwardly revised
several times by CBO.
I think Republicans made a mistake not to include spending
cuts. I will say it and I will continue to say it. For a party
that is so obsessed with out-of-control spending, for us to
have the House and Senate and the Presidency, and to pass tax
cuts and tax reforms and not reduce spending, which I think is
the preponderance of the problem, certainly one of the two
pieces of the equation here, growth and reduction in spending,
I think is more than disappointing. I think it is shameful,
actually, and we can't repeat that if we are given the
opportunity.
But what tax cuts and tax reform did was to generate more
capital investment than we have ever seen, more R&D investment
than we have ever experienced. We had the lowest unemployment
rate. We had the lowest poverty rate in recorded history. Six
million people lifted out of poverty. A lot of benefits accrued
to this country, namely, people were having better
opportunities, higher paying jobs, and they kept more of their
money, and that we experienced an economic renaissance.
Rather than to go through all of my notes here because I
know I have filibustered before, I would just say we have to
have the most simple and efficient tax code. We have to find a
way to make it more simple and, simpler and more efficient. We
have to have a fair and equitable tax code.
And there is going to be debate about what that means. For
me, to have 40 percent of the American people not having any
stake in their country is a problem. To have the top ten
percent paying 75 percent of the taxes, I think that is
inequitable, but we can debate that and we should.
And then, finally, we need a productive, the most
productive, and most competitive tax rate. We can't have China,
Communist China, have a lower tax rate on their businesses,
their job creators, than we do in the United States, and even
today, after lowering the corporate rates, you combine the
state taxes on businesses and Federal taxes, we are paying more
than businesses in Communist China, our competitor, and our
adversary. That is a problem.
So, let's work together, try to figure out how to get this
right. We know the formula for success after World War II. Cut
spending, right size the government, the bureaucracy, take on
entitlement reform. That will be a fun discussion. We haven't
gotten there yet, but let's figure out how to grow this economy
and leave our children a better country and a better spot with
a brighter future.
And with that, I yield to my Ranking Member for such time
as he may consume for his opening remarks.
[The prepared statement of Chairman Arrington follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.001

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.002

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.003

Mr. Boyle. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and glad to have
this hearing today.
A number of things I wanted to respond to, maybe some other
occasion or some other format we will have a chance in a
respectful, of course, way to go back and forth on some of
these points that you raise.
First, I would say, before I even get to my opening
statement, we know definitively the answer to the question
whether or not the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act paid for itself. The
answer is no, and don't take my word for it. Sitting right at
that chair, our guest at a previous hearing, Douglas Holtz-
Eakin, clearly a well-respected right-of-center economist, his
exact quote, so I don't misquote him here, when asked the
question whether or not--actually I believe I was the one who
asked him the question--whether or not tax cuts entirely pay
for themselves, he said, ``No serious economists would make
such a claim.''
Now, tax cuts do have some stimulative effect, more of an
effect when they are targeted in the right way versus others,
but no, of course, they never entirely pay for themselves.
Heck, if they did, then why not have a tax rate of 0.00001
percent if we thought that they were--oh, wait, some of my
friends might take me up on that. Oh, geez. I think I just won
the 2024 Republican nomination, but of course, they don't pay
entirely for themselves. Money does not grow on trees.
And the reality is when we--another witness testified to
this, if people recall. I like to do callbacks for those
longtime viewers of our hearings. When you add up the two Bush
tax cuts, 2001 and 2003, and then of course they were extended
jointly under split rule--President Obama and the Republican-
led Congress--and then you add in the TCJA, we are missing $10
trillion. So, when you look at that national debt figure,
recognize that's where some of that debt comes from.
I would also point out, since a favorite president of mine,
JFK, was invoked, it is true he did push for a tax cut. I am
not sure my Republican friends would like us to go back to what
the marginal rates were after those tax cuts. They were
significantly higher than the taxes we have today. Indeed, we
have some of the lowest tax rates right now that we have ever
had since having this modern system of taxation.
Now, part of the title for this hearing is ``Reigniting
American Growth.'' I have good news. It is already happening:
more than 13 million jobs created over the last two and a half
years, the lowest unemployment rate since the 1960s, more jobs
have been created in this presidential term than any other
single term in American history.
On inflation, with the latest data that came out last week,
inflation has now dropped for 11 consecutive months. It is
still higher than what we would like it to be, but my goodness,
are we in a different world than our friends in Europe. Their
situation is much worse on inflation, without the signs that it
is necessarily going to get better soon.
On this point, I had a German parliamentarian, a member of
the Bundestag, in my office last week, a good ally of the
United States. He was talking about the situation they are
facing in terms of inflation and expressing the wish that
inflation was in Germany what it is in the United States right
now, with it dropping so heavily.
So, once again, as I have said here many times, the United
States continues to lead the worldwide recovery coming out of
COVID, and we need to make sure we don't do anything that would
jeopardize that.
Now, finally, let me say on the other half of what I think
this hearing will be, the trade picture, I am glad that we are
having a hearing talking about trade. We are four percent of
the world's population. Sometimes, you know, being Americans,
it is very easy to forget that 96 percent of the world lives
outside our shores. Mark Twain once said, ``America's two best
friends in the world are the Atlantic and the Pacific.'' So,
sometimes, you know, we can have a more parochial view.
The reality is being only four percent of the world's
population, we do need trade. However, I think it is clear, and
in some ways there might be Democrats and Republicans who agree
on this, I think there have been trade deals over the last
quarter-century that have not paid close enough attention to
the needs and concerns of American workers, especially
America's blue collar workers.
There was a victory on that front, a bipartisan one, that
is, you know, not really talked about that often, and that was
the revision of NAFTA, the USMCA, a deal in which, for the
first time, you saw a majority of organized labor in support.
It got over 400 votes in the House of Representatives. The same
number of House Democrats and House Republicans voted for
USMCA.
So, it shows that this isn't just rhetoric. I am a believer
that we can have trade agreements that are in our national
security interest, but also balance the need for growth and the
balance to drive good prices for American consumers, with also
protecting the interests of American workers.
So, with that, I will yield back and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Ranking Member Boyle follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.004

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.005

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.006

Chairman Arrington. I associate myself with the remarks of
my colleague on trade, and I look forward to opening up new
markets, new customers for American producers and
manufacturers.
With that, I want to thank my colleague and want to make
mention that if any member has an opening statement, you can
submit it for the record. I will hold the record open until the
end of the day to accommodate those members who may not yet
have prepared written statements.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.007

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.008

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.009

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.010

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.011

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.012

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.013

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.014

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.015

Once again, I would like to welcome our witnesses. Today,
we are going to hear testimony from Dr. William McBride, Vice
President of Federal Tax Policy at the Tax Policy Foundation;
Mr. Kyle Pomerleau, Senior Fellow on Tax Policy at the American
Enterprise Institute; Mr. Kevin Kuhlman, Vice President of
Federal Government Relations at the National Federation of
Independent Businesses; and the Honorable Mark Mazur, Former
Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy at the United States
Treasury Department, and we all extend our appreciation for
your time and your insights.
The Committee has received y'all's written statements, and
they will be made part of the formal hearing record. You will
each have five minutes to deliver your oral remarks.
I now yield five minutes to Dr. McBride.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM McBRIDE, VICE PRESIDENT OF FEDERAL TAX
POLICY AND STEPHEN J. ENTIN FELLOW IN ECONOMICS, TAX FOUNDATION

Dr. McBride. Thank you, Chairman Arrington, Ranking Member
Boyle, and Members of the Committee. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you.
My testimony will focus on the economic effects of recent
changes to the Federal tax code, including the Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act, and recommend ways to boost economic growth going
forward.
TCJA reduced income tax rates broadly, both for individuals
and corporations, lowering taxes for every income group and
improving incentives to work, save, and invest, through lower
marginal income tax rates on labor and capital income.
Lowering the corporate tax rate, in particular, improved
the long-run health of the economy by reducing the tax burden
on corporate investment. As a result, the Joint Committee on
Tax and the Congressional Budget Office both predicted more
investment, more labor supply, and faster economic growth.
However, several temporary features complicate the law and
reduce its impact. On the individual side, all of the
individual income tax cuts expire in 2025. On the business
side, the ability to immediately deduct R&D expenses ended last
year. So, businesses are now required to delay those deductions
for five years. Likewise, bonus depreciation initially allowed
businesses to immediately write off the full cost of equipment,
but now, depreciation rules are returning and require
businesses to delay those deductions for up to 20 years.
We found TCJA's positive impacts on the economy would build
in the first few years, resulting in a three percent increase
in GDP and a 1.7 percent increase in wages by 2025, with
smaller impacts in the long run. Comparison to actual outcomes
is difficult due to confounding events, such as the pandemic.
However, at a high level, several measures point to a
strengthened economy post-TCJA. GDP investment and labor
compensation all improved in the two years after enactment of
TCJA and before the pandemic, relative to historic averages.
Regarding tax revenue, while TCJA was estimated to reduce
revenue initially, both our analysis and that of the JCT
indicated it would raise revenue by the end of the budget
window. Actual tax collections have exceeded expectations,
hitting an all-time high in nominal terms last year of 4.9
trillion and 19.6 percent of GDP, which is a 22-year high.
Average Federal tax collections in the five years since TCJA's
enactment are higher than forecasted by the CBO, higher than
most years leading up to TCJA, and higher than the long-run
average.
In contrast to TCJA, President Biden's tax proposals would
raise marginal income tax rates. While the proposals are
ostensibly aimed at high-income earners and businesses, they
would depress economic activity generally and reduce
opportunities for workers at every level. Revenue raised with
these tax hikes would in part be spent on tax credits and other
subsidies for specific industries and taxpayers, further adding
to the complexity of the tax code and expanding the scope of
the IRS.
Going forward, lawmakers should focus on simplifying the
Federal tax code, creating stability, and broadly improving
economic incentives. As a first step, lawmakers should
permanently extend R&D expensing and bonus depreciation. The
policy, which would boost GDP by 0.5 percent over the long run,
would add about 87,000 jobs.
As 2025 approaches, when much of the TCJA expires,
lawmakers should consider fundamental tax reform to
systematically address the tax code shortcomings. While there
are many options, we have recently detailed and analyzed a
proposal that would substantially boost economic growth and
opportunity. It follows along the lines of the Estonian income
tax system, which tops our annual ranking of most competitive
tax systems.
The reform would fully integrate the corporate and
individual income taxes to avoid double taxing corporate
income. Instead of a complicated corporate income tax and
separate rules that apply to passthrough businesses, all
businesses would be subject to a simple 20 percent tax on
distributed profits. At the individual level, a simple flat tax
of 20 percent applies to all individual income, except
dividends, since they are already taxed by the distributed
profits tax. Capital gains are taxed as ordinary income, also
at 20 percent. Rather than a complicated estate tax like ours,
the taxes accumulated savings at death, bequeathed assets are
simply taxed as capital gains when sold by the heir, with
deductible basis determined only by cost incurred by the heir.
We find if such a system were implemented in the U.S., it
would greatly simplify the tax code, saving taxpayers more than
$100 billion annually and reduce compliance cost. In addition,
our modeling indicates it would increase GDP by 2.3 percent in
the long run, raise wages by 1.3 percent, and add 1.3 million
jobs.
My written testimony goes into other ideas along these
lines. I am happy to answer any questions you may have about
that. Thank you for your time and attention.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.016

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.017

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.018

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.019

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.020

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.021

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.022

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.023

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.024

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.025

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.026

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.027

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Dr. McBride.
I now yield five minutes to Mr. Pomerleau.

STATEMENT OF KYLE POMERLEAU, SENIOR FELLOW ON TAX POLICY,
AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE

Mr. Pomerleau. Chairman Arrington, Ranking Member Boyle,
and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. I am Kyle Pomerleau, Senior Fellow at the
American Enterprise Institute.
In my testimony, I am going to put the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act's corporate tax proposals in an international context. I
will make three points.
The first point is prior to the TCJA, the U.S. Corporate
Tax Code was an outlier among the 38 countries of the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, the
OECD. Two, the TCJA brought the U.S. Corporate Tax Code more in
line with those of our major trading partners. And three,
lawmakers should be cautious about some of the proposals in
Biden's budget that could once again make the U.S. corporate
code an outlier.
Before the TCJA, the U.S. corporate tax code was an outlier
in the developed world in a few important ways. The statutory
corporate tax rate was 38.9 percent, which was the highest in
the OECD. At the same time, the U.S. also levied high effective
tax rates on corporate investment. The U.S. was also one of the
last OECD nations to tax U.S.-based multinationals on their
worldwide income.
The pre-TCJA corporate income tax created several issues.
First, the high statutory tax rate combined with the ability to
defer additional U.S. tax on foreign profits encouraged
corporations to shift profits and headquarters to lower tax
jurisdictions. Second, high effective tax rates discouraged
investment in the United States and encouraged corporations to
locate highly mobile assets, such as intellectual property,
overseas. And third, the high statutory tax rate combined with
the ability to deduct interest expense resulted in a large bias
in favor of debt-financed investment.
The TCJA addressed many of those issues and brought the
U.S. code more in line with those of our major trading
partners. Reducing the Federal statutory tax rate to 21 percent
brought the combined statutory rate to about 25.8 percent,
which is slightly below the OECD average of 26.2 percent. The
lower rate reduced the tax burden on new investment and, in
combination with the limitation on net interest expense, also
reduced the bias in favor of debt-financed investment. In
current law, tax treatment of U.S. multinationals' foreign
activity, which exempts the returns to tangible assets but
places a minimum tax on intangible assets, is more aligned with
how other OECD countries treat their multinational
corporations.
But by no means were the TCJA's corporate tax revisions
perfect. For example, some of the TCJA's tax cuts for new
investment were temporary, such as 100 percent bonus
depreciation, and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act raised the tax
burden on research and development in the United States. And
second, the new provisions aimed at preventing base erosions
and profit shifting of U.S. multinationals have several known
shortcomings, and the tax rate on these provisions are
scheduled to rise after 2025, creating uncertainty for
corporations.
Lawmakers are right to want to extend both 100 percent
depreciation and delaying amortization of R&D, but those
changes should be made permanent and prospective, not temporary
and retroactive. In looking forward, lawmakers should continue
to expand expensing further and limit the deductibility of
interest expense.
The last point I want to make is that lawmakers should be
cautious about some of the proposals in the Biden
Administration's budget. In his last couple budgets, the
Administration proposed raising the statutory corporate income
tax rate from 21 percent to 28 percent and proposed significant
reforms to the tax treatment of multinational corporations'
foreign profits. Under these proposals, the U.S. corporate tax
rate would be 32.5 percent and the second highest in the OECD.
Effective tax rates on new investment would also be among the
highest, and despite new limitations on interest expense, the
proposal would also increase the bias in favor of debt-financed
investment.
The Biden Administration argues that its proposal to reform
the tax treatment of multinational corporations would align the
U.S. Code with the global minimum tax, or Pillar Two, the
OECD's proposal, but there would remain meaningful differences.
In fact, their proposal would place a heavier burden on
multinational corporations headquartered in the United States
in Pillar Two. So, under the Biden budget proposals, it would
be less attractive to be a U.S.-headquartered corporation, even
if all countries enacted Pillar Two.
Thank you, and I look forward to any questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.028

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.029

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.030

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.031

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.032

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.033

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.034

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.035

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.036

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.037

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.038

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.039

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.040

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Pomerleau.
Now, we would like to yield to Mr. Kuhlman five minutes for
your opening remarks.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN KUHLMAN, VICE PRESIDENT OF FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, NATIONAL FEDERATION OF INDEPENDENT
BUSINESS

Mr. Kuhlman. Thank you, and good afternoon, Chairman
Arrington, Ranking Member Boyle, and Members of the Budget
Committee. My name is Kevin Kuhlman. I am the Vice President of
Federal Government Relations at the National Federation of
Independent Business, NFIB. I appreciate the opportunity to
share the small business perspective today.
Small businesses face economic challenges, including
stubbornly high inflation and pervasive workforce shortages.
Additionally, small businesses face a very uncertain tax future
that makes business planning extremely difficult.
Beginning this year, certain business provisions of the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 expire. In about two and a half
years, the vast majority of the provisions that benefit
individuals and small businesses will also expire. If Congress
fails to act, there will be a detrimental and substantial tax
increase on millions of small businesses. Further, proposals to
increase taxes on businesses cloud business optimism and
complicate business planning.
Small businesses received significant tax relief upon the
enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. More than three-
quarters of businesses organize as passthrough businesses,
either S corporations, LLCs, sole proprietorships, or
partnerships. Business income is passed through to the
individual owner's income tax, Form 1040, where individual
income tax rates are applied. For passthrough businesses, the
20 percent small business deduction, also known as Section
199A, combined with the lower individual tax rates and broader
income brackets provided tax relief that was invested in small
businesses and their employees.
For example, Lana Pol, owner of Geetings in Pella, Iowa,
testified before this Committee a couple years ago that, ``The
new small business deduction will provide around $40,000 in tax
relief for our businesses. This tax relief provides crucial
cash flow that allowed us to provide up to $4,000 raises for
our employees, the largest compensation increases we have been
able to provide in recent years. Retaining highly valued
employees is key for our businesses to function.''
The small business tax relief was ploughed back into people
and production, not owners' pockets. Unfortunately, these
provisions expire on December 31, 2025. Nearly half of small
business owners reported that uncertainty of expiring tax
provisions is impacting their current and future business
plans.
Fortunately, Congressman Lloyd Smucker, a Member of the
Budget Committee, will reintroduce the Main Street Tax
Certainty Act during the next congressional work period. This
legislation would make permanent the 20 percent small business
deduction, providing tax certainty for small business owners to
grow their businesses. NFIB urges Members of Congress to
support this legislation by joining as an original cosponsor.
Further clouding business planning are proposed tax
increases on small businesses. President Biden's Fiscal Year
2024 budget request would increase taxes on small businesses
organized as corporations and passthroughs.
I included a list of certain tax increase proposals in my
written testimony, but I would like to focus on the proposed
five percent small business surtax on passthrough business
income. The President's budget request describes this small
business surtax as ``closing a loophole.'' The tax was
originally created as part of the Affordable Care Act's
reconciliation bill as a tax on investment or passive income.
It was a deliberate policy choice to not apply the tax to
active business income, which of course is not passive income.
As former chairman of President Obama's Council of Economic
Advisers, Jason Furman described, it was not applied to active
business income ``because it could be demonized as a tax on
small businesses and doctors.''
A deliberate policy choice is not a loophole. The proposed
expansion of the tax would more than double the revenue
collected, further demonstrating that the tax increase proposal
does not close a loophole. If it is ultimately enacted, this
substantial tax increase would reduce the ability of
passthrough business owners to invest in their businesses and
employees, as well as leaving them at a further disadvantage
relative to corporations.
Over a few months, NFIB collected over 21,000 signatures
from small business owners throughout the country opposing this
small business surtax, and stating emphatically that small
business is not a tax loophole.
Small business owners shared their concern. For example,
John Sullivan, owner of Dana Wallboard in Westford,
Massachusetts, wrote that, ``As a passthrough entity, we pass
through a million dollars, but that doesn't mean we keep it for
ourselves. We still pay out of that, long-term debt, mortgages,
truck leases, et cetera. We don't take it home. When all is
said and done, we take home less than 400,000. By taxing us on
everything over 400,000, assumes we are keeping that money for
personal consumption, and that is just not true. I recommend
rethinking this 3.8 percent small business surtax on small
businesses who are hanging on with all the issues they've had
to deal with over the past two and a half years.''
In conclusion, small businesses continue to face economic
headwinds. Congress can help mitigate economic challenges by
extending beneficial small business tax provisions, reducing
paperwork, and rejecting tax increases on small businesses. Tax
certainty will help businesses plan for the future and increase
small business confidence.
I appreciate your time and attention to these concerns.
Thank you for this opportunity.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.041

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.042

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.043

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.044

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.045

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.046

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Kuhlman.
I now yield five minutes to Dr. Mazur.
Dr. Mazur. Mazur.
Chairman Arrington. Mazur. You know, I asked that question
and I still couldn't get it right. So, I apologize.

STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE MARK MAZUR, FORMER ASSISTANT
SECRETARY FOR TAX POLICY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY

Dr. Mazur. No problem. Chairman Arrington, Ranking Member
Boyle, Members of the Committee, thank you very much for having
me here today to discuss this important topic concerning the
Federal tax code.
The Federal tax code administered by the Internal Revenue
Service is responsible for raising four and a half trillion
dollars a year. That pays for all the goods and services
provided by the Federal Government.
Just to review some basics, when we think about any taxes,
there are four main criteria we use to evaluate it. One,
revenue adequacy. Does it raise enough revenue to pay for the
goods and services that are demanded by the population? Two,
efficiency. Is the revenue raised in a way that minimizes
distortions? And distortions accompany any tax system, so
minimize them in that context. Third, is it equitable? That
means two things. One, are similarly situated taxpayers treated
roughly the same, horizontal equity? And are taxpayers with
greater ability to pay asked to contribute a larger share of
their resources than those with less ability to pay, vertical
equity? And finally, simplicity, where taxpayers know what the
obligations are, know what the rules are, and can comply with
the system without too much burden. Those are the ideals.
Obviously, our system falls short on all four dimensions.
We can talk about revenue adequacy to start. In the late
1990s, early 2000s, the last time the Federal budget was
balanced, the Federal Government raised about 20 percent of GDP
in terms of revenues. Since then, as a country, we have decided
to increase spending on things like national defense, and
demographically, we have way more retirees than we used to have
who claim benefits from Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid,
and so on.
And so, if we are serious about balancing the budget, we
would be looking at something above 20 percent of GDP, not
below. Last year, we had a one-time apparition to get up to
19.6 percent GDP. That would be a good start if we were able to
maintain that, but that would take some action from Congress to
actually raise revenues relative to the baseline in order to do
that.
In my testimony, I just do a quick little example of my
personal situation. So, in 1988, I looked at my effective tax
rate. It was 21 percent. In 2018, 30 years later, my adjusted
gross income was about 50 percent higher in inflation-adjusted
terms. My effective tax rate was 19 percent. It was actually
lower. So, I was paying less to the Federal Government for the
services I was getting, which are roughly the same level of
services 30 years later, even though my income was
substantially higher.
Why is that? Because we have had a series of tax cuts that
have occurred over a long period of time, in 2001, 2003, they
were extended again in 2012, in 2017, and several other times,
and those outweighed the tax increases in 1993 and with the
Affordable Care Act.
And so, really, we are asking people, relatively well-off
people, to pay less than they used to pay to support the
Federal Government. That doesn't seem like a strategy for
getting the budget balanced.
I know the hearing today is focused on tax incentives.
Largely, one of the things that you should keep in mind is
almost all the tax incentives we have in place are inefficient,
that they are not the most cost-effective way to generate the
behavior that Congress is trying to generate. What we do with
the current set of tax incentives is largely pay taxpayers to
do what they would have done anyway.
And so, just one example, bonus depreciation, which I know
my colleagues here like. Basically, bonus depreciation says if
you are investing in your business to maintain it and keep it
profitable and so on, completely deduct the cost of those
investments. You would have done that anyway. We are not
encouraging people to do much more than they would have done.
Similarly, I talk a little bit in my testimony about things
like 529 plans, which basically have people shift investments
from taxable accounts into tax-favored accounts. Really doesn't
change their behavior very much, but it does cost the Federal
Government revenue.
And so, if we are looking about designing tax incentives,
what we would focus on is where the behavior occurs, and then
try very hard to focus attention on changing that behavior in a
very cost-effective way, and as Kyle Pomerleau said, one of the
things that we would certainly not do is do retroactive tax
cuts because, frankly, that behavior has already occurred in
the past. We are not changing it by changing the tax law with
that. So, really, you would want to try the minimum, not do
those things that will not change behavior.
And with that, I will just conclude here. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here. Happy to take your questions.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.047

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.048

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.049

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.050

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.051

Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Dr. Mazur.
We will now begin our question-and-answer session. I will
yield myself five minutes.
Let me start with you, Dr. Mazur. I think your comments
were very thoughtful. I want to know, as a tax policy expert,
is there a point at which--because you mentioned some of the
tax incentives don't have the return on investment that some--
--
Dr. Mazur. Mm-hmm.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Would say they do, but
where is the point at which you have diminishing returns? And
is there a point at which you tax either businesses or
individuals where you get less revenue because you have reduced
investment, growth, et cetera? Is there such an inflection
point, in your mind?
Dr. Mazur. Well, for sure. You have heard of the Laffer
Curve, right? You have seen that picture drawn. So, surely at
100 percent, that is not giving you much incentive, right? And
so, as you move back a little bit from that, you are able to
generate additional revenue, but where we are looking at in
today's world, with tax rates of, between 20, 30, 40 percent,
that is not even close to where an inflection point occurs. We
are really far away. I think when President Kennedy talked
about cutting tax rates, maybe we were close to it then, but
really, we are not there now.
Chairman Arrington. I am not an expert on tax policy, but I
am on the Tax Subcommittee of Ways and Means, and I have
pondered what is the right rate for many years now, and I am
not dogmatic.
Dr. Mazur. Mm-hmm.
Chairman Arrington. It is not theology for me, but
practically speaking, you look at our competitors around the
globe and you say to yourself, do we want to be the highest
taxed business, job creators in the world or do we want to be
the most competitive, or somewhere in between? Because capital
is going to flow in this global market to where it is going to
get the best return, and I think about pre-TCJA and how much
capital was overseas and how uncompetitive we were from a tax
code standpoint.
So, you touched on this, Mr. Pomerleau, about bringing us
in line. Let's just say, you know, nobody knows the magic rate,
but we know our rates relative to our competitors, and you said
that if we implement President Biden's tax rates that he
proposes in his budget, number one, it is almost $5 trillion
dollars in new taxes, but you said it would bring us to the top
taxed corporate rate or business rate in the OECD field, with
the exception of one country. Who is the one country that would
be taxing higher than the United States in that scenario?
Mr. Pomerleau. It is actually a small country, Colombia.
Chairman Arrington. Colombia. Who is in the top five with
the United States in that scenario where we would increase the
corporate rates to 28 percent?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, the countries that would be up there
with us would be some of the larger countries, like Germany,
France, Japan.
Chairman Arrington. I read from a progressive, more liberal
tax policy think tank where corporate rates, the majority of
corporate rate increases are passed onto consumers. It is as
high as 70 percent, but we can debate that, but are corporate
rate increases passed to consumers in lower wages, in higher
prices, and to what extent does that dynamic occur?
Mr. Pomerleau. Yeah, this is a complex issue, and it also
depends on what the base of your tax looks like, how much it
distorts investment, but it is generally true that, you know,
any tax is going to fall on either workers or owners of
companies, and the corporate tax is no exception, but the exact
share really depends.
Dr. Mazur. But the----
Chairman Arrington. Go ahead. Yeah.
Dr. Mazur. But the Treasury Department and Joint Tax
Committee, who have studied this, basically show that 70 or 80
percent goes to capital.
Chairman Arrington. Goes to what?
Dr. Mazur. Capital. Not labor, not consumers.
Mr. Pomerleau. One reason for that, by the way, is because
the base of the corporate tax has a lot of expensing, which
makes the corporate tax more neutral and less distortive for
corporate investment.
Chairman Arrington. Dr. McBride talked about the
progressivity of the tax code, and many would say it is the
most progressive of the OECD countries. Did the TCJA make the
tax code less progressive or more progressive?
Dr. McBride. A couple of studies on this indicate that it
was basically a wash or made it slightly more progressive
actually.
Chairman Arrington. Okay. So, it wasn't less progressive?
Dr. McBride. No. No. Certainly demonstrably, when CBO
looked at it, there were tax cuts across the entire income
scale.
Chairman Arrington. And we have heard the tired talking
point about it was a giveaway to the rich, but my understanding
is that lower-income and middle-income folks benefited as a
percentage more than the higher income in terms of retained
income, retained earnings. Is that correct?
Dr. McBride. I believe that is correct, but I am not
entirely sure. I don't have the numbers in front of me here.
Chairman Arrington. Well, my time has expired and I yield
to my Ranking Member for his Q&A.
Mr. Boyle. And so, on the TCJA, Dr. Mazur, you may know
this, but am I correct when I recall that the Congressional
Budget Office found that by 2026, 83 percent of the tax cut
from the TCJA went to the wealthiest one percent?
Dr. Mazur. I am not aware of the actual numbers, but I do
know that the benefits tended to go to higher income people,
especially when you considered the corporate benefits being,
going to capital.
Mr. Boyle. And not just the richest one percent, but the
richest one-tenth of one percent received a majority of the tax
cut in the TCJA.
Now, for most of this year, actually all of this year up
until a few weeks ago, the major issue in the Capitol was the
debt ceiling and whether or not it would be raised, whether or
not the United States would suffer a first-ever default. The
alleged driver for those who didn't want to raise the debt
limit was to win cuts because they were so concerned about the
size of the national debt.
Well, here we are just last week, the House Ways and Means
Committee passed a piece of legislation that would extend the
TCJA, the GOP tax scam, and extend those tax cuts. Are you
aware perhaps of how much that would cost in terms of adding to
our national debt?
Dr. Mazur. Tens or perhaps hundreds of billions of dollars.
Mr. Boyle. Yeah. I believe over $2 trillion is what was
found. Sorry, I am not----
Dr. Mazur. No, it just depends----
Mr. Boyle [continuing]. Intending to put you on the spot.
Dr. Mazur. No, no. It depends how long you do the
extension.
Mr. Boyle. Extension for. That is correct. Yeah. So, I
believe this was an extension that would cover ten years or so,
or at least make them permanent, as far as the budget window.
So, I mean, it is remarkable to me that the majority for
months and months and months was talking about national debt,
national debt, national debt, and then, as soon as the debt
ceiling is raised, they immediately pivot to making tax cuts
for the richest one percent permanent that would add trillions
of dollars to our national debt. It certainly calls into
question the extent to which some are really concerned about
our national debt.
Now, you had, you know, I think an interesting point in
your written testimony, and you talked about it just kind of
orally here. The level of taxation that you were paying decades
ago, same individual, right, relatively I think same income----
Dr. Mazur. Same house.
Mr. Boyle [continuing]. Not to pry, but that was what I
read.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Boyle. And just how much less you are paying now versus
decades ago, and looking at that in relation to our deficit and
debt issue, and I was wondering if you could just kind of
expound on that because I thought it was very interesting.
Dr. Mazur. Sure. So, I am a pack rat and I do keep my old
taxes, and probably some of you older people do as well, and I
looked when I did my 2018 tax return, it was after the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act, and looked at what my effective tax rate was,
taxes paid over adjusted gross income, and it was 19 percent,
and I compared it to what it was in 1988. Roughly same
household composition, but my income in 2018 was like 50
percent higher in inflation-adjusted terms, and my tax rate was
two percentage points lower. My effective tax rate was two
percentage points lower.
And so, I guess what I took away from that was I am
benefiting at least as much from the Federal Government now as
I did 30 years ago in terms of public goods that have been
provided, and I am paying less for it, and frankly, I could
afford to pay more, right. I am not near the poverty level or
anything like that.
So, really, I think what it shows is just as a country, we
have kind of shirked our responsibilities for ensuring that we
are paying for the goods and services that our Nation demands.
Mr. Boyle. And to be clear, it is just reclaiming my time
because this was something else that needed to be corrected,
and we have two sides of this obviously, the corporate income
tax side and the personal income tax side. Personal income tax
side, our top marginal rate 37 percent, significantly lower
than where it was in the 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, 1970s. Brief
period in the 1980s it was a little bit lower, but for most of
Reagan's Presidency it was higher, and then, of course Clinton
when he came in raised the top marginal tax rate, and what
followed was a remarkable period of economic growth for most
Americans, as well as our stock market and reduction in
poverty.
Now, on the corporate side, in the 15 seconds I have left,
the TCJA of course lowered the top tax rate, nominal rate, from
35 percent to 21 percent. Compared to what CBO predicted we
would be getting in corporate tax revenues before the TCJA
versus what happened afterwards, $119 billion shortfall a year
after the TCJA took effect, another $100 billion shortfall,
$160 billion shortfall. Those were all in the next three years,
again according not to my figures but the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office.
So, there is no question that the so-called Tax Cuts and
Jobs Act was a massive tax reduction for corporations and the
richest one percent.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Boyle.
We will now yield five minutes to the gentleman from
California, Mr. McClintock.
Mr. McClintock. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Ranking
Member's view of the Trump tax cuts reminds me of the story of
the economist who said, well, that might work in practice, but
it will never work in theory. My Democratic colleagues seem to
believe that taxes are simply a cashbox with a dial. Turn it
up, they produce more revenue. Turn it down, it produces less.
But Dr. Mazur touched on this, the Laffer Curve, which
explains why that view is so wrong. A zero percent tax rate of
course produces zero revenues, but so does a 100 percent tax
rate produce zero revenues because it utterly destroys the
incentive to produce. So, as the tax rate rises, the incentives
to produce new wealth slowly diminish and the incentives to
avoid or evade the tax slowly increase at the same time, until
the curve reaches a point of equilibrium, in which any increase
in tax rates actually produces lower tax revenues.
Dr. McBride, do I have that right?
Dr. McBride. That is correct. That is certainly a real
thing.
Mr. McClintock. And history teaches us very clearly that
this is the case. In the last 60 years, the top income tax rate
has been as high as 91 percent and it has been as low as 28
percent, but Federal tax revenues have stayed remarkably steady
at between 13 percent and 20 percent of GDP, and indeed, some
of the lowest tax revenues came when the top tax rate was at
its highest and some of the highest revenues came when the top
tax rate was quite low.
But although the tax rates within this envelope has
remarkably little effect on revenues, I do think that it has a
big impact on economic growth, and experience, practice, tells
us that that is the case as well.
We keep hearing that the Trump tax cuts favored the
wealthy. Well, Dr. McBride, you are Tax Foundation, right?
Dr. McBride. Correct.
Mr. McClintock. Didn't you folks report that the taxes paid
by the top one percent went up while the other 99 percent of
Americans saw their taxes go down with the Trump tax cuts?
Dr. McBride. The share of taxes paid by the top one
percent, yes, reached a, I believe at least a 20-year high.
Mr. McClintock. The top one percent actually saw their
share rise from 38 percent to 40 percent. Correct?
Dr. McBride. Correct.
Mr. McClintock. And the top one percent of taxpayers, they
earned 19 percent of all income in the country, and yet they
ended up paying 40 percent of all of the income tax revenues.
Do I have that right?
Dr. McBride. That is right.
Mr. McClintock. So, when they say the wealthy ought to pay
their fair share, what they are really arguing for is to cut
their taxes in half. Do I have that right?
Dr. McBride. Sounds right. Yes.
Mr. McClintock. Dr. McBride, when we cut taxes during the
Trump Administration, did tax revenues go up or go down?
Dr. McBride. They certainly went up, and they went up
beyond expectations.
Mr. McClintock. But the deficit also went up. Why was that?
Dr. McBride. Spending went up.
Mr. McClintock. And faster, right?
Dr. McBride. Much more. Yes. It remains considerably
higher.
Mr. McClintock. I have been trying to point out to my
friends on the other side it is the spending, stupid, and that
is the point, deficits are simply a deferred tax. We borrow now
and then we have to pay it back in the future or we simply
inflate the economy and everybody pays it back at the grocery
store and the gas station, and this Administration has made a
science of both of those.
When Reagan cut taxes, did tax revenues go up or go down?
Dr. McBride. They went up eventually.
Mr. McClintock. Yeah. Well, eventually because the tax cut
was postponed for two years, and as Art Laffer had explained to
President Reagan at the time, Mr. President, how much shopping
do you do at a store the day before they have their year-end
sale? But the point is the economy responds to these things,
and the Democrats used to understand that. When Truman took
office, he abolished the excess profits tax, he slashed Federal
income tax rates, and we had the post-war economic boom.
Look, the Ranking Member is right, Clinton did raise taxes
shortly after taking office, and he took such a drubbing at the
polls, they lost the congressional majority. He completely
reversed course, came to the Congress, and declared the era of
Big Government is over, and what did he do? He provided what
amounted to the biggest capital gains tax cut in American
history. He restrained Federal spending, actually reduced
Federal spending as a percentage of GDP, and we had explosive
economic growth and four years of balanced budgets.
You would think that with that practice in hand, the left
would abandon their socialist theories, which have never
worked, here or anywhere else they have been tried.
I see my time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from California,
and yield five minutes to my friend, Mr. Higgins, from New
York.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of
things. You know, America remains the world's richest, most
dynamic, and productive economy. It is the largest economy. It
is 25 percent of the world's economy. It is a $24.5 trillion
economy. America was 40 percent of the world's seven largest
economies in 1998. Today, it is 58 percent, or an 18 percent
increase. America is home to 11 of the top 15 universities in
the world. Tech investment raised $150 billion, or 49 percent
of the global total, and more than double that of China.
In the United States today, as the Ranking Member has said,
that U.S. recovered from the coronavirus pandemic faster than
any major economy in the world. Unemployment is at a stunning
low, 3.4 percent. Biden's economy grew three times the average
pace of the previous economy. Real incomes are rising.
Manufacturing is booming with 800,000 new jobs. Employment has
grown under this Administration by 14 million jobs. Even
inflation, which this month was at 4.1 percent, is lower than
the global average of 5.2 percent, and two percentage points
lower than the average inflation in Europe. Even the budget
deficit, 15.6 percent of the economy at the end of the Trump
Administration, has dropped to 5.5 percent at the end of last
year.
Now, I was just looking at the last 34 years. You have had
three Republican administrations and you have had four
Democratic administrations. We have had four recessions and
four recoveries.
Under George H.W. Bush, Bush one, the deficit grew by $300
billion and drove the economy into recession.
Under the Clinton Administration, he fixed the broken Bush
economy and grew the economy by four percent each year,
sustained over an 8-year period, a $400 billion in debt
reduction and left Bush two, George W. Bush, with a $260
billion surplus.
Bush two took the Clinton surplus and turned it into a $1.2
trillion deficit and drove the economy into its worst recession
since the Great Depression in 2008.
Obama came in, cut the Bush deficit by $600 billion.
Trump increased the deficit by nearly $2 trillion, lost
three million jobs, including 200,000 manufacturing jobs, and
accumulated $8 trillion in debt, which necessitated the raising
of the debt ceiling three times.
Biden created 14 million jobs.
I mean there is a trend here, and each of these
Administrations that failed economically adopted a supply side
economic policy that disproportionately gave tax cuts to the
very wealthy, and each time, those economies have failed
miserably and then were saved by the Democratic Administrations
that came in, invested in the growth of the American economy,
and that is what the economy did under those Administrations.
Dr. Mazur, what am I missing here?
Dr. Mazur. I think one thing that we all tend to do is
overstate the role of the tax system in what is going on in the
U.S. economy. It is a contributor, but it is not the driving
force.
The U.S. is a very strong economy, as you point out, four
percent of the population, 25 percent of the world's economic
output. That means we are in a position where we have lots of
strengths: a good labor force, good capital markets, good rule
of law, supportive Federal Government, supportive rules, and so
on. So, the tax system is just part of the process.
I guess I might quibble a little bit with assigning blame
to each of these Administrations or credit. It is true that the
economic policies of the Democratic Administrations tended to
raise taxes and put you in a better fiscal position. That part
is true, but whether----
Mr. Higgins. Does infrastructure investment grow the
economy?
Dr. Mazur. Yeah. I think that one of the major benefits of
the infrastructure bill that was passed is it allows there to
be high rates of return investment in every state of the
country.
Mr. Higgins. Because that is an investment in the growth
and the productivity of the American economy. Tax cuts that end
up as stock buybacks do not contribute to the growth of the
economy, and what I am simply pointing out here is that there
is a trend that is historical and factual.
Mr. McClintock [presiding]. The gentleman's time has
expired. Mr. Estes.
Mr. Estes. Well, thank you, Mr. Acting Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity. Thank you to our witnesses for
being here today. I am glad we are having this hearing today.
Talked a lot about last week's CPI numbers and confirmed that
the American economy does need help to be reignited.
The Kansans I represent are still suffering under
Bidenflation, and tax policy lays an important foundation for
helping economic growth for everyday Americans. You know,
families and small businesses have suffered for more than two
years under the failings in these economic policies of the
Biden Administration.
Inflation is up five and a half percent since Joe Biden
took office in January of 2021, much higher than any of his
predecessors over the same period of time, and instead of
addressing this issue, the President in his budget proposed
$4.7 trillion in tax increases at a time when Kansans are
already paying 14 cents out of every dollar they earn in direct
Federal taxes, not including the taxes they have to pay through
the purchases of businesses, that ultimately pay taxes, from
the income from Kansans. You know, this is the opposite of
incentivizing of economic growth, if we want to increase that
amount.
I do have a couple of ideas about tax policy that the
President could put in place to make that important, and I want
to talk about that a little bit, but one of the things I want
to at least touch on that was brought up earlier and, you know,
talking about the difference between in theory versus in
practice. You know, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that was passed
in 2017 obviously is sort of like an investment that you might
make in a business, is that you change the tax code to make
sure that you incentivize the behavior you want, and as a
result, we have seen the economy take off and grow.
So, the first few years you may have lower tax revenue, as
mentioned by my friend, the Ranking Member, for the first
couple of years, first three years that that went into place,
the tax revenue was down over prior years, but the last two
years we have already seen we have turned a corner. That
investment from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, I mean, raised over
$200 billion more than the CBO estimated in 2021, and in 2022
raised over $900 billion in actual tax receipts more than what
the CBO had estimated. So, obviously we are seeing some
positive results out of that by making sure the economy keeps
going.
I mentioned there are a couple bills that the President
could consider to help get the economy going. One is a
bipartisan bill, the American Innovation and R&D
Competitiveness Act. That restores immediate expensing for
research and development cost. This legislation was part of the
larger tax cut and economic growth package that we passed
through Ways and Means last week, the Build It in America Act,
and it has already been reported out of committee.
It is a promising start. I mean, it will change our tax
code to help generate innovation and foster job growth, so that
we don't cede any more ground to our adversaries. You know,
just as a point of reference, you know, our main competitor,
China, has seen its R&D investments increase 400 percent in
just two decades. While the United States' share of global R&D
investment in 2019 was 30 percent, China's was 24 percent. You
know, that is a far cry from where we were in 1999 when the
U.S. was at 40 percent and China was at nine percent. So,
obviously we have seen a huge growth making those smart
investments.
Mr. Kuhlman, will restoring R&D expensing reduce the tax
burden on new investments, and how will that help spur economic
growth?
Mr. Kuhlman. Yeah. I think, yes, R&D spending will. It is
especially a big deal when cash flow is tight and as interest
rates are increasing. That is certainly the case. I have been
hearing particularly from manufacturers, engineering firms,
architecture firms, technology companies that it certainly
would be helpful.
Mr. Estes. Well, thank you, and a second thing we need to
do, talking about tax policy, we need to focus on what is being
bantered about by the Biden Administration on the OECD Pillar
Two tax scheme that the Administration has been pursuing.
Basically, what their proposal is that the OECD would dictate
what U.S. companies pay as a tax rate on operations inside the
United States, and actually would be detrimental to U.S. tax
receipts.
So, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation, if this
global implementation of the global minimum tax as defined in
Pillar Two is implemented, the United States will lose $120
billion in tax revenue that will be lost, and even if the
United States changes its tax code to match and to copy what
the rest of the world does, we would still lose $58 billion in
tax revenue. So, businesses are going to lose money and we are
going to get less tax revenue in the United States. That is
just a poor policy, and we need to make sure we don't proceed
down that route.
So, I know I could go on for a whole lot longer, but I am
out of time, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Blumenauer.
Mr. Blumenauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hesitate to
contradict my Ranking Member, but there were actually----
Mr. Boyle. Ms. Schakowsky is now recognized.
Mr. Blumenauer [continuing]. There were actually more
Democrats who voted for the NAFTA revision than Republicans.
Just keep the record straight, but I do appreciate you and Mr.
Higgins laying out what the facts are regarding whether or not,
somehow the economy is some sort of rapid decline as a result
of 29 months of the Biden Administration. There have, in fact,
been more jobs created, 13 million additional jobs, compared to
the miserable experience that we had under the four years of
the previous President. Those are facts that can be verified.
We have 28 consecutive months of job growth under the
``failed'' policies of President Biden. Doesn't seem to make
sense. We are at historic low record of unemployment, and for
Black Americans, it is an all-time record. Hardly the
characteristics of failed policies. To the contrary, in terms
of growth, in terms of jobs, those are examples of where it is
in fact working, and as have been pointed out here before this
panel, problems of inflation are not unique to the United
States, but in fact, the record of the United States is that we
have done a better job of dealing with inflation than the other
major economies around the world. I mean, again, Germany,
France, Italy, the United Kingdom have experienced far more
unemployment and inflation than we have, and I would suggest
that it is important to try and put this--we can go ahead on
our rhetorical flourishes and talk about theories about what
would work or what not, and make rhetorical attacks based on
socialist policies and communism and other delusional theories,
but the fact is our democracy and its economy are doing better
than any other major economy in the world, and it is time that
we will be able to reflect on the performance of the Biden
Administration.
It seems to me as we are talking about taxation and
generating revenues, I am saddened to say that my colleagues,
when they got their hands on the levers of power and be able to
advance policies, one of the first policies they advance would
increase the deficit by slashing enforcement of our taxes. Now,
we can debate about what the right level is and who should pay
it, but I think it is unconvertible that people should pay the
taxes they owe now under the existing system, and those of you
who purport to represent small business, I would think that you
would want to make sure that they are protected by making sure
that people who owe taxes pay what they are responsible for
doing. That should not be an item of contention. The tax system
that has the least friction is collecting the taxes that are
already due and are not being paid, and sadly, the evidence is
the further up the food chain you get, the richer you are, the
larger the corporations, they have less compliance, not more.
We ought to embrace those investments to inject a sense of
fairness, so that they are not disadvantaged by people who
cheat. That is not in anybody's interest.
Finally, it seems to me that the recent proposal from my
Republican colleagues to gut the inflation reduction proposals
to incent investments in alternative energy, which are working,
there are billions of dollars that are being committed, largely
in red states, to take advantage of those provisions, and it is
sad that the majority wants to strip those out of the tax code.
Mercifully, they won't be successful and they shouldn't be
because they are working for the American people.
Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Bergman.
Mr. Bergman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find it interesting
that too many of us in our 435-member body spend the five
minutes of valuable oxygen consumption time talking rather than
listening, but it is what it is. We all run every two years and
we have to figure out a way to get back here.
So, let's talk to the folks that are sitting somewhere in a
mom-and-pop restaurant today or in a machine shop that maybe
employs four or five folks, and so, if they were listening to
this, it is on their lunch break, and all their employees are
listening, how much of what has been said here today do you
think they would understand, as it relates to their daily
lives? And are we, whether it be us here on the dais or you at
the table, are you actually, not necessarily thinking in terms
that they will understand, but utilizing examples that a small
mom-and-pop business understands?
Anybody want to offer comment? Are we in our own little
bubble here as we have these high-level, philosophical, a lot
of cases nondecision-making discussions? Anybody want to offer
comment?
Mr. Kuhlman. Congressman Bergman, thank you. Just last
week, there were about 200 NFIB small business owner members in
town. Met with many offices, including yours and you. So, thank
you for meeting with them, but it was, we just encouraged them
to tell their story, share their story about it. We follow it
at a macro level but we always think that the individual
stories are much more important, and it was, you know, how tax
relief was reinvested back into the people and into their
production, and not into their bank accounts.
Mr. Bergman. Have we as the Federal Government made it too
complicated?
Mr. Kuhlman. Yes, and they do acknowledge that things are
very complicated.
Mr. Bergman. So, the point is if we have made it too
complicated, if we looked at and when we talk about corporate
taxes, where we talk about taxing the wealthy, which is I
think, if I remember in my first term in Budget seven years
ago, the math was said if you taxed the wealthiest one percent
115 percent of their income, which seemed a little weird, that
it still didn't even come close to beginning to reducing the
national debt. The numbers don't match. It is a nice soundbite
to play, but the math doesn't work.
So, I would like to hear from whoever wants to offer
comment on the following statement. If we eliminated--well, is
it a fair statement to say that corporate income tax is very
simply passed along to the end to the consumer? If I am a
business and I pay corporate tax and I do my structure and I do
what my market forces will allow me to do as a business, is it
fair to say that corporate taxes are passed--those expenses and
paying the corporate taxes, eventually are passed along to the
consumer?
Mr. Kuhlman. Yes, and especially in an environment now
where businesses have become as efficient and productive as
they possibly can. They are dealing with stubbornly high
inflation. Certainly the costs do have to be passed along.
Mr. Bergman. So, the point is, is it time that we--should
we just consider getting rid of the corporate income tax
because the consumer pays it anyway? And if you are a corporate
executive making $20 million a year, you just pay that tax on
it and that revenue comes direct to the Government?
Dr. Mazur. I think I want to disagree with that, that the
literature shows, and we talked about this a moment ago, from
Treasury, Joint Tax Committee, Congressional Budget Office
shows that about 80 percent of the corporate income tax is
borne by capital. So, shareholders generally pay for that, not
consumers. Now, the other 20 percent, 20, 30 percent is borne
by labor and consumers. So, there is a portion of it, but the
largest portion----
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So, but you said borne by capital.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah. The shareholders.
Mr. Bergman. Okay. So, the point is in the long term, if we
are trying to create an economy that is streamlined so that
people working, whether you are the business owner or just that
employee working there and paying your personal income tax,
that you can live the kind of life that your grandparents had
hoped for when they were struggling through the 1930s and
1940s, and I see my time has run out, so I guess we will have
to take that for another time, but I always appreciate, I will
always defer to Mr. McClintock because of his ability to take
these complex things and break them down for folks like me.
Mr. McClintock. As much as it pains me to interrupt the
gentleman in such a compliment, the gentleman's time has
expired.
Ms. Balint. Ms. Balint.
Ms. Balint. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you all for being
here today to talk about these issues. They are very important
to me.
I come to this hearing as a teacher from Vermont who has
worked in four different rural public schools, and have really
direct experience with dealing with rural poverty, and right
now, one in 18 Americans live in what writer Matthew Desmond
has called deep poverty. One in 18. He said it is so low he
refers to it as subterranean level of scarcity, and rates of
poverty in this country have really not changed since the
1970s, and today, a minimum wage full-time worker cannot afford
a two-bedroom apartment anywhere in America. Anywhere. So, in
all of our districts, and this obviously should trouble all of
us, that people are working as hard as they possibly can and
they--you know, we can talk about investments, we can talk
about stocks, we can talk about, you know, who is better off. I
can tell you most folks are not better off right now.
Dr. Mazur, as you know, for decades, the Republican Party
has carried out essentially the same playbook of cutting taxes
for the rich and then feigning concern over the deficit. We
just went through this. It is really fresh in our minds, and
then, proposing spending cuts to vital programs, such as Social
Security and Medicare, and I know my colleagues are also teeing
up part two of the Trump tax cuts when we haven't even been
able to pay for the first phase. First phase cost us a whopping
$1.9 trillion and has led to a proliferation of billionaires in
the United States, and in 2018, for the first time ever in our
country's history, the richest class of Americans paid a lower
tax rate than working Americans and the average effective tax
rate of the top 0.1 percent of households dropped by 2.5
percentage points. The greatest legislative achievement did
nothing to address the unbelievable wealth inequality in this
country, and according to April data from Forbes, the United
States now has 735 billionaires, the highest number of
billionaires in the world, who consistently use our tax code to
the maximum advantage at the expense of American working
families, like the Vermonters in my district.
And just this week, we learned that one of these
billionaires may be exerting influence over the Supreme Court.
According to ProPublica, hedge fund billionaire Paul Singer
spent some of his vast fortune to take Justice Samuel Alito on
a luxury fishing trip, and he repeatedly had cases concerning
his company in front of the Supreme Court.
Now, I am a daughter of an immigrant, and my parents, like
so many others, sought to achieve the American Dream here.
However, the current American Tax Code has rendered the
American Dream basically unattainable for most people.
Dr. Mazur, it is difficult for many of us to imagine it,
but what would a more equitable tax structure look like today?
What is possible?
Dr. Mazur. So, a couple things are possible, I guess. One
is that you could rebalance the tax code so that higher income
people pay a larger share of their income for taxes, and that
could be either through payroll taxes for Social Security and
Medicare or through income taxes.
You could look at the preferential rate on capital gains
and dividends. There is a lower rate put on dividends that was
supposed to account for the 35 percent corporate tax rate. It
did not get changed when the corporate tax rate went to 21
percent. You could imagine changing that.
Ms. Balint. Can you unpack that a little bit more for
people? Because I think it is really important.
Dr. Mazur. Sure. So, Congress passed a lower tax rate on
dividend income back when the corporate tax rate was higher
than it is today, and part of the stated reason was that, well,
corporations already pay a high rate of tax. You are being
double taxed on this dividend as it comes through, but when the
corporate tax rate was dropped, the preferential rate wasn't
changed at all. So, you kind of get a double benefit from that.
So, that's just a few things. One point that you made that
I think deserves emphasis is looking at the minimum wage.
Ms. Balint. Yeah.
Dr. Mazur. We have not increased the minimum wage in the
United States in decades.
Ms. Balint. It is disgusting is what it is. It is
disgusting.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah, and you are right that you can't afford to
live on a minimum wage job.
Ms. Balint. No. You can work 40 hours a week in this
country making minimum wage and not be able to afford housing,
basic housing, not great housing, basic housing for your
family. This should not be happening, and we should not be
letting it happen.
So, I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. The gentlelady yields back. Mr. Ferguson.
Mr. Ferguson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all
for being here today.
So, I just want to go through a couple of things here that
just kind of make my brain hurt a little bit. We have got, my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle are screaming about
corporate America paying their fair share, okay. Whatever that
number is, okay, because of the Inflation Reduction Act and the
infrastructure plan, there have been over a trillion dollar's
worth of tax credits made available to corporate America,
right? So, the very people that my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle say they want to pay higher taxes, the wealthiest
corporations and the wealthiest individuals can now buy these
tax credits and their effective rate becomes zero. Correct?
Dr. McBride. That is correct. Yeah. That is----
Mr. Ferguson. All right. So, we are screaming about
corporate America paying more taxes, and yet we are going to
turn around and give them what now is about a $1.2 trillion tax
credit to offset the tax rates. So, we are going to raise you,
but we are going to allow you to pay zero. I just want to make
sure I am right on that, right?
Dr. McBride. That is absolutely correct.
Mr. Ferguson. Okay. I got that.
Dr. McBride. It is called----
Mr. Ferguson. Number two----
Dr. McBride [continuing]. Subsidizing and penalizing at the
same time.
Mr. Ferguson. Exactly. So, that is number one. Number two,
Pillar Two, OECD, that is going to remove $300-plus billion
from the revenue stream if that goes through. $300 billion. So,
now, we are telling corporate America we want you to pay more
in higher taxes but we are going to give you a $1.2 trillion
offset, and then, by the way, we are going to give about $300
billion of our taxing authority away to other countries. Now,
that to me just is a really bad policy.
I then hear my colleagues talking about raising tax rate,
lowering tax rate, doing it with Clinton, doing it after
Clinton, before Clinton. We need to recognize that we are in a
global economy and we need to be doing everything that we can
with our economy to make America the best place in the world to
invest, create jobs, and sell around the world, period. So, we
can have a lot of discussions over spending, where things
should go, but the unifying philosophy for this body should be,
are the decisions that we are making make America more
competitive or less competitive? Do they create more jobs, do
they take away more jobs? Are we doing more to invest in
research and development and come up with new ideas or are we
trading that away to other parts of the world?
So, when we look at all of this debate about revenue and
spending, raise the corporate rate ten percent. Raise the
individual rate to 40 percent. These folks are going to take
advantage of the refundable credits and make their effective
tax rate zero. So, how in the heck does that make sense? I
mean----
Dr. McBride. It doesn't make a lot of sense. I agree. The
major outcome of that approach is complication, further
complication of the tax code. So, lots of measures of how
complex the tax code is, but one is the number of words, about
four million words and counting.
Mr. Ferguson. All right. So, for folks that have not lived
in an area or that currently do live in an area without a
manufacturing base, okay, it is incredibly difficult to sustain
a community or a county or a state unless you have
manufacturing there, okay. I mean it just is, and when I say
manufacturing, a major job creator that is the economic
backbone of a county or a city or a region. That is what feeds
off all of the other small jobs and small businesses that we
see growing in a community.
So, if we raise the corporate tax rate, okay, and we don't
move off the snide on this trade policy that we have got, we
are falling further behind, and by the way, we are going to see
less tax revenue coming in because we are giving people
refundable credits and we are giving away part of our taxing
authority to the tune of about $300 billion, and by the way,
does that do anything for American competitiveness and job
creation? Dr. McBride, I will let you answer that question.
Dr. McBride. No. What it does is you could say level the
playing field, but it levels the playing field across the world
with a higher level of corporate taxes, which dozens of studies
show are----
Mr. Ferguson. But let me add----
Dr. McBride [continuing]. Detrimental to economic growth.
Mr. Ferguson [continuing]. Level it with higher taxes, but
our biggest corporations aren't going to be paying taxes
because they are going to use the refundable credits.
Dr. McBride. That is right. So, what we are getting is a
high marginal rate that applies generally combined with a bunch
of preferences for specific companies, industries, and
taxpayers.
Mr. Ferguson. Time has expired, but thank you for helping
me expose the hypocrisy of this conversation. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock. Ms. Schakowsky.
Mr. Ferguson. Yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Ms. Schakowsky.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
So, you know, this Committee comes up with very interesting
titles. The second part of the title of today's hearing is
Incentivizing Economic Excellence Through Tax Policy, but I
would think that it is more accurate by saying what we have
right now is incentivizing economic inequality through tax
policy, and, you know, we are the richest country in the world,
except that we are also, I think, number one in the world of
industrialized nations of the inequal distribution of that
wealth right now. There are three American families, it is
Bezos and, let's see, what are the three, Musk. No, it isn't
Musk. It is Buffett and who was the third? Okay. Anyway, three
American families, I don't want to take my own time, that has
as much wealth as the bottom half of Americans. Think about
that, and you heard, I thought, a really good explanation and
examples of how this has affected Americans in our country, and
so, it just seems to me that we need to focus, if we are really
concerned about not just equity--and let me ask you, Secretary
Mazur. You mentioned what it takes to have--and I don't want to
blame everything on tax policy, but you did say that you
thought the people that have the most ought to pay more. How
would you justify this to some people in this room?
Dr. Mazur. I think one of the basic criteria of good tax
policy is vertical equity, and what vertical equity means is
higher income people pay a larger share of their income than
lower income people. That is reflected in a progressive tax
rate schedule, but there could be other ways to do that as
well, and it really is just a basic sense of fairness, that
those who get the most from the system sort of pay the most for
maintaining that system.
Ms. Schakowsky. So, right now, what we are seeing is that
the Republicans are coming up, as you have heard, with a
proposal of a major tax cut, it looks like it will also go to
the wealthiest Americans, and at the same time talking about
paying for it through things like, that have been suggested,
cutting Social Security, raising the age to now 69 is the
proposal by the majority of the Republicans right now, and
looking at so-called entitlements, which of course people pay
for through every paycheck, and is this, in your view, as
someone who deals with the economy, going to make our economy
stronger, these choices of lowering the tax cuts mostly to the
wealthy and cutting the benefits and the programs that help
lower income people?
Dr. Mazur. I mean, I think making the country stronger from
a fiscal perspective requires two things: one, more revenue,
and two, some breaks on spending, and I think Chairman
Arrington talked about that as these are the two levers that
you can move, and really, it is a matter of balance getting
that right. Our revenues today are too low to pay for the goods
and services that we as a country demand. If we want to demand
less, that is okay, but we still need to raise the revenues to
pay for the ones that we demand that are out there, and you are
right about some of the entitlements. People have paid into
them with the understanding that they will be there for them
when they retire, Medicare and Social Security in particular,
and so, those are promises to future generations that we as a
country need to redeem.
Ms. Schakowsky. The other wealthiest person was--let me
see, they are, thank you, I appreciate that, Gates, Warren, and
Buffett.
But--oh, time. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. McClintock. Mr. Moore.
Mr. Moore. We know it is not me and probably anybody in
this room.
Ms. Schakowsky. Thank you.
Mr. Moore. I wish the Chairman was here because I don't
like to give other people compliments on my birthday. I try to
reserve those solely for myself, but I will be remiss if I
didn't just hit on the topic of credibility. It is a currency
that is dwindling in this place of Congress, unfortunately, and
I really appreciated his opening statements. To be able to
stand in front of a sitting Committee and fully state that he
wishes his party, my party, and I share the sentiment, could
have done more and would have done more about spending, overall
spending, mandatory direct spending or discretionary spending
across the board, wished in 2017 when we had majorities in the
White House, the House, and the Senate, wish we would have done
more, and we would have had an even stronger argument, in my
opinion, of what I think is a pretty strong argument with
respect to the Tax Cut and Jobs Act, but I truly wish that
would have been the case, and I appreciate his willingness to
be--he is somebody that has always led that way. He has
inspired me. It is why I want to be close. I am on both of the
major committees that he is on, and it is a currency that we
just don't have much of back here, and I appreciate that from
our Chairman, and also, the minority witness, Dr. Mazur, you
earlier said I would quibble or I would hesitate to just fully
lay blame or cast the context that it is, you know, laid out
that it is this President did this, this President did this. I
have heard it communicated oftentimes sometimes the economy is
what makes the President actually, and, you know, our economic
cycles go in a certain way that sometimes you catch the tail
end. I don't blame the entire 2008 financial crisis on
President George W. Bush. No way. Right. That has been policy
that has gone on for years and neglect of a lot of different
things with lots of players. So, I appreciate, you know, that
concept of credibility.
I was back in Utah with my colleague from the third
District, John Curtis, Representative Curtis, and he actually
put it better than I have ever heard anybody say it, and I am
going to talk about calling the tax scam, calling the Tax Cut
and Jobs Act the tax scam for the rich. I am going to just
emphasize the way he communicated it. He said, it is uncanny to
me that when the Democrats have an--you know, they can
communicate a message and stay on that point so much that
ultimately the media and a large group of people will
ultimately believe it, and, you know, we will stand up as
Republicans and list out all this data. I am going to do it
again. List out all this data and all this good information
that refutes that fact, and oftentimes, my colleagues from the
other side of the aisle, all they have to do sometimes is stand
up and say, this is a tax cut for the rich, and literally that
is the narrative that continues on.
I resent and I would hope that we could actually agree that
the Child Tax Credit is not a tax scam, that real wage growth--
because the Tax Cut and Jobs Act didn't create an enormous
amount of inflation. It didn't create any. We were able to see
real wage growth take place. You had a doubling of the standard
deduction. Is that a, you know, direct benefit to the wealthy?
In fact, I will ask the question. Dr. Mazur even, asking
the minority witness a question. Would you say that the
standard deduction is a benefit to the wealthy? Would you also
say that SALT, the way we address SALT, by saying what was the
average across the country of state and local taxes in that
deduction, let's double it, and is that a benefit to the
wealthy, what we did on SALT?
Dr. Mazur. There are pros and cons to all these things,
right. So, if you take individual items, you can say they
benefited high-income people or lower-income people. The Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act had lots of moving parts. So----
Mr. Moore. Yeah. Oh, it is a very large piece of
legislation. In fact----
Dr. Mazur. And so, when you talk about the SALT deduction,
you also largely repealed the alternative minimum tax, and many
people who feel that they lost the deduction for their state
and local taxes actually lost it under prior law through the
alternative minimum tax.
Mr. Moore. Right. So, I don't disagree with any of that,
and I am trying to make the point here that so many provisions
in the Tax Cut and Jobs Act weren't just this benefit to the
wealthy, and I think it is a disingenuous narrative, but this
place is what it is, I get it, and I would like to just, with
my remaining time that I used way too much, focus on just one
last thing. We had the R&D tax credit. To Dr. McBride, the R&D
tax credit, can we look at that and say this is something we
have got to preserve and work together? Would you suggest that
Congress try to work together on a bipartisan way to make this
happen, so we can make sure that we can write off these
expenses in that first year?
Dr. McBride. Well, you mentioned R&D credit. I think you
mean R&D expensing, and that is the item that----
Mr. Moore. R&D expensing, yes.
Dr. McBride [continuing]. Has now expired and we are now
faced for the first time ever in this tax code we have had for
100 years where businesses are required to wait for those
deductions and suddenly figure out how to amortize R&D
expenses, which are primarily labor expenses, about 70 percent.
So, this is, yeah, paying scientists and stuff like this.
Mr. McClintock [continuing]. Sadly, the gentleman's time--
--
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
Mr. McClintock [continuing]. Has expired.
Mr. Moore. Appreciate it.
Mr. McClintock. Even more sadly, they have called one of
these pesky annoying votes that just disrupt the schedule and
are just very annoying, but there it is. So, I think there are
three votes scheduled, so it will probably be about 30, 35
minutes or so. So, you all go out and get a cup of coffee or
whatever and I apologize for that, but it is an occupational
hazard at this job. We are all going to go vote. You go out to
coffee and we will all come back in about a half-hour or so.
Thanks. Committee stands in recess.
[Recess.]
Chairman Arrington. We now have the requisite Members of
the Committee from both sides of the aisle. So, we are going to
reconvene here. The Committee will come to order, and now, Mr.
Scott, I know you are getting yourself situated. So, I don't
want to start the clock on you. He is walking up here ladies
and gentlemen of the upper deck. He is going to take full
control of the Ranking Member's chair and let's hope he doesn't
drive us into the ditch like Brendan Boyle has done too many
times. This is what you get. It is an open mic when everybody
else is gone.
Mr. Scott. He made it.
Chairman Arrington. Yeah, so----
Mr. Scott. He got away.
Chairman Arrington [continuing]. Feel free to pick on a few
of my guys that aren't here.
Mr. Scott. Well, I will pick on--thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. Ranking Member Scott, the floor is
yours. I yield five minutes for your questions and answers.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, I hope I don't
put us in the ditch like every Republican President since Nixon
has done. Everyone, every Republican Administration since Nixon
has left for the Democratic successors a worse deficit than
they inherited. Every Democrat Administration since Kennedy has
left for their Republican successors a better deficit situation
than they inherited. President Trump was on the way to doing
that before the pandemic. President Biden is doing that
already.
So, let me see, Dr. Mazur, we have heard about inflation
and blaming the President. How is the United States' inflation
rate compared to the rest of the world?
Dr. Mazur. Generally, the U.S. inflation rate now is lower
than other developed countries like in Europe for instance.
Mr. Scott. So, we have got a global inflation problem and
we are actually doing better than most.
Dr. Mazur. Relatively better, yeah.
Mr. Scott. Dr. Mazur, do tax cuts affect the budget?
Dr. Mazur. By arithmetic, yes, they affect the budget.
Mr. Scott. Well, some don't apparently believe in simple
arithmetic like adding and subtracting because you know that
the, under PAYGO, that Democrats have as a budget rule, if you
have new spending, you have to pay for it with either new taxes
or other spending cuts. You got to pay for it. If you have a
tax cut, you got to pay for it. Either raise somebody else's
taxes or spending cuts to pay for it.
Under the Republican plan, if you have a new spending plan,
you have to pay for it, but if you have a tax cut, you don't
have to pay for it. As if they didn't understand what you just
said that it is simple arithmetic. So, we have heard about
taxing policy, different tax cuts or different spending
initiatives can stimulate the economy but on a differential
basis. Isn't it true that reducing taxes on dividends has a
negligible effect on, as a stimulus to the economy?
Dr. Mazur. Yeah, I would think that relative to other
potential tax cuts, given who the owners of shares are, giving
them a lower tax rate probably doesn't boost the economy that
much, and probably doesn't change corporate behavior that much
in terms of dividends paid.
Mr. Scott. And you said compared to other tax cuts like
what?
Dr. Mazur. Well, if you are thinking you want to boost
consumption, then you would probably want to provide resources
to people who are going to consume those tax cuts. So, lower-
income, middle-income people.
Mr. Scott. Like the Child Tax Credit?
Dr. Mazur. Child Tax Credit would be one example and I
think you saw when it was a refundable credit paid monthly that
it had a pretty substantial benefit to the recipient families.
Mr. Scott. And the Earned Income Tax Credit?
Dr. Mazur. Earned Income Tax Credit is similar though one
caveat in the Earned Income Tax Credit is that for many years,
the Earned Income Tax Credit has been used as a replacement for
increasing the minimum wage. Largely to say, we are not going
to increase the minimum but we are going to give a tax credit
instead. That works for the people who are eligible for the tax
credit but not those who don't have qualifying children living
in their household.
Mr. Scott. And certain spending would have the same thing,
like if you increased unemployment benefits, it would have a
very good stimulus, or food stamps, increase that, that would
go right back into the economy.
Dr. Mazur. Generally true.
Mr. Scott. So, we know which tax policies work and which
ones don't work. Who basically benefitted from the 2017 Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, better known as the Trump tax scam?
Dr. Mazur. So, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that was passed in
2017 had lots of moving parts. Basically, two-thirds of people
in the country probably got a tax cut. The tax benefits for
corporations were generally permanent. The tax benefits for
individuals were generally temporary. I think there was a
slightly larger proportional benefit to higher-income people in
part because they benefit from the corporate tax cuts.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank my new Ranking Member, and now
I yield five minutes to the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. I got ten questions so you got to answer
quick. We didn't get all we wanted in our tax cut, or I didn't,
and one of my concerns was I thought the purpose of the tax cut
was to a degree, to make us more competitive with countries
abroad and there are segments of the population that are more
important than other segments.
Manufacturing was always treated special in this country
through a special credit. That disappeared with the tax cut. We
only have so much money to pay for tax cuts. Somebody even said
we don't have enough money to pay for any more tax cuts, but I
do have a problem if we target it at manufacturing, which has
to compete with other countries abroad, and maybe if we have to
target it even more, the machines that are used in the factory
to make other machines. I tour my manufacturers all the time.
There is always very important machines printing, that sort of
thing. Where do they make that machine? It is always Germany,
Italy, Belgium, Korea, or Japan. Do you think there is a
problem with targeting the tax cut to those manufacturers as
opposed to say retail, which is going to be here anyway?
Dr. McBride. I will take that one. I have a problem with
that. I mean, I think targeting manufacturing is, first of all
not a very small target, right? Manufacturing is a huge sector.
There was a manufacturing deduction years ago that----
Mr. Grothman. Before we got rid of it, it was a
manufacturing credit.
Dr. McBride. That is correct, and it was taken by all sorts
of taxpayers including publishers. You know, coffeemakers,
stuff like this. So, manufacturing is just a huge sector, and
the other thing is that I agree that they are subject to
competition from abroad. So are other sectors like information
technology. There is lots of mobility in a lot of sectors.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Dr. McBride. I suggest----
Mr. Grothman. I am going to cut you off.
Dr. McBride [continuing]. Generally lowering the corporate
rate.
Mr. Grothman. Yeah, I am going to cut you off a little bit.
There is an economic argument if you are solely concerned in
the short term that one business is the same as another
business. I thought we saw a little in the COVID that there are
some businesses that are more important for our national
security than for our wealth. Which is why I wondered about
targeting manufacturing as opposed to retail or say law
offices. Do any one of you want to comment on that at all? I
mean, we used to treat manufacturing better.
Mr. Pomerleau. Yeah, so it is possible that you could make
an argument that for national security purposes, certain types
of production should be in the United States, but I don't think
that the tax code is a good tool to accomplish that. I think
tax systems should be primarily used to raise revenue in a
neutral manner, but if there are national security concerns----
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. That should be dealt with
elsewhere.
Mr. Grothman. You can tell me how later, but okay, next
question we have, we are sometimes criticized for having our
tax cuts favor the rich. That is inevitable I think because the
poor don't pay any taxes in the first place, but I do think it
would be good if to a degree we went after credits that clearly
are benefitting the wealthy. One of those is carried interest.
Does anyone want to say that we should get rid of carried
interest? You can do it if our guys won't.
Dr. Mazur. No, you should. I think this is an area where
basically it is ordinary compensation to people in various
businesses and it is treated in a preferential way.
Mr. Grothman. Yeah, we are helping the hyper wealthy with a
different tax treatment. Well, thank you. Any of our guys agree
with that? Any of our guys, I mean the left three?
Mr. Pomerleau. I agree with Mark. I think that the----
Mr. Grothman. Okay, well we----
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. Treatment is under current law
do support----
Mr. Grothman. We will try to do that, and I will give you
another one. Section 42, low-income housing. That is, you know,
you are giving some guy or gal 85, 95 percent of the value of a
new building if they rent to low-income people. It offends me
out of my mind because you have this group of people, who
probably gives a lot of money up here to, who are getting
wildly generous tax cuts. Maybe they sell these credits to
other businesses. Do you feel that is something we should get
rid of? Or is that, I mean, just say it, you are just
overwhelmingly benefit very wealthy developers. You want to
comment on getting rid of that?
Dr. Mazur. I mean I think the important thing to recognize
is that that is pretty much the only low-income housing
project----
Mr. Grothman. So, you don't think we can----
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. The Government has.
Mr. Grothman [continuing]. First of all, low-income housing
isn't a Federal problem. It is a state problem, but you don't
think there is any way to get money for housing for poor people
other than to, in essence give very wealthy developers----
Dr. Mazur. No, no, if you want to do it through a spending
side program it could be way more targeted, way better targeted
than it is, but Congress decided to do it through the tax code
and as Kyle has said, the tax code's a very blunt tool.
Mr. Grothman. Any of you other guys? I hate Section 42 more
than anything that is why I bring it up. Will anyone of you
guys say it is wrong? It is not good to make the wealthiest of
developers wildly more wealthy? That is the only way we can----
Dr. McBride. Yeah, I say it is wrong. I mean, I think most
of us probably would say that. It is wrong in the same way that
targeting manufacturing with a special provision is wrong. I
think the general principle is that the law should apply
generally, and so, this thing for low-income housing should go
in favor of lowering rates generally for all taxpayers.
Mr. Grothman. I guess I am up. I can talk forever if you
want me to, Chair.
Chairman Arrington. No, well, we----
Mr. Grothman. You are going to cut me off, okay. That is
okay. That is good.
Chairman Arrington. The gentleman's time has expired. I
appreciate his comments and questions. I will now yield five
minutes to my friend Dan Kildee from Michigan.
Mr. Kildee. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, and to
temporary Ranking Member Scott. Good to see you, thank you.
Listening to my friend from Wisconsin, it is obvious that there
are some areas where we have significant disagreement, but
interestingly enough, some areas where we might find agreement
when it comes to tax policy. So, I do think it would make sense
for us as a body, and I serve on the Ways and Means Committee,
the tax writing committee, to try to focus on tax policy that
is a bipartisan approach. It is very difficult to do, I
acknowledge it, but if we are going to have sustainable policy,
we are going to have to figure out a way to do this in a
bipartisan fashion that ensures that people and organizations
pay their fair share and that the obligations for those who
have significant resources are applied to them, and also, that
we do have incentives built into the code.
Now, we can argue about whether or not we do a direct spend
approach or we use the tax code as a way to get at it. It is a
blunt instrument, but I don't think we can deny that there are
priorities that are Federal priorities that we ought to focus
upon, and I do believe that housing, a fundamental aspect of
the hierarchy of human needs, ought to be on the agenda for the
Federal Government, and whatever method we want to use to get
at it, I am interested in a conversation on that, but I think
unfortunately what we have seen most recently in the
legislation that House Republicans have advanced doesn't meet
those tests. It doesn't substantially cut taxes for working
families. It certainly doesn't deal with some of the needs of
the most at-risk people that we face, and we have had
conversations about the low-income individuals. We certainly
had conversations about the Child Tax Credit but that didn't
make it into the legislation. Instead, it overwhelmingly would
cut taxes for the largest and wealthiest corporations. So, it
is not a fiscally responsible approach. It increases our
deficits and exacerbates the inequities in the tax code.
So, I mean, obviously we may not all agree on that
particular point, but I think any thoughtful analysis of the
Republican plan would cause that conclusion to be drawn. For
example, as a result of Republican tax legislation in 2020, 55
of the largest Fortune 500 companies don't pay Federal taxes. I
don't think anybody can defend that when those organizations
and high wealth individuals pay less in Federal income taxes
than a teacher in my communities of Bay City or a nurse in
Saginaw or a factory worker in Midland. So, I am disappointed
in that, but, Dr. Mazur, I wonder if you might just take a
moment to comment on the economic and fiscal benefits of first
cutting taxes for workers in middle-income families to grow the
economy, and second, making sure that those large corporations
and wealthy individuals pay more, just to be blunt, more
meaning their fair share in order to reduce our deficit. I
mean, it is a fundamental question but that really is the
question before us.
Dr. Mazur. Oh, let's start with the second part. Basically,
if you have a set of goods and services that the Federal
Government is providing, you should find a way to pay for them,
and the system that we have in place does not raise an adequate
amount of revenue to meet that, and so, you need to find
sources of additional revenue, and you are right to focus on
large corporations who are paying nothing or small amounts of
tax and high-income individuals who similarly pay less tax than
folks further down the income distribution. So, that would be
the first place to start.
I guess in terms of tax cuts, I would put that a little bit
aside before you got the fiscal house in order. Tax cuts are
not going to be a driving force for making the economy work
better, right? You want to have a good labor force, good
infrastructure, well educated population, and so on. Tax cuts
are sort of secondary to that.
Mr. Kildee. But in that context though, when I think about
tax obligations, if you could just briefly address the economic
impact of, say for instance, the refundable Child Tax Credit.
Dr. Mazur. So, the refundable Child Tax Credit we saw this
occur when it was paid on a monthly basis, we saw it improve
the life situations of the recipients significantly, and so,
that is a situation where getting additional money into the
pockets of those people was a good thing. Whether the tax code
has to do that or if it is some other way, is a discussion. I
mean, I would be much more in favor of increasing the minimum
wage than increasing the Child Tax Credit by a similar amount.
Mr. Kildee. Well, I appreciate that. I appreciate this
conversation. Obviously, we have a lot of work to do, but I
would like to pursue some areas of common ground. Mr. Grothman
made a mention of a particular tax provision that I think we
all could maybe have a conversation about, and I appreciate the
fact that the witnesses at least share some common ground when
it comes to that subject. With that, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Michigan,
and yield five minutes to my friend Rudy Yakym from Indiana.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I ask unanimous consent
to submit into the record a report from the Heritage Foundation
titled, The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act: 12 Myths Debunked.
Chairman Arrington. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.052

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.053

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.054

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.055

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.056

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.057

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.058

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.059

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.060

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.061

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.062

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.063

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.064

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.065

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.066

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.067

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.068

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.069

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.070

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.071

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.072

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.073

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.074

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.075

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.076

Mr. Yakym. Thank you, and thank you to our witnesses for
being here today to share your expertise on this critical
issue. It is no secret that state and Federal tax policies
strongly impact economic growth and opportunities for all
Americans. Every tax dollar that the IRS collects is a dollar
that hard working families don't get to put towards food on the
table or a night out at the movies, and it is a dollar that
businesses don't get to put towards raises for their employees
or capital expenditures. Repeatedly, we have seen the positive
impact of tax cuts on everyday Americans.
For example, in the two years after the passage of the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, real median household income increased by
over $5,000. Yet President Biden and congressional Democrats
continue to push for higher taxes and spending with complete
disregard for the impact on inflation, the impact on long-term
economic growth, and the impact on American, and even more
specifically, Hoosier families and businesses.
The American Rescue Plan, which was rammed through without
a single Republican vote, supercharged inflation, saddled
everyday Americans and small business owners with burdensome
new paperwork requirements on transactions over $600. The
Inflation Reduction Act, was also rammed through without a
single Republican vote, imposed American manufacturers with
over $100 billion in new taxes.
Meanwhile, the Biden Administration's loose regulatory
interpretations have ballooned the costs of new tax credits to
over 700 percent of their original projected costs. What we
should be focused on is how to incentivize growth, how to
incentivize more research and more development within the
United States. For example, a study published in the Journal of
Public Economics estimated that when a business received a ten
percent reduction in their R&D costs, they increased research
spending in intensity by about 19.8 percent. Additionally, they
found that most of the increased spending went to increases in
wages and supplies. This clearly illustrates the broad benefits
in allowing businesses to expense or receive tax credits for
research and development.
So, my question for Dr. McBride to start, can you speak to
the economic impact of R&D tax credits and deductions on
everyday Americans?
Dr. McBride. Sure. So, this gets to the discussion we were
having earlier about consumption being a driver of the economy.
It is true that consumption is about 70 percent of GDP for
instance, but it is investment that happens first to get to
that consumption. It is investment that creates the income
ultimately out of which we consume, and so, it is investment
that should be prioritized here and that is what we should be
discussing here, and it is R&D investment in particular that is
incentivized by R&D expensing. So, yes, it is a very important
provision.
Mr. Yakym. And how would that help everyday Americans or
even Hoosiers that, you know, just median income Hoosiers?
Dr. McBride. So, it leads to greater R&D expenditures. R&D
leads to innovation. Innovation leads to better products,
better consumer products, more efficiencies in the workplace,
which in turn leads to higher productivity ultimately, and
workers are paid based on their productivity. So, that means
higher wages.
Mr. Yakym. All right. Estimates by the Cato Institute show
that ``if Congress confiscated every dollar earned by
individuals, and businesses past their first $500,000, it would
still be about $200 billion short of covering the cost of next
year's projected $1.7 trillion deficit.'' Dr. McBride, do you
believe that this shows that we have a spending problem or a
revenue problem in Washington?
Dr. McBride. I think the clearest picture is from the CBO
when they simply do their 10-year projection. Looking forward,
they are showing on average, spending is going to be about 24
percent of GDP over the next ten years. It is about three to
four percentage points higher than the historic average, okay?
And then we have revenues also higher than the historic
average, coming in about 18 percent. So, I think that is all
you need to know going forward if it is spending or revenues
that are the problem.
Mr. Yakym. Thank you, and, Dr. Mazur, part of my job is
ensuring that Hoosiers and small businesses and families don't
pay higher taxes that is the result of Washington's
overspending, and in your opening testimony you stated and
complained that you now pay less taxes today as a percentage
than what you did prior. So, I just want to make sure that you
are aware that the Treasury Department actually has a program
where if you don't feel like you are paying enough taxes, you
can send in additional dollars and that would help make sure
that my constituents don't bear the cost of the overspending
here in Washington. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Dr. Mazur. I am well aware of that program. I also don't
have a Roth IRA for a similar reason that I enjoy paying my
taxes because like they say, tax is the price you pay for a
civilized society.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Indiana, and
now yield five minutes to my colleague from Oklahoma, Josh
Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I heard earlier
today one of our colleagues, one of our Democrat colleagues. I
wrote down the comment. They were concerned about ``a
proliferation of billionaires in our country.'' That is an
exact quote from what they said. They were also concerned
``that we have as the United States, the highest number of
billionaires in the world.'' It made me think about John F.
Kennedy and his famous commentary that a rising tide lifts all
ships, all boats, and how this ideology of wanting to weaken
our country's ability to have people invest and create jobs,
how it has taken over and it misuses facts.
I greatly enjoyed studying the Tax Foundation's state by
state comparisons, and with the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, what we
know is the corporate income tax rate, which made America have
among the highest corporate income taxes in the world, with the
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act we went back to the average, and then
last year if you look at the 2022 income tax collections, what
you find is, is that the top one percent paid 42 percent of all
income taxes, and the top 50 percent paid 97--of income
earners, paid 97 percent of all income taxes, and the bottom
income earners in the United States only paid 2.3 percent of
all income taxes.
So, it is amazing to me the rhetoric that continues to come
out when we already have seven graduated tax rates. We are
totally in contrast to what in 1935 William John Henry Boucher
once said, you can't hit the poor man by destroying the rich
man. You can't strengthen the weak by weakening the strong. You
can't lift the wage earner up by pulling the wage payer down.
It is just an astounding contrast in America that we don't want
to create an environment that makes people successful, and then
when you actually look at who is paying taxes, as I just
recited, it doesn't match the rhetoric of, we got to get them
to pay more.
So, Dr. Mazur, you made a comment about vertical equity.
You defined it a minute ago about vertical equity is to get
those who do better to pay more. With 97 percent of the income
tax burden paid by the highest 50 percent of earners, and the
bottom 50 percent of earners pay only 2.3 percent, and the top
one percent that is talked about all the time pay 42 percent of
all income taxes, and we are at the average of corporate income
tax rates and you look at where we are at historically in terms
of our gross domestic product and the amount of tax collection,
that we are on par with history of our Nation. Can you explain
to me where do you expect people to pay more when we have this
system already in place?
Dr. Mazur. Sure. So, you are focused on income taxes. If
you would go back to your constituents, probably more than half
of them pay way more in payroll taxes than income taxes, and
you are leaving payroll taxes out of the calculations here when
you are going through who pays how much.
Mr. Brecheen. Can I ask you a question?
Dr. Mazur. Sure.
Mr. Brecheen. Payroll taxes, you are talking about FICA and
the----
Dr. Mazur. I am talking about, yeah, Social Security and
Medicare.
Mr. Brecheen. Yeah, Medicare.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Brecheen. So, what we know by looking at that is, is
that when we look at our budget deficits----
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Brecheen [continuing]. Our annual budget deficit is
$1.5 trillion this year, that is not inclusive of the
insolvency of those programs you are discussing. Most of us,
you know, we know we have got to solve that problem.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Brecheen. But that is a totally different conversation
than when we are looking at budgets.
Dr. Mazur. Not totally different. It is part of the entire
fiscal package.
Mr. Brecheen. Of unfunded obligations I agree with you
there.
Dr. Mazur. And you are right. Then you know how to solve
this. There is like six dials you can turn, and you can get the
Ways and Means Committee together to figure out how you want to
address Social Security. Whether you want to do something on
the benefits side, the tax side, the retirement age side, cost
of living side. There aren't that many dials.
Mr. Brecheen. Can I pivot once?
Dr. Mazur. Sure, please.
Mr. Brecheen. I just need to pivot because there is limited
time here. I want to go back to something that, it was part of
your introductory testimony where you talked about the ability
for us as a Nation to look at a simplification of our tax code.
We have about a $100 billion expense to just pay our taxes in
the United States, and the Tax Foundation has got some ideas
and I want to give you just a moment to talk about Estonia and
what they are doing to simplify within minutes to be able to
file your taxes, and, you know, what we can learn--what I love
about what the Tax Foundation has done, state-by-state
comparison to help states get an idea of how you can improve
the ability to find out what is working and look at the
laboratories of experimentation, laboratories of democracy
state by state, but also, by looking at different countries. I
would like to have you speak in my time limit here. You got 20
seconds if you can talk about Estonia.
Dr. McBride. 20 seconds, I think some people from Estonia
might actually file their taxes in 20 seconds. The claim there
is that you can file your taxes in five minutes or less, and we
have talked--my friend Kyle here--we had talked to the folks in
Estonia at the Ministry of Finance and they confirmed that,
indeed, it is five minutes or less to file your taxes, which
is, should be mind blowing for Americans, but they do it
because they have a very simple system. A simple system that
actually collects plenty of revenue about the same----
Mr. Brecheen. It is not 72,000 pages when you talk----
Dr. McBride. Absolutely not.
Mr. Brecheen [continuing]. Look at court cases like the----
Dr. McBride. It is about----
Mr. Brecheen [continuing]. United States.
Dr. McBride [continuing]. 88 pages, the entire Federal tax
code. So, it can be done.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Chairman, I yield, and thank you for your
indulgence.
Chairman Arrington. You bet. I thank the gentleman from
Oklahoma. I now yield five minutes to my friend from North
Carolina, Chuck Edwards.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Dr. Mazur, I heard you
mention something a while ago that seems to be a typical
political talking point and that is there are corporations in
America that do not pay any taxes. Do you think they are doing
anything illegal?
Dr. Mazur. I don't know. The situation you know that they
are taking advantage, full advantage of the law and shipping
income to other tax jurisdictions, and they are taking
advantage of the tax incentives that are provided. Whether
they, as Mr. Grothman was talking about, some of the tax
credits that they have available or the deductions that they
have available.
Mr. Edwards. And so, do you think that is wrong that they
take advantage of----
Dr. Mazur. So, Congress used to have an alternative minimum
tax for corporations, and part of the reason for having
alternative minimum tax was that it provided a backstop. It
said no matter how many deductions or credits you get you
still----
Mr. Edwards. Dr. Mazur----
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. Have to pay this much.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. Thank you. Thank you for that.
Have you ever paid alternative minimum tax?
Dr. Mazur. Yes, I have paid alternative minimum tax many
times.
Mr. Edwards. Yes, and you recognize that the reason that
one would pay that is because there was no income in the first
place. I mean that is----
Dr. Mazur. No, that is not true. I paid alternative minimum
tax personally----
Mr. Edwards. Yeah.
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. When my income was probably around
$200,000 a year, similar to your income, and it was because I
had a lot of state and local taxes that are not allowed as a
deduction under the alternative minimum tax.
Mr. Edwards. I can tell you as a businessperson I paid lots
of alternative----
Dr. Mazur. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. Minimum tax, and it is because
there was no income, and I believe that is what is the case
with most businesses out there today. The goal of every
business is to have income to be able to pay taxes. Would you
not also agree that even those companies that do not generate
income to the level to pay the income taxes that you might want
them to pay do pay Social Security taxes.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Edwards. They do pay FICA taxes. They do pay property
taxes. They do pay unemployment taxes. There are still plenty
of taxes out there for those companies that have not generated
the income to pay. You do recognize----
Dr. Mazur. No, agreed they pay----
Mr. Edwards [continuing]. There is a----
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. A whole range of taxes.
Mr. Edwards. Yeah.
Dr. Mazur. I agree with that.
Mr. Edwards. All right, thank you. Mr. Pomerleau, the TCJA
reduced the Federal corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21
percent. What did that do for international competitiveness?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, as I described in my testimony, prior to
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act the U.S. had the highest statutory
tax rate in the developed world, and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
brought that down to roughly about average. That had a couple
benefits sort of internationally. So, the first one is that it
just, it reduced the incentive for corporations to locate their
profits in low tax jurisdictions. The amount a company can save
depends on the differential in tax rates, and when the U.S. had
a very high tax rate and other jurisdictions had lower rates,
companies could save more by shifting overseas.
The second benefit is it also reduced the incentive to
locate intellectual property offshore as well. When a company
is deciding where to place a highly mobile asset, they are
going to ask themselves, all right where can I get the highest
after-tax return on this investment? And a lot of that is
determined by the statutory tax rate that the U.S. levies, and
bringing that down also discouraged companies from shifting
those abroad.
Mr. Edwards. As any CEO would do, they are trying to
generate income for their shareholders, their owners, and so, I
appreciate you calling attention to the fact that if we want
more American jobs, if we want more investment in the United
States, as opposed to places like China, then we need to create
the environment for them to do that. Thank you very much.
Mr. Kuhlman, what did the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 do
for small businesses?
Mr. Kuhlman. I think from an overall environment, the
passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act combined with some of the
emphasis on reducing regulations, we saw small business
optimism at or near all-time highs right before the pandemic.
Of course, the pandemic turned everything upside down, but
business owners took the benefits and just reinvested it back
in the business. According to a survey we did in 2019, one in
four increased compensation, nearly identical number increased
business investment, 16 percent hired new employees, 20 percent
paid down debt. Overall, they plowed it back into the business
so their obligations for the overall economic benefit of the
small business to have.
Mr. Edwards. Thank you. One more question I would like to
get to before I run out of time. 32 percent of small business
owners reported raising their selling prices. Would raising
taxes help the inflation that Americans are already
experiencing today?
Mr. Kuhlman. Short answer, no.
Mr. Edwards. Okay, all right. Mr. Chair, I see I am out of
time. I yield back.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from North
Carolina. I yield five minutes to my friend Lloyd Smucker from
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you to the Chairman. Dr. Mazur--Mazur--
Mazur, sorry about that. In response to a question earlier, you
said we could make the tax system more fair by making it
progressive.
Dr. Mazur. It already is progressive, making it more
progressive.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, okay. That is the point I wanted to
clarify, and in fact, I would like to enter into the record a
report from the Joint Committee on Taxation, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.111

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.112

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.113

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.114

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.115

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.116

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.117

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.118

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.119

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.120

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.121

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.122

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.123

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.124

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.125

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.126

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.127

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.128

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.129

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.130

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.131

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.132

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.133

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.134

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.135

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.136

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.137

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.138

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.139

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.140

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.141

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.142

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.143

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.144

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.145

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.146

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.147

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.148

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.149

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.150

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.151

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.152

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.153

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.154

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.155

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.156

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.157

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.158

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.159

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.160

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.161

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.162

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.163

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.164

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.165

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.166

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.167

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.168

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.169

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.170

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.171

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.172

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.173

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.174

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.175

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.176

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.177

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.178

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.179

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.180

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.181

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.182

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.183

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.184

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.185

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.186

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.187

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.188

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.189

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.190

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.191

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.192

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.193

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.194

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.195

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.196

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.197

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.198

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.199

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.200

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.201

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.202

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.203

Mr. Smucker. This is from 2018, and this report identifies
the U.S. tax system as the most progressive in the developed
world. Do you agree, generally?
Dr. Mazur. I am not going to quarrel with JCT since I used
to work there.
Mr. Smucker. Okay, yeah. So, I think it is important we
establish that.
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Smucker. Because if I had listened to your answer and
not had more context, you know, I would have thought that the,
you know, the individuals on the lower economic scale are
paying a higher percentage than lower, but I will give you some
numbers in here.
Dr. Mazur. Okay.
Mr. Smucker. And your point excluding payroll taxes is a
good one because they pay payroll taxes, but without payroll
taxes, the bottom 50 percent are paying -0.6 percent, -0.6.
Dr. Mazur. In that year perhaps, yeah.
Mr. Smucker. What is that?
Dr. Mazur. In that year perhaps, yeah.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, -0.6 because of the refundable tax
credit they are literally getting money back rather than paying
it. That is the bottom 50 percent. Now, with payroll taxes, to
your point, their average rate according to----
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. JCT, is 6.3 percent. Compared to
the top tenth of a percent are paying on average 33 percent of
their taxes. So, it is the most it could be----
Dr. Mazur. Interestingly though, if you were to break that
top tenth even finer, so like the Treasury Department used to
put out the top 400 and now----
Mr. Smucker. Yeah.
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. They put out maybe the top .001
percent, but basically, the top sliver pays less than the top 1
percent. So, it kind of goes down at the top end.
Mr. Smucker. They don't have that on here but----
Dr. Mazur. No, but----
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. I am willing to look at that----
Dr. Mazur [continuing]. You could ask JCT about where.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. Because that would be
interesting, but, you know, one of the statistics that they
list on here is that the top .01 percent, top tenth of a
percent pay 30 percent average Federal income tax rate while--I
am sorry I just made this point, while the bottom 50 percent is
less than zero. Here is the point I wanted. Separate research,
and this is from the Tax Policy Center, which is sort of a
liberal----
Dr. Mazur. I used to work there too.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. Entity. Okay. Yeah, you worked at
all of them. They say, research that the top one percent of
income earners shoulder 25 percent of all Federal taxes paid.
In contrast to 53 million households in the U.S. that pay
nothing at all, and in fact, six out of ten households actually
receive more in direct government benefits than they pay into
the system.
Again, just want to be sure that we understand what we are
working with here, and the point about the Tax Cuts and Jobs
Act making the system benefit more for higher income earners is
false, because CBO in 2021, and I would like to enter this into
the record as well. This is a 2021 report by CBO.
Chairman Arrington. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.204

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.205

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.206

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.207

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.208

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.209

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.210

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.211

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.212

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.213

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.214

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.215

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.216

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.217

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.218

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.219

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.220

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.221

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.222

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.223

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.224

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.225

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.226

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.227

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.228

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.229

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.230

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.231

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.232

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.233

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.234

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.235

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.236

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.237

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.238

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.239

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.240

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.241

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.242

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.243

Mr. Smucker. And they state that the provisions of the 2017
Tax Act reduced the total estimate of benefits from income tax
expenditures by nine percent, and on that those provisions made
the distribution of tax expenditures more progressive because
most of the benefits that were reduced by the Tax Act would
have accrued to households in the highest quintile. So, we
started with the most progressive, according to JCT, of
developed countries, and we made it even more progressive with
the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
Dr. Mazur. I am going to have to quarrel with CBO on that.
You might want to look at the Tax Policy Center's work that was
done on the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. I think they come to a
somewhat different conclusion, and it really depends on the
timeframe you look at.
Mr. Smucker. Sure.
Dr. Mazur. And it depends on--because the individual ones
expire, and it depends on what you do with the corporate income
tax.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, I am just telling you what----
Dr. Mazur. Yeah.
Mr. Smucker [continuing]. CBO said in their report. They
said that our tax structure got more progressive after the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, but, Mr. Kuhlman, you know, I was a small
business owner myself, understand the impact of tax policy and
the benefits of growing a business, and I have heard from so
many small businesses in my area who benefitted from the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act, and I am not talking about the top one
percent or top tenth of a percent. I am talking about people
who maybe, you know, they had $10,000 more in their pocket at
the end of the year that they could reinvest back into the
business, grow jobs, and so on, and I just wonder what is the
top provision that you hear about? What are some of the things
that you hear about that have been most beneficial, and then
how concerned are you about some of those provisions expiring?
Mr. Kuhlman. Sure, yeah, what we call the small business
deduction, Section 199A, the 20 percent deduction for pass-
through businesses, it added great benefit for small business
owners, NFIB members. 91 percent of them support making it
permanent. 81 percent thinks it is very important, and just a
quick example is a Pennsylvania business owner, David Cranston,
Jr. of Cranston Material Handling Corporation said it is only a
couple employees, but he said in real terms, this means I will
be able to keep between $1,200 and $2,500 a quarter in my
business that I would otherwise have paid in taxes. The ability
to keep $5,000 or $10,000 in a year in my company is a big deal
to a small business owner like me. Moreover, the cumulative
effect over several years is substantial. They allowed him and
millions of other businesses like him to be in a better
position to take advantage of opportunities to grow and
improve. They are going to take the----
Mr. Smucker. Thank you. I know I am way out of time. Thank
you for your indulgence, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Arrington. I go from thumping to gaveling.
Mr. Smucker. Yeah, sorry about that so, yeah.
Chairman Arrington. Thank you, Mr. Smucker, and now we will
yield five minutes to Dr. Michael Burgess from the Great State
of Texas.
Mr. Burgess. I thank the Chairman. Actually, let me start
with a unanimous consent request for two documents. One being
the Democrats' Corporate Tax Plan Threatens Higher Bills for
Manufacturers. The second, Chinese Communist Party Linked Solar
Panel Company Could Reap Inflation Reduction Act Handouts with
U.S. Factory.
Chairman Arrington. So ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.077

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.078

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.079

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.080

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.081

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.082

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.083

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.084

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.085

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.086

[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.087

Mr. Burgess. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, staying
with the Inflation Reduction Act for just a minute. It created
two new corporate taxes. Dr. McBride, two new corporate taxes
were created in the Inflation Reduction Act. 26 tax credit
programs on top of an already complex and burdensome tax code.
So, I think your colleagues at the Tax Foundation have
estimated that over $300 billion a year is lost in productivity
due to the complexity of the United States tax code.
So, every Congress that I have been here I have introduced
H.R. 1040. You know, this is a flat tax, a version of the same
flat tax that was created by my predecessor, Leader Armey, when
he was here, and honestly, I mean, you referenced the Estonia
tax code and how people can file their taxes in under five
minutes, and wouldn't reducing the complexity of the tax code
and perhaps flattening the rate a little bit, would that not
have a positive effect on people's compliance with the tax
code, as well as overall tax collections?
Dr. McBride. Absolutely would. So, the real-world examples
we have not just in Estonia, but a lot of their neighbors in
Eastern Europe, that is where flat taxes really took off in the
1990s. Many countries there implemented flat taxes, and they
did so because one reason, they were having a big compliance
problem. They were having all sorts of, you know, major tax
evasion with a complicated income tax like ours. So, they came
upon a solution which is to simplify the rules. Flatten the
tax, you know, toss out all the special provisions, and low and
behold they found it generated better compliance and more
stable and reliable revenues over the years, and so, they stuck
with those flat taxes, and Estonia went further and eventually
with their business tax, they simplified it even further to
this distributed profits tax. There is basically no taxable
income. There is no calculation of taxable income at all.
Instead, it is just a tax on whatever is distributed to
shareholders. You know, taxing one stream rather than
calculating all items of income and all items of expense, et
cetera and sending it to the tax authorities.
Mr. Burgess. As a practical matter have they suffered from
not bringing----
Dr. McBride. Sorry, say that again.
Mr. Burgess. As a practical matter, has Estonia suffered
from not bringing in enough tax revenue?
Dr. McBride. No, absolutely not. They generate revenues
today 20 years into this new system that have essentially, are
pretty typical across the developed world in terms of income
tax collections.
Mr. Burgess. So, just my own observation, living and
working in this country in 1986, when the Reagan tax cuts were
introduced and passed, the Bush tax cuts in 2004, and Chairman
Brady's tax reform in 2017. My observation is you seem to have
an increase in compliance. You didn't have to hire 87,000 new
IRS agents but you made things more straightforward and people
complied because it was easier to comply than it was to hide
your income and try to not comply. Is that a valid assumption?
Dr. McBride. It is absolutely valid. When we have a tax
code today that is four million words, I don't think any person
on earth has the ability to understand something like that.
Mr. Burgess. Now, Mr. Chairman, in the time I have
remaining, I am going to have another unanimous consent
request. It also deals with the Inflation Reduction Act. This
is a page from the Federal Register from October 14, 2022, from
the Department of Health and Human Services, and reports the
establishment of the Medicare Drug Rebate Negotiation Group
within the Center for Medicare. Most people did not realize
that with the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act, the
Federal Government will now have the largest and most secretive
PBM that has ever been developed.
Now, a lot of us decried the PBM because we say they only
add complexity and they don't bring anything of value to the
system. When you read through these words in the Federal
Register, it absolutely describes a nightmare going forward,
and, of course, their enforcement mechanism is the tax code, a
1,900 percent tax on any profits--not profits, I am sorry--
gross revenues that the company may create. So, Mr. Chairman,
this is a very serious matter and we haven't talked about it
enough, but I do want to introduce this for the record and
perhaps at some point in the future we can have a hearing on
the deleterious effects on what is happening in the United
States with the so-called mislabeled Inflation Reduction Act.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Texas. So
ordered.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHIC] [TIFF OMITTED] T3465A.088

Chairman Arrington. I now yield five minutes to my friend
from Virginia, Mr. Bob Good.
Mr. Good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. I think you are starting to see the light at the end
of the tunnel here. I appreciate your investment of time today.
I wanted to touch with the limited time that we have on a
couple of the President or the Administration's key policy
priorities, energy, or climate, as well as immigration/border
and how they impact the economy, and a couple of questions to
Dr. McBride first. Dr. McBride, the President has stated many
times that his proposed tax reforms would help average
Americans. How would you reconcile that or contrast that
perhaps, with the estimate that 80 percent of the electric
vehicle tax credits are going to households with incomes of
$100,000 or higher?
Dr. McBride. Well, clearly that is, like you describe and
like anybody can recognize when they look at the sticker prices
on electric vehicles, that those are luxury goods. They are not
targeting a low-income community with those products. Those are
luxury goods that, as good as they are for the planet, perhaps,
they are very expensive, and they have been expensive for, you
know, ever since they have been produced, and so, these tax
credits, of course, then go to high income individuals that can
afford a 50,000, 60, 70, up to $80,000 is what is allowed under
these new tax credits towards--that is the sticker price of an
electric vehicle. Then there is a loophole around that so that,
around that provision and then the income provision. So, that
is the leasing loophole, and so, none of the restrictions as I
understand it apply to vehicles, electric vehicles that are
leased. You can get the credit. It basically flows through the
leasing company to the consumer. So, you know, someone making
millions of dollars a year, for instance could get a--could
lease an electric vehicle and benefit from the credit that way.
Mr. Good. Yeah, it is really just obscene that we would on
the backs of regular taxpayers subsidize vehicles for the
wealthiest of Americans and then as we are trying to force
Americans to electric vehicles and restrict production of gas-
powered vehicles, what is going to happen to the prices of gas-
powered vehicles as their supply is limited? You know, what is
that going to do? We can only imagine and speculate what that
will do.
Consistent with what you said, reports that I have read are
that the vast majority of electric vehicle owners, you used the
term luxury, it is a secondary vehicle because of the
impractical nature of it. You know, it is impractical,
insufficient number of charging stations, impractical for long
distance travel, that sort of thing.
The Biden energy agenda, more broadly, combined with the
massive inflationary spending, combined with the response, I
would suggest misguided response of massively raising interest
tax--or excuse me, interest rates so the housing prices are up.
Inflation is up. Grocery prices are up. Utility prices are up.
Gas prices are up. So, let's sock the American people with
higher interest rates to make it so they can't afford to buy
homes where we make the average cost of the mortgage go up
about 50 percent. So, your thoughts on how is his doubling down
on his Green New Deal tax credits, how is that going to impact
the economic or financial future for average Americans?
Dr. McBride. Well, I think it was sold as an Inflation
Reduction Act, of course, that is the title, and that was all
premised on the idea that it would reduce deficits, which was
what was originally thought based on the original score from
CBO and JCT. We now know that that score was off. It was off in
the direction of actually underestimating the cost of these
green credits greatly, and so, we now, based on the new scores
from JCT, it appears the IRA legislation as a whole increases
deficits. It is not clear how much. We should hopefully get a
new score for the entire bill to find that out, but if there is
no deficit reduction on this bill, then there goes the idea
that it reduces inflation.
Mr. Good. Mr. Pomerleau, with the limited time that we
have, I saw a study that says the net cost of illegal
immigration in the United States, 16 million or more illegals
in the country now, is about $150 billion last year. Roughly
$9,000 per illegal. Could you speak to the cost to the American
taxpayer for the flow of illegals into the country?
Mr. Pomerleau. Thanks for your question, but this is a
little outside of my area of expertise. I don't know if anyone
else has any thoughts on this issue in particular.
Mr. Good. Well, I will just say with the eight seconds I
have got left, you know, it is funny we have a law in this
country where, if legal immigrants can't be on the public dole,
but illegal immigrants, if you break the law, your first act on
the soil of the United States is to break the law, then we give
you all the social safety nets, the social welfare, the
healthcare, the social services that we can provide to you. So,
it is really incredible as we reward illegal immigration. I
yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thank the gentleman from Virginia,
and yield five minutes I think to close out our hearing, my
friend Buddy Carter from Georgia.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank all of you
all for being here, and I promise you it will be brief and try
to get through this five minutes as quickly as we can, but I
wanted to ask you, you know, our current tax code and I think
most people would agree it is built on government control, and
it is built on trying to control actions of people and what
they do. You know, I have served in a number of different
capacities. I have been a mayor. I have been a state
legislator, and now I serve in Congress. I started when I was
ten so that explains that, but nevertheless, I have always
noticed that people given the choice between a property tax or
an income tax, that they don't like taxes, but given that
choice, they would prefer a consumption tax. Are any of you
familiar with the fair tax?
Can you tell me, I am the sponsor of the fair tax. You
know, the fair tax was started in the late 1990s by John Linder
and then Rob Woodall, who was his chief of staff at the time,
became a Member. After John left, Rob took his place, and then
when Rob left, he asked me if I would carry it and I did and I
am proud to. It was the very first bill that I sponsored when I
became a Member of Congress, and tell me, if you will, what you
think about a consumption tax and about specifically the fair
tax in that proposal.
Mr. Pomerleau. So, I think consumption taxes are good
policy. I think that in general they are less distortive than
the income tax. They do not discourage investment. They do not
discourage saving, and if they are structured well, they can
reduce noncompliance in the tax system. The fair tax in
particular, I think the policy, you know, the heart is in the
right place but I think structurally needs----
Mr. Carter. Well, what would you change? Tell me, how can I
make it better?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, I think the fundamental weakness of the
fair tax is that it is a retail sales tax. I think retail sales
taxes, they are collected all at the very last point in the
chain of production at the retailer, and as a result, all of
the revenue is collected at that point, which creates a pretty
significant incentive to avoid the tax, especially if the rate
is high enough to replace current revenues, and I actually have
a recent paper that I did that estimated how high the tax rate
would need to be under the fair tax to replace current
revenues.
Mr. Carter. And what did you come up with?
Mr. Pomerleau. And with a reasonable amount of avoidance,
which I think might be on the low end----
Mr. Carter. Do you think we have any avoidance in the
current tax system?
Mr. Pomerleau. The current tax code does have avoidance but
I think any tax system has avoidance, and if you were given----
Mr. Carter. But you think that the fair tax would have more
avoidance than----
Mr. Pomerleau. Well, in our paper we assumed that it would
have just the same amount as----
Mr. Carter. Okay, fair enough.
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. The current tax system.
Mr. Carter. Fair enough. Continue on.
Mr. Pomerleau. We found the tax rate would have to be in
the high 30 percents in order to cover current tax revenues.
So, at a rate that high, I think a retail sales tax would also
be high.
Mr. Carter. And what do we have it at?
Mr. Pomerleau. Sorry?
Mr. Carter. In the proposal, do you know what it is at?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, in the proposal you have two rates. You
have a standard rate and a variable rate for the trust funds
and those in the first year add up to a tax inclusive rate of
23 percent.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. Pomerleau. The tax exclusive rate is closer to 29 or 30
percent.
Mr. Carter. Right.
Mr. Pomerleau. But that would be insufficient to cover
current revenues plus----
Mr. Carter. How do you base that assumption on that it
would be inconsistent?
Mr. Pomerleau. Sorry?
Mr. Carter. How do you base that assumption to be
inconsistent to replace what we currently have in revenue?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, we did our estimates based on national
accounts. So, this was using BEA data and IRS data.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Let me cut to the chase, what would you
do differently? How would you improve it?
Mr. Pomerleau. So, first I think that----
Mr. Carter. Because would you agree first of all that
people prefer a consumption tax and that----
Mr. Pomerleau. So, I personally----
Mr. Carter [continuing]. People would have control?
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. I would prefer a consumption
tax over income tax.
Mr. Carter. And this would give people control as opposed
to the government having control.
Mr. Pomerleau. So, I think that one of the weaknesses is
that you are resting the entire tax code on a single tax, which
can create problems with avoidance. I think having multiple
taxes is good, and second, I think you could improve over a
retail----
Mr. Carter. You might be alone in that----
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. Sales tax.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. In that assumption.
Mr. Pomerleau. I think you can improve over a retail sales
tax with a value added tax. Under a value added tax, you would
be collecting the same amount as under a retail sales tax, but
it would be done each stage in the production process. So, if
there is avoidance----
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Mr. Pomerleau [continuing]. It only ends up being a small
amount of avoidance.
Mr. Carter. All right. Anybody else want to comment real
quick? I am sorry.
Dr. McBride. I agree with those comments. I would just add
further what the VAT does, it has a bad reputation because it
comes from Europe.
Mr. Carter. Yes.
Dr. McBride. But what they are doing makes a lot of sense,
which is removing the cascading effect of sales taxes on
business inputs as they go through the production process.
Mr. Carter. Well, look----
Dr. McBride. The sales tax, you know, has the cascading
effect.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. I am appealing to you. I want
help. I want to make this even better. So, help me.
Dr. McBride. So, the best thing in my view that you could
to that is remove that cascading effect of taxes on business
inputs.
Mr. Carter. Okay. All right. Well, we, you know, we are
hopefully going to be taking this up. So, I need your help and
I want your input. So, I am appealing to you to help me with
that. Thank you all. I appreciate it and I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Arrington. I thoroughly enjoyed the dialog and I
appreciate the time of our witnesses. In closing, just a quick
thought and then I am going to ask my Ranking Member to close
it up for me, but our first hearing was about the Fiscal State
of the Nation. I don't think there was any disagreement that we
have got problems, and those problems are getting worse very
quickly, and that the financial health of the country is
deteriorating rapidly. How we address that, I think there is
definitely disagreement, but there is probably commonality as
well.
Today, we focused on one part of the equation, the revenue
side, and the growth side, and I appreciate that good, open,
robust discussion and debate. Here is my biggest concern that
gnaws at me in every Committee hearing, and that is that we
have $1.5 trillion in the gap of the funding of our government
that we borrow on the backs of future generations of Americans,
and it is completely unsustainable, and so, you have colleagues
on one side that may want to raise taxes or some combination,
and you have people like me who think we need to massively
right size and shrink the government and cut expenses, or some
combination, but it is immoral in my mind to rack up this kind
of debt and to stack it and shift it as a deferred tax on our
children, and that is the unfortunate nature of the budget
process, is that we just continue to perpetuate this to the
demise, I think, of future generations. With that, Mr. Scott,
bring us home.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think if
we just pay for what we do we can balance the budget. I think
Dr. Mazur pointed out that it is arithmetic. If you are going
to have a new spending program, pay for it. If you are going to
have tax cuts, just pay for it, and things won't get worse, and
under Clinton they got so much better. We were on course to
paying off the entire national debt held by the public by 2008.
Entire debt held by the public and put all the money back into
the trust funds by 2013, but you can't do it if you have unpaid
spending or unpaid tax cuts. You got to pay for what you want
to spend.
Chairman Arrington. You know, I know this is not a
colloquy, but I actually agree with that. See, look at, look
here, I am in the most Republican district in Texas. Whether
you offset through a cut to pay for tax cuts, tax reform, or
you raise revenue, because we rarely do and we reach for the
more expedient mechanism, which is finance it, which doesn't
hurt anybody. You don't have to raise the tax and take any
money out of anyone's wallet. We don't have to cut somebody's
favorite program. When that happens and we can still grow the
government, there is not a real rational decision as to do we
really want that? Can we really afford that? So, those trade
offs aren't there in this unfortunate sort of fantastical
system that we have today.
If we had one that considered the cost that we paid for it,
in one way or the other, I think we would have a very different
dynamic between the electorate and representative leaders of
our great country.
Mr. Scott. That was PAYGO under Democrats----
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Scott [continuing]. Right?
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Good.
Chairman Arrington. Yes.
Mr. Scott. And we can get it back.
Chairman Arrington. Well, you know, Mr. Scott, I am going
to invite you up here to the upper deck more often. I think we
may have to have an executive session about the Ranking
Member's job since he is gone.
Thank you, Dr. McBride, Mr. Pomerleau, Mr. Kuhlman, Dr.
Mazur, got that right, for appearing before us today. Please be
advised that Members may submit their written questions to be
answered later in writing. Those questions and your answers
will be made part of the formal hearing record.
Any member who wishes to submit their questions for the
record may do so within seven days. With that the Committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:23 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
