- TURNING AN IDEA INTO LAW: MODERNIZING THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TURNING AN IDEA INTO LAW: MODERNIZING THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE MODERNIZATION OF CONGRESS

of the

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 28, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-18

__________

Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Modernization of
Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http:/govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-603             WASHINGTON : 2022

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE MODERNIZATION OF CONGRESS

DEREK KILMER, Washington, Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina,
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri              Vice Chair
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BOB LATTA, Ohio
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia             DAVE JOYCE, Ohio
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas

COMMITTEE STAFF

Yuri Beckelman, Staff Director
Derek Harley, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

__________

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page
Chairman Derek Kilmer
Oral Statement...............................................     1
Vice Chairman William Timmons
Oral Statement...............................................     2

WITNESSES

Mr. Noah Wofsy, Deputy Legislative Counsel, U.S. House of
Representatives
Oral Statement...............................................     3
Written Statement............................................     6
Mr. Kevin McCumber, Deputy Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives
Oral Statement...............................................    11
Written Statement............................................    13
Mr. Hugh Halpern, Director, Government Publishing Office (GPO)
Oral Statement...............................................    25
Written Statement............................................    27
Discussion.......................................................    38

TURNING AN IDEA INTO LAW: MODERNIZING THE LEGISLATIVE PROCESS

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 28, 2022

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the Modernization of Congress,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in Room
210, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Derek Kilmer [chairman
of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kilmer, Cleaver, Phillips,
Williams, and Timmons.
The Chairman. All right. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Thanks, everybody, for your patience as we dealt with
technical difficulties. I have often joked that the name ``the
Select Committee on the Modernization of Congress'' makes us
sound like we are the IT help desk, and today we actually
needed the IT help desk. And I thank our staff for figuring out
the technology.
I have really been looking forward to this hearing, because
turning ideas into laws is at the core of what Congress does.
It is where Members get to combine their representative and
lawmaking roles by giving their constituents a voice in the
policymaking process.
I think Schoolhouse Rock got it right when the little bill
on Capitol Hill explained it started as an idea from folks back
home who decided they wanted a law passed. Of course, not all
ideas for bills come from our constituents, but, in my
experience, some of the most meaningful ones do.
Every Member can tell you a story about a great idea that
they got from a constituent and why that idea should be law.
And I love those stories because they perfectly exemplify what
we are here to do, which is to represent the views of the folks
who we serve.
While the ideas I get from my constituents are sometimes
unique to the district I represent, there is often a thread
that connects the idea to issues that span districts across the
country. A great example is the Building Civic Bridges Act,
which is a bipartisan bill I recently introduced, which now has
10 Republicans and 10 Democratic cosponsors, including Mr.
Timmons and Mr. Phillips. And it came from events in my
district.
We had a series of horrific attacks against faith-based
institutions in our region, and an interfaith group came
together for the purposes of fostering understanding and
building community.
And, after a conflict surfaced at a local YMCA, a group of
community leaders joined forces to help build understanding
across differences. And those groups sought resources from the
Federal Government to support their bridge-building efforts but
were told resources for this kind of work didn't exist.
And, when that was brought to my attention, I wondered why
our government supports this kind of work in other countries
but not here at home. That didn't make sense to me, and so my
staff and I dug into it and tried to figure out what we could
do to help.
And, working with constituents back home and some partner
organizations who lead in the civic bridge-building space, we
actually came up with the Building Civic Bridges Act, which
would establish the Federal Government as a key partner in the
deliberate effort to bridge divides and strengthen American
democracy.
Groups are doing this important work in districts
nationwide, so an idea that originated in Washington's Sixth
Congressional District with some conversations with
constituents has the power to resonate with constituencies from
coast to coast, and I think that is pretty amazing and a
powerful testament to how representative democracy is supposed
to work.
Ideas are the sparks that ignite the legislative process.
That is the fun part, but what comes next can sometimes be
confusing and frustrating. Ideas need to be drafted into
legislative text. Bills have to be assigned numbers and printed
and introduced, referred to committee and referred to the
floor. Every step of the way, different House offices and
support agencies are involved to ensure that the bill text is
accurate and accessible to the public.
The behind-the-scenes work of turning an idea into a law is
mysterious to most people, including Members and their staff,
but it is incredibly important. And today's hearing is about
shedding light on this highly specialized work and figuring out
how to streamline and improve processes, and so I am looking
forward to learning from the witnesses joining us today.
The committee will use its rules that allow for a more
flexible hearing format that encourages discussion and the
civil exchange of ideas and opinions, so here goes. In
accordance with clause 2(j) of House rule XI, we will allow up
to 30 minutes of extended questioning per witness, and, without
objection, time will not be strictly segregated between the
witnesses, which will allow for extended back-and-forth
exchanges between members and the witnesses.
Vice Chair Timmons and I will manage the time to ensure
that every member has equal opportunity to participate.
Additionally, members who wish to claim their individual 5
minutes to question each witness pursuant to clause 2(j)(2) of
rule XI will be permitted to do so following the period of
extended questioning. Phew.
All right. With that, I would like to now invite Vice Chair
Timmons to share some opening remarks.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Really appreciate you all being here today. I think,
between the three of you, you have over 80 years of experience
in this institution. We are doing our best to get this place to
work better. Part of that is to help you do your jobs more
effectively and more efficiently.
I am--I was looking for the exact numbers, but I think, in
the last decade, you have added a handful of attorneys and you
have had a 20 percent increase in the number of bills that have
been drafted. Obviously there is a resource issue, but I think
there is also an understanding issue.
I would imagine it would shock a lot of people the number
of offices that don't fully understand the challenges that you
all face, and trying to educate all the different Member
offices to more effectively address our concerns while also
keeping an understanding of the challenges that your offices
face, I think, is very important. I think that is an area that
we can really dig into.
Technology is another thing. I think we have got to use
technology at any place that we can to be more effective and
efficient. And I look forward to hearing from you all on what
you think we can change, what resources you need, what
education we can provide to this institution to more
effectively, you know, pursue the mission--pursue the mission.
So thank you for being here today, and we look forward to
your testimony, and we are going to have some good questions.
Thanks.
The Chairman. Okay. I would now like to welcome our three
experts who are here to share with us their knowledge and
recommendations for how Congress can improve and modernize the
legislative process. This is a reminder that your written
statements will be made part of the record.
Our first witness is Noah Wofsy. Mr. Wofsy has served as
the Deputy Legislative Counsel for the U.S. House of
Representatives since 2018. Prior to this position, he was an
assistant counsel and senior counsel within the Office of
Legislative Counsel, where he has served since 1986.
Mr. Wofsy earned his bachelor of arts from James Madison
College of Michigan State University and his law degree from
the University of Southern California.
Mr. Wofsy, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENTS OF NOAH WOFSY, DEPUTY LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL, U.S.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, WASHINGTON, DC; KEVIN McCUMBER,
DEPUTY CLERK, U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, WASHINGTON, DC;
AND HUGH HALPERN, DIRECTOR, GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE (GPO),
WASHINGTON, DC

STATEMENT OF NOAH WOFSY

Mr. Wofsy. Thank you very much.
Co-Chair Kilmer, Co-Chair Timmons, and members of the
select committee, good morning. I am honored to speak with you
today and share my thoughts on modernizing the legislative
process, the process by which an idea becomes law. And I am
especially honored to do so on behalf of my colleagues at the
House Office of Legislative Counsel.
For over 100 years, the office has provided professional,
nonpartisan legislative drafting and related services to
Members, committees, and leadership offices of the House. We
are the ones who get the call when a Member says, ``There ought
to be a law.''
We are proud of our service to the House, especially during
the challenging times the House has faced over the past several
years. And I believe that the House is pleased with our service
for no other reason than the simple fact that our business is
booming. We must be doing something right.
We share your interest in making the process more effective
and more responsive to the needs of the House. And, indeed, we
are uniquely positioned to discuss this process, because, in
most cases, the proponent of an idea of a law will at some
point ask us to turn that idea into actual legislative text.
So, when we respond to a request to turn an idea into
legislation, our goal is always to carry out our mission. And,
as set forth in our charter, our mission is to assist offices
of the House in the achievement of a clear, faithful, and
coherent expression of legislative policies. That means that we
cannot ourselves provide the policy; rather, we can only
provide language to express the policy of the proponent of the
legislation. In other words, we can't fill in the blanks.
It also means that, for our drafts to express policy
clearly, faithfully, and coherently, we need a sufficient
understanding of the policy. And, in many instances, the
request doesn't convey enough information, so we need to ask
questions and begin an iterative process.
And these questions may include questions about scope,
administration, timing, and enforcement. And often the most
important and the most complex issue to be addressed is the
extent to which existing law already addresses the idea behind
the policy and how the application and enforcement of existing
law might be affected by the policy.
And note that these issues apply even in the case of a
request which consists of pre-drafted legislative text. If we
don't know the policy intent which generated the idea that was
behind the text in the first place, we have no way of knowing
whether the legislative text accomplishes the goal of
translating the idea into law.
A bill may be drafted perfectly on a technical level, but
if it doesn't fix the problem that inspired the idea behind the
bill, it doesn't work. It is legally insufficient.
And there are two other features of our office, which are
also included in our charter, that help us ensure the integrity
of the legislative documents that the House produces and
considers. And what I mean by integrity is that anyone who
encounters a document will know that the document reflects an
accurate statement of the current state of the legislation
involved.
So the first of these features, we are required to keep our
work product confidential. We take this very seriously. If we
prepare a draft for any office of the House, we cannot share it
with anyone else, no matter which side they are on, without the
express consent of that office. Even if doing so could promote
collaboration and efficiency, we can't do it, and we don't do
it. So, if a document is under our control, Members and
committees will know that it will not be disclosed without
their consent.
And, second, we work only for the House. We cannot provide
drafting or other services to people from the outside,
including lobbyists, constituents, or people from the executive
branch, even if they are nonpartisan professional staff. We
cannot prepare a draft or make changes to a draft without the
express direction of the House client. Again, even if doing so
could promote collaboration and efficiency, we can't do it, and
we don't do it.
So, if a document is under our control, Members and
committees will know that the only changes which will be made
to it are the changes that they alone authorize. And, as you
keep these features in mind, remember that they don't
necessarily apply to Members, committees, leadership, or their
staffs.
So, as I mentioned at the beginning of my testimony, the
office has been extremely busy, so we have adopted policies
which will expand our capacity to respond to requests. For
example, we are sending more and more of the requests we
receive for simple resolutions and reintroductions to our
paralegals. We have expanded our recruiting, increased pay, and
enabled flexible work arrangements. We have expanded education
programs so that Members and staff will know more about the
drafting process and the best practices for working with our
attorneys.
And we continue to explore developments in technology,
building on existing initiatives with the Office of the Clerk,
the Government Publishing Office, and other legislative branch
organizations.
So, in conclusion, thank you again for inviting me to speak
on behalf of the Office of the Legislative Counsel. I have been
with the office for over 35 years, and much has changed over
that time. But what has remained the same is our commitment to
turning the ideas of the House into law that works.
And I look forward to answering your questions and to
continuing the dialogue between our office and the select
committee.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Wofsy follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Wofsy.
Our next witness is Kevin McCumber. Mr. McCumber has served
as a Deputy Clerk of the U.S. House of Representatives since
2021. Prior to this position, he served in numerous positions
in the House Office of Legislative Operations, including as
chief, deputy chief, and assistant journal clerk. Mr. McCumber
earned his bachelor of arts degree from the University of
Colorado-Denver.
Mr. McCumber, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN McCUMBER

Mr. McCumber. Chair Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons, members of
the committee, thank you for inviting me to testify about
modernizing the legislative process.
It is an honor to represent the Office of the Clerk before
this committee alongside my colleagues from the House Office of
Legislative Counsel and the Government Publishing Office.
Our office pursues numerous diverse goals and priorities,
and our primary function is supporting the day- to-day
operations of the House.
The committee members have my written statement, which
includes an appendix that describes the bill introduction
process. In short, legislative counsel drafts the legislative
text, a Member or committee introduces it to the House, and
Clerk staff process it and coordinate publication with GPO. GPO
and the Library of Congress publish bill versions and related
materials online at govinfo.gov and congress.gov, and GPO
delivers paper copies to the House.
I have four points to highlight for the committee about how
an idea becomes law and the process for creating, amending, and
publishing legislation.
First, the House must manage both paper and digital
workflows. Only recently has Congress added a digital layer to
a centuries-old paper process. Traditionally, tasks related to
preparing, managing, distributing, and preserving the House's
official documents were confined to paper. Today, paper is
still the official document of record, and we must also manage
the electronic rendition and its related data.
Second, Clerk staff, bound by House rules, traditions, and
precedents, execute critical tasks. There are skilled and
dedicated public servants behind each step of the legislative
process. When you or one of your colleagues offers a floor
amendment, our clerks read it from the rostrum.
When you cast a vote using the Electronic Voting System or
a well card, our clerks confirm those votes.
When a committee meets, an official reporter, such as the
one you see here today, covers the proceedings. We ensure your
work is accurately recorded and made publicly available. We are
bound by House rules, traditions, and precedents.
Third, legislative branch staff rely on linked systems. The
organizations represented here today interact daily and use the
same tools to create and publish bills, resolutions, and
amendments. GPO provides the composition engine that creates
PDFs. We provide the XMetaL editing tool used by legislative
counsel, committees, and our clerks.
Experience has taught us that changes must be considered
across the entire ecosystem. They cannot be considered in a
vacuum. Any change may have unintended consequences for Members
in both Chambers, as well as the more than 10 legislative
branch organizations and agencies that support congressional
operations.
Fourth, nonpartisan support staff have ideas for improving
how Congress works. I am sure Mr. Wofsy and Mr. Halpern will
agree, together, we have seen immense change in this
institution since we began our careers, yet there is more work
to be done.
As the committee is aware, the Clerk's top priorities are
modernizing the Legislative Information Management System,
deploying the eHopper and Comparative Print Suite applications,
maintaining the Electronic Voting System, and redesigning the
lobbying disclosure system.
This is an exciting time for our office. As we work on
these projects and other modernization initiatives, we value
opportunities to think creatively about how to improve
processes for Members and staff.
In my written statement, I provide a few of our many ideas,
including collaborative drafting tools, a Member office portal
for submitting legislative documents, as well as amendments and
appropriations requests, and a committee portal for scheduling
official reporters, sharing required information for the
Congressional Record, and submitting committee reports.
In closing, I am proud to represent the 227 public servants
who work for the Clerk of the House. Our organization has
steadfastly supported the House in a nonpartisan institutional
capacity for more than two centuries.
The capability, commitment, and energy of Clerk staff are
critical to maintaining and modernizing this great institution.
Together, alongside Member offices, committees, and our
legislative branch partners, we can make Congress more
effective, efficient, and transparent.
I look forward to our continued discussions and will be
happy to take any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. McCumber follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McCumber.
And our final witness is Hugh Halpern.
Mr. Halpern has served as the Director of the Government
Publishing Office since 2019. Prior to GPO, he held several
leadership positions on Capitol Hill, including as director of
floor operations for Speaker Ryan and staff director of the
House Committee on Rules. He served in numerous other roles
during his 30-year career in the House, including general
counsel to the House Committee on Financial Services, the
parliamentarian to the first Select Committee on Homeland
Security. Mr. Halpern earned both his bachelor of arts and
master of arts from American University. He earned his law
degree from George Mason University.
And, Mr. Halpern, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HUGH HALPERN

Mr. Halpern. Thank you very much.
Chair Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons, other members of the
select committee, I am excited to appear before the select
committee today along with my colleagues from the other support
offices. While I am appearing today in my capacity as the
Director of the Government Publishing Office, I also bring to
the table the more than 30 years of experience as a House
committee and leadership staff person.
At GPO, I head an agency of more than 1,500 craftspeople
and professionals, and that agency is responsible for the
processing, publishing, and printing of an average of nearly
300 measures each week that Congress is in session. My
experience in both environments gives me insights into where
there may be some pinch points in the process and some
potential areas for change.
Before I talk about GPO's process, it is important to
highlight some of the structural issues faced by Members,
staff, and those of us supporting the legislative process. Put
simply, when our predecessors created our system of laws and,
more importantly, how we update them, they made some really bad
decisions.
Those systems don't scale well, and particularly when they
are coupled with modern technology, things like expressing
changes in terms of instructions to an unseen clerk, using page
and line numbers as the means of navigating legislative
documents, and requiring authors to match typographic
conventions to convey meaning. The complexity of these
conventions creates even more complexity as we establish modern
systems to draft legislation and make it available.
With that as background, I am going to briefly summarize
GPO's system for processing legislative measures.
The process is still largely paper based and driven by the
requirement that our final product match the paper manuscript,
the official document of record. Bills are handled by GPO's
Bill End unit in the proof room, and it is made up of
experienced proofreaders and typesetters who are familiar with
the particular issues that can arise with legislative text.
If there is an electronic file, GPO's Bill End unit
proofreads the output to ensure that it matches the manuscript
introduced via the hopper or the eHopper.
If not, we scan and OCR that document, and our markup
session will manually add typesetting codes to the paper
manuscript to be input electronically later in the process.
GPO's Text Edit section then updates the electronic file,
making any changes or corrections spotted by the proofreaders
or inputting the instructions from the markup team. And then
proofreading double checks to make sure that all changes were
executed properly.
When this process is complete, the electronic files and
accompanying metadata are posted online while GPO's plant
produces paper copies. This process generally works on a first-
in, first-out basis, and we aim to have a new measure online
and in print within a week of receipt, although this can vary
depending on volume.
Before closing, I want to briefly discuss two ideas to
address Member concerns about bill processing. To be clear, I
am not endorsing either of these concepts but simply flagging
possible risks should Congress decide to pursue either or both
of these options.
Some have suggested that Members be given the option to
waive the proofreading process for measures drafted by
legislative counsel. While this would definitely speed up the
process, it would also essentially end the primacy of the
introduced paper manuscript and instruct GPO to rely on the
House's prepared XML file. Measures would be processed
electronically, posted online, and printed, but without any of
the usual quality assurance checks.
While this is an easy change for GPO to execute, inevitably
there will be some errors that would otherwise be caught during
GPO's proofing process. It could also result in Members
introducing measures just to correct errors or demanding
expensive reprints.
We are also involved in ongoing discussions regarding the
development of Word templates that could be used by staff for
simple drafting tasks and could be ingested into GPO's
typesetting system through a web interface. While we are
currently testing a similar model for committee reports and
hearings, legislative measures are significantly more complex,
and we are at least several years away from an option that is
production ready and easy to use.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I stand
ready to answer any questions you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Halpern follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Halpern.
I now recognize myself and Vice Chair Timmons to begin a
period of extended questioning of the witnesses. Any member who
wishes to speak should just signal their request to either me
or to Vice Chair Timmons.
So, you know, I have got a hundred questions I want to ask,
but let me just start. Mr. Wofsy, in your written testimony,
you pointed out some of your response to the Leg Branch
Appropriations Subcommittee in terms of kind of, what do you
need, right? And I think you hit on a few things--some
additional funding to bring on more people and to be able to
retain people; the use of the Staff Academy both for the folks
who work under you but also for Member offices to be trained on
how better to engage with Leg Counsel; and then technology.
I am just curious how one--have those needs largely been
met, or are they in the process of being met? Are there other
things that our committee should think about recommending that
would support the work you are doing in light of the
overwhelming increase in demand that your office is facing?
And then the other question, just relatedly--and there has
been some discussion of this already--you know, one potential
solution to reduce the strain on your workload would be just to
expand who has access to legislative drafting tools. Curious if
you--you know, who has--if you have thoughts on who has access
and what your thoughts are about expanding that access? If Mr.
Wofsy and perhaps Mr. McCumber may want to weigh in on that,
too, but----
Mr. Wofsy. Certainly. Let me address the first set of
questions that you asked----
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Which I think I can tell you that
there are things that have already been implemented, and there
are things that we are going to continue to implement. For
example, last--we have six new attorneys who are going to be
joining our team this year, two of whom have already started.
Four are going to be coming in the fall.
We anticipate and we aim to do the same thing for this
coming year with recruiting season, and we also anticipate
hiring additional paralegals. I had mentioned that we use our
paralegal team to help us out with simple things and to help us
with a lot of kind of document generation things. They are
excellent, and they are very, very helpful.
We are also--I will tell you that we are very grateful for
the Speaker's most recent pay order, and we are grateful to you
and the select committee because, you know, I work with--as it
turns out, I work with the select committee. My drafting area
includes the things that you work on. And I remember, from the
beginning, one of the things that you were very, very strong on
was increasing staff pay, or at least allowing for the
possibility of staff pay, especially senior staff, to be
compensated more.
That has already made a tremendous difference in our
retention efforts. It is very, very helpful. And it--what we
want is to see this keep going so that staff pay will continue
to rise and that we will continue to retain our highly trained
staff. The magical phrase of the high three has been batted
around in our office quite a bit over the past year. That has
been a terrific help.
We are also, as I mentioned, trying out different
arrangements where we can retain people by offering them the
opportunity to engage in extensive telework. And we have
people, in fact, who are working from very remote locations
now, partly as a result of the pandemic but also partly as the
result of family opportunities. We have one of our senior
attorney's spouses has taken a temporary position very far
away, and he is still able to work with us remotely and to keep
doing that. That is something we can tell our people that we
can do for them.
So many of these things are already underway. What we need
is, first of all, the continued funding to make it possible,
and that--to my knowledge, the Appropriations Committee has
been extremely helpful with that. They have been able to give
us what we need. And then some of the other things that we are
talking about today would also be a big help, and we can talk
perhaps--I can get into greater detail if you would like about
the education efforts that you had alluded to, as a way of
basically reducing the pain ultimately.
It expands our capacity when people come to us with a lot
of the questions answered because we don't have to start off
from square one. If people know how to use our office and the
best practices for use in our office, they can come to us
better prepared. So we look at this as a help us help you----
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Sort of effort.
The Chairman. Do you need anything else in that regard? If
you were on this committee and making recommendations in this
space, do you feel like the Staff Academy has got it handled,
or are there other things we ought to be looking at?
Mr. Wofsy. I think the Staff Academy is a good start. I
mean, I think that what--to the extent that you can--that there
are specific things you can do to promote it and to encourage
Members to have their staffs attend the Staff Academy sessions,
and also to go to our internal website. That is another
terrific source of information.
I mean, when people go onto our website, they can see right
upfront a sort of, before you contact us or before you begin,
to list out some of these questions and some of the basic
background information. We give people on our website basically
a guide, a brief guide to the legislative process, where we
talk about, for example, the Parliamentarians, Congressional
Research Service. We give them links to these offices.
We even have a basic guide to legislative drafting, which
gives a very brief but still useful introduction to, what is
the difference between a bill and a resolution, a bill that
amends existing law versus a bill that is freestanding and just
sits on its own? In other words, a lot of this material is out
there now, and what we would like to see is staff take
advantage of it.
The most recent webinar that we had for what is called the
Leg Counsel 201 class, which is the advanced class, I believe
there were 80 people who signed up, of whom 50 actually
attended. And I am--that is not bad----
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. You know, because, as we know, who
knows how your day is going to go on the Hill. You may think,
``Oh, I am going to go to my webinar,'' and then, the next
thing you know, you get a call, and ``I guess I am not going to
go to that webinar.''
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Wofsy. So I think 50 out of 80 is actually not a bad
percentage, but we need to see more of that happening. To the
extent that you can recommend to Members and the staff to do
simple things, like look through our website, look at the
Congressional Staff Academy--I mean, here is something else
that is very, very simple that is sort of--it has driven me a
little crazy, to be honest, in the past that when staff leave a
Member's office and they don't tell their successors about the
drafting that we have already been working on, and then the
request comes in anew, sometimes maybe a year or so later, and
we have to search through our--my aging memory cells to see if,
``Gosh, this sounds familiar, where did--haven't I seen this
before,'' and we have to start the process all over again.
I mean, a simple recommendation to Member staff that, when
somebody leaves, that to make it a policy to notify the leg
director or the chief of staff about what they are working on
with our office so that people will know how to pick it up and
move forward.
Small things, but to encourage the Members to take
advantage of what is out there.
The Chairman. Do you want to take a swing at the pitch
about access to legislative drafting tools?
Mr. Wofsy. Sure. It is a question really of what the House
wants from a legislative document because the Member--if you
can introduce a bill that says anything or does anything, the
question is, will it work? Will it be technically sufficient?
And legislative drafting is a craft, and we believe that the
House is best served when people who are experienced in that
craft are the ones who ultimately prepare the legislation.
It isn't just a matter of the training that we receive,
which is rigorous. When we have new people come in, they go
through an extremely rigorous apprenticeship-type program where
they learn all--the whole panoply of rules and procedures and
techniques and how to ask all of these questions and how to
work with our clients to make sure that we are giving them what
they really want, what they really want, not necessarily what
they write down on the page but what they are really trying to
accomplish.
I will also mention, as I did in my testimony, that we are
covered by the attorney-client privilege so that, when people
work with us, we are going to keep their work product
confidential. I can't even mention the fact that somebody has
contacted me, even if there is no bill draft provided, I cannot
share the fact that somebody has reached out to me with anybody
else.
When other people do legislative drafting, they are not
bound by those same confidences so that, if somebody else is
going to produce a document, there is no way to guarantee that
somebody is going to look at that document and maybe make
mischief with it.
The other--I guess the other thing, because we can talk a
long time about all of this stuff, that somebody--one of my
colleagues drew my attention to a Harvard Law Review article.
This was about 10 years ago. Somebody was talking about how
many lawyers work for the government, which--what a
fascinating--how would you like to spend your career coming up
with--that that was your research, that was your thesis? That
is great. How many lawyers work for the Federal Government?
And they came down roughly saying that, in the executive
branch, there are maybe more than 20,000 lawyers. In the entire
legislative branch, there are 500. So, if legislation gets
enacted that is unclear, that is incoherent, that has technical
issues, that leaves blanks, that can be subject to varying
interpretations, if it gets enacted and if Members think that
they are going to be able to direct how those blanks get filled
in, how the law gets implemented--if the Members think that
they are going to have a role in that process, they are wrong.
The ship has sailed already.
And who is going to make that decision? Well, that army of
20,000 lawyers in the executive branch or perhaps in the State
and local governments and private businesses, depending of
course on who the subject of the legislation is. We think that
the House is best served by taking advantage of professional
legislative drafting services. You never know when something is
going to move through the process.
Myself and all my colleagues have had examples of things
that we just kind of tossed off and said, ``Oh, sure, why not,
let's try this,'' and the next thing you know, oh, my gosh--not
that there is a signing ceremony necessarily but that there
is--this thing is now enacted into law, and we are going to
have to deal with it.
The Chairman. So I--the last thing you said--and apologies
to my colleagues because I want to make sure that they get a
chance to throw in some questions here, but, I mean, just to
press you on that a little bit, you know, there is, I think, a
substantial amount of legislation that gets introduced where
the person introducing it hopes that it will become a law. I
think we are all pretty conscious of the fact there is also a
fair amount of legislation where the person is trying to make a
statement, not make a law, right?
And, yes, I--and I know that might have----
Mr. Wofsy. I am shocked. I am shocked. I am shocked.
The Chairman. Politics in the Capitol.
Mr. Wofsy. Shocked.
The Chairman. Good God.
So I guess the question is, might it make sense, given the
overwhelming workload that you are facing, to at least broaden
access for those things that are, you know, going nowhere?
Mr. Wofsy. Well, possibly.
The Chairman. I mean, it could save you guys some work,
right?
Mr. Wofsy. Maybe yes, or maybe no.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Wofsy. Because what happens--what would happen--I can
certainly envision that, if this were to happen, at a certain
point, people are going to look at the bills that said people
just wanted to just introduce them for the heck of it, and
someone is going to say, ``No, I want to take this seriously.''
The Chairman. Uh-huh.
Mr. Wofsy. I--there could--again, you never know. The chair
of a committee or a subcommittee may look at this, or perhaps
is himself or herself the one who is introducing this and said,
``Let's have a hearing on this,'' and then, when that happens,
we are going to get the call to say, ``Okay, we know this
doesn't really work.''
The Chairman. Yeah. Now what?
Mr. Wofsy. ``Can you clean it up for us?''
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Wofsy. And it could be somebody other than the person
who introduced it, and, in effect, that could make our workload
even worse because we are going to start getting last-minute
things to redo things that we never saw in the first place, and
we are starting with a total zero null set of information
about, what was the purpose of this? What is it trying to do?
Who is responsible for this? And we are back to square one at a
time when we are already doing our things.
And the other thing is that I think we would quickly see
the distinction among the Members of this is a good bill, and
this is a bad bill. I mean, I am not saying good or bad or good
or evil or something like that, but Members are going to
quickly know, and they are going to become even more insistent
that they are going to want our imprimatur, and they will come
to us at the last minute and say, ``You know something? Wait a
second. We are doing this, but now I am realizing that there is
a problem.''
And meanwhile, where were you 2 weeks ago----
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. When we might have had a chance to
work through the issues?
So I am nervous about that there could be a boomerang
effect on our office, that it may----
The Chairman. Maybe Mr. Halpern wants to weigh in here,
too. Then I will defer to my colleagues here.
Mr. Halpern. Well, two points. One goes to an earlier point
that I made, that the existing suite of drafting tools for the
House are extremely complex. And, when I managed groups of
attorneys or nonattorneys at several committees, they didn't
want to use these tools because they were incredibly hard to
learn. And that is largely driven because they have to account
for all of the different drafting styles.
Putting that aside, when I worked for the gentleman who is
up on that wall and ran the floor for him, the one thing that I
learned very quickly is ideas that start life as sort of a
throwaway, Members suddenly become very, very attached to the
words that are used to execute those ideas.
So, at some point, the Speaker would often come to me and
say, ``Member X is bugging me about their bill to do X, Y, or
Z.''
And I would look at it, and I am like, this? Really?
And that is to say that the expertise that Noah and his
colleagues bring to this is critically important to maintaining
the standard and the preciseness that has characterized House
drafting for my House career.
There is actually a good example of this. So the rule--I
think it may have gone away this Congress, but the rule that
drove the comparative print project.
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Halpern. So that was adopted very much ad hoc in the
House Republican Conference where we were considering the rules
package for that Congress. And, frankly, at some point, we
realized we couldn't articulate reasons why we shouldn't do
this any longer, and so we just said we are going to do it. And
I had to come to my colleagues in the Clerk's Office and go,
``We have got a year to figure out how we are going to do
this.''
But, if you look at the text of that rule, it is written
differently than virtually every other rule literally in the
book, and that was because that came from Mr. Posey.
The Chairman. Uh-huh.
Mr. Halpern. And Mr. Posey decided that is how he really
wanted that constructed.
And the several times we actually went back to him to say,
``Hey, can we just update this to conform it to the style and
the structure of all of the other Rules of the House,'' he was
not enthusiastic about revisiting that.
So that is just something to keep in mind----
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Halpern [continuing]. That the distinction that we may
draw at the outset doesn't always hold when things start
moving.
The Chairman. Gotcha. Vice Chair Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the last 10 years, you have gone from 32,000 drafts to
48,000 drafts, almost a 50-percent increase in a decade. And
you have added nine attorneys, less than 20 percent.
Do you need more attorneys?
Mr. Wofsy. Yes. Yes, we do. And we are starting to ramp up
our hiring. There are several issues, of course, involved.
First of all, we have lost some fairly senior attorneys over
the past few years, just because of the natural--the lifecycle
of an attorney, I suppose, is that, at a certain point, you are
ready to go and do something else or simply retire.
We had a colleague who had been in the office for 50 years
who retired last year. And we have people who have similar
links. So some of this is a matter of filling vacancies that
were both expected but also unexpected.
And the other thing also to keep in mind is that we want to
expand as quickly as we can without overburdening our existing
attorneys because the way that our office operates is that the
training we provide--as I mentioned before, it is like an
apprenticeship program. A new attorney is subject to review and
oversight by two senior attorneys who control all the workflow,
provide rigorous redlining and advice, and basically spend the
better part of a year training somebody on how to do our job.
That, of course, takes time away from the senior attorneys
who are doing the training. So we have--we feel that we have a
good balance.
Now, if we are shooting to add six people, let's say, every
year, with doing that, we will be able to keep our senior--
enough of our senior attorneys available to do their jobs and
still provide the training and, at the same time, have more
attorneys gaining more expertise, and we can start filling them
in on the drafting teams that we use for the various areas of
law that people specialize in, and they can start developing
the specialization.
Bottom line: Yes, we need more attorneys. We need more
paralegals, too. I mentioned that they provide a terrific role,
and they are fantastic, and they can help us a lot to sort of
expand our capacity to be able to serve the Members.
But, yes, that was a longwinded answer to a very short
answer, which is yes.
Mr. Timmons. After people work on the Hill for 2, 3, 4, 5,
10 years, generally speaking, they can go downtown for a 50-
percent increase, minimum, sometimes 200-percent increase. Are
you losing attorneys to--does K Street want your team, or is it
not really a translatable skill set?
Mr. Wofsy. Wow, I never thought of that before. What am I
doing here? No.
It is--you know, that is a really good question. I mean, I
think that it is an--would be an unusual career path to do the
K Street thing. I think that this--because we are nonpartisan--
I mean, I am just kind of going--I am making this up off the
top of my head here, but I think, because we are nonpartisan,
we don't have the same relationship with Members----
Mr. Timmons. Okay.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. And leadership and all that, that I
think K Street values more than the ability to draft
legislation. But there are certainly people who have gone off
to work for--to work for law firms to do----
Mr. Timmons. Sure.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Certain types of work.
I think that, when people leave the office, it is almost--
it tends to be more for reasons of that they just don't--that
they just--after a year or two, they realize they just don't
enjoy the work. Maybe they want to be more involved in
policymaking themselves because they have their own policy
goals. And, as I say, we don't provide the policy. We provide
the expression of other people's policy. So sometimes people
leave for that type of reason.
I don't--I don't see an exodus to K Street so much as our
problem. Having said that, it is a lot easier to say that now
that we have the--we have got the most recent pay order, and
with the hope----
Mr. Timmons. That was my next question.
Mr. Wofsy. Yeah.
Mr. Timmons. What percentage of your staff are maxed out?
Mr. Wofsy. Oh, gosh. I would have to get back to you on
that, but----
Mr. Timmons. Yeah.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Let's just say quite a few. I mean,
there were--and, God, I was one of them for many years. I--
there are at least--I should probably get back to you on that.
Mr. Timmons. Okay.
Mr. Wofsy. I don't want to give--but it was a considerable
amount.
Mr. Timmons. But a substantial number of your attorneys are
maxed out?
Mr. Wofsy. Yes. They were. Now they are not in the sense
that the cap on the pay order was raised to such a level that
we now have breathing room----
Mr. Timmons. Okay.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Underneath to kind of give people--
continue to give people raises as they stick around, so they
get--our raises or seniority based.
Mr. Timmons. You mentioned teleworking. What percentage of
your team teleworks?
Mr. Wofsy. 100 percent at one point or another. I mean,
we--I don't think that there is an attorney who does not
telework at least 1 or 2 days a week.
Our telework has been--I mean, it has been--I think it has
been--I mean, we are going to pat ourselves on the back. I
think it has been astonishing how we have been able to use that
and that we were--we were very well placed to do so when the
pandemic hit because we had been doing it since--well, it
started--Hugh probably can remember--since the anthrax attacks
after 9/11 that we--that the House realized that we need to be
able to have people work remotely.
And so, since then, at one level or another, we have done
it. And it is a terrific help. It is a great retention tool.
Mr. Timmons. There are different types of teleworking. One
teleworking is being within a couple miles of the Capitol. The
other one is being in a completely different area code where
the cost of living is a quarter of what it is here. So how many
of your team telework from afar?
Mr. Wofsy. I would say three or four, or four or five at
this point.
Mr. Timmons. Is that something that you would--I mean, you
know, 150-, $200,000 is fairly good pay here in D.C., but it is
an enormous amount of money in South Carolina. So, I mean, do
you have people--are you encouraging people that are kind of
questioning their career path to consider moving further away
where they have a better quality of life for less money?
Mr. Wofsy. That is a great question. And that is actually
something that we are starting to discuss among ourselves in
the office because we have to--as with everything, we have to
strike a balance. I mean, you know, I am an old school person,
or I am just an old person period, and I see the value of
people being together in the same place at the same time, and I
know that there is a--obvious----
Mr. Timmons. Zoom doesn't count?
Mr. Wofsy. Not quite. I mean, you know, each of us have had
our experiences with it, right. But I understand that there is
a generational thing and that there are advantages, of course,
to having people work remotely. If we did that, though, we
would need to answer some very tough questions, that should
people who, because of their location, will very rarely, if
ever, be able to respond to some demand, which may come from a
Member or committee, to show up in person, should they be
compensated at a different level?
In other words, should people who are staying here who are
going to be more accessible in cases of emergency, should they
be paid the same as somebody who will never be able to come
here? These are just the types of issues that we would have to
work through, and we are starting to talk about it, but----
Mr. Timmons. One last question for the Clerk's Office. And
this is for another Member that is not here. I am not as
passionate about it as he is.
The Electronic Voting System, security is obviously
incredibly important. My understanding is it has got--it is its
own system, right? It is not connected to anything whatsoever?
Mr. McCumber. That is right, yes.
Mr. Timmons. Multiple fail-safes?
Mr. McCumber. That is right.
Mr. Timmons. The question that was posed was, how could a
Member's office, particularly a legislative director, maybe his
chief of staff, be able to see whether and how that Member
voted in a case of whether they got to the floor in time or
not, or whether they are possibly talking outside and just
about to miss a vote?
Obviously, you can call the floor, and that is kind of
cumbersome. We would not want to impact the security. I can
imagine there is a way to determine whether and how someone
voted should the House--should leadership want that to occur.
Is that something that you all have investigated? Do you
have a--if this is something that the Speaker says that we want
to do, it is done? Can you just talk about that?
Mr. McCumber. We scoped it out at a very high level when
this conversation came up earlier this year, and it is very
secure. There is a way to do it. A program could be written to
use----
Mr. Timmons. To look at the wall and see what----
Mr. McCumber. Right out----
Mr. Timmons. Yeah.
Mr. McCumber. Right. Right out of the EVS system itself.
But, you know, a program would have to be created. And I think
they said, I mean, 9 months to a year to be able to get
something in place.
Mr. Timmons. And, obviously, you wouldn't want people to
know how everybody voted? I mean, there are arguments on all
sides, but you don't want to have--that would create problems,
but just if a Member's office could tell if that Member voted
or maybe even how that Member voted, I could see a value there.
Mr. McCumber. That could----
Mr. Timmons. It is doable?
Mr. McCumber. That could potentially be one of the ideas in
this Member portal with the new LIMS modernization that we are
doing where the administrative rights could be granted to that
Member's office to access that information.
Mr. Timmons. Okay.
Mr. McCumber. It is certainly possible.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you.
I yield back. Sorry.
The Chairman. Mr. Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thanks to each of you. I am grateful for what you and
your offices do and wish more of our colleagues, frankly, could
understand, myself amongst them, so I want to say thank you.
I have always been taught to investigate best practices and
implement them into the organizations to which I have been
party. My question to each of you is, do you investigate those
as they relate to best practices in legislative bodies
throughout the country but also around the world? And, if not,
is there an opportunity to create a mechanism by which we can
identify those and perhaps implement ideas that have been
attested in other legislative bodies?
Maybe start with you, Mr. Wofsy.
Mr. Wofsy. Sure. Our office does participate, on a formal
and informal basis, with international organizations that bring
together legislative drafters and people who do similar work
all over the world. There is a particular group of the former
commonwealth nations that has--from U.K.--who we are in
constant touch with. We have had people actually spend time
with us from South Korea, from the U.K. and like spent time
with us, watched how we do our things. We have had--our
attorneys have helped in the past with the emerging democracies
to provide assistance. And some of our retired attorneys have
done that.
The pandemic has interfered with some of that, as you may
imagine. Pre-pandemic, there was an annual conference of
international legislative drafters that would be held typically
here in D.C., and people would come from all over the world. We
would put on--we would present papers and research findings and
talk about best practices, about how we do things in our system
of government, how they do things in their system of
government, the roles of--for example, the equivalence of the
Congressional Research Service in other countries.
The pandemic has interfered with that. One of my colleagues
is sort of our point person for these international
organizations, and he is saying that there may be an attempt to
have the conference start this fall. And typically we would
have it here in D.C., and we would have several events,
receptions, and get to know those people.
So the answer is yes, absolutely. We are in touch with
international organizations and other people who do similar
work, and we want to learn from them, and they want to learn
from us.
Mr. Phillips. Wonderful. And, in your specific line of
work, are there any States or countries that are particularly
impressive relative to their efficiency in systems
technologies?
Mr. Wofsy. I am not sure----
Mr. Phillips. If you aren't----
Mr. Wofsy. I can speak to the technologies. We were very
impressed with the Australians, who seem to have a very--it was
more about how their offices were organized in terms of how
they tackled various subject matter areas, how they would
respond to requests. Obviously parliamentary systems are
different because it is the government----
Mr. Phillips. Of course.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. That runs everything. So this--
there is the division between the branches, which, of course,
drives a lot of what we do, is different. But we thought--but
we were very impressed with them, and they were--I will also
just say the Australians, they are fabulously entertaining
people----
Mr. Phillips. And there is that.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. In their ways. So that was one
example of the ways.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you.
Mr. McCumber.
Mr. McCumber. So my predecessor was pretty involved in the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, and I know that they got together
often for an exchange of ideas, especially during the pandemic,
best practices for what works for us, what works for them, how
did we do this, how did we do that?
I am not as familiar yet. Those haven't been an opportunity
yet that have come up for me yet, but it is something that, you
know--and similar, we are bound a lot by what the House--the
rules and the traditions and the precedents, but where there
are opportunities to improve in efficiencies, in the way we do
things, we certainly take advantage of them.
Mr. Phillips. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Halpern.
Mr. Halpern. Thank you. GPO is about a billion-dollar
government enterprise, operates very much as a business, and
throughout all of our lines of business, we are constantly
checking for what are the best practices around how we do
things? But I think, to be more responsive to your question, I
would actually like to go back to something I did when I worked
for the House.
So, probably about 10, 15 years ago now, I and some of my
colleagues did the staff del to visit the European Union
Parliament but, more importantly, the U.K. Parliament. And, as
part of the discussion, we were talking with their clerks, who
serve as the counterparts both of the folks in the House
Clerk's Office but also our Parliamentarians.
And, through that discussion--it was literally cocktail
discussion. I pointed out that their documents looked a whole
heck of a lot more modern than ours do despite the fact their
parliament is roughly a thousand years older than ours.
Mr. Phillips. Uh-huh.
Mr. Halpern. And the deputy clerk I was talking to, she was
like, ``Oh, yeah, like, 10 years prior, we just thought
everything looked too Victorian, so we just changed it,'' and
they printed on regular size paper, and they used color, and
they used modern typefaces.
So I came back kind of invigorated after that trip and met
with the staff of what I affectionately refer to now as the old
GPO. And, when I suggested, ``Hey, let's just start with
printing hearings on letter size paper, let's just start
there,'' and you would have thought I had asked everybody for
their first-born child.
Mr. Phillips. Whoa.
Mr. Halpern. I left that meeting very frustrated.
Fast forward, 12, 13 years, and they are, like,
``Congratulations, you are in charge now.''
The good news is we are at a bit of an inflection point
with a lot of different things where we can consider some of
those best practices. So one of the reasons that our documents
look the way they do--and the Committee Report today is in
basically the exact same format it was when GPO opened its
doors in March of 1861.
Mr. Phillips. Uh-huh.
Mr. Halpern. It is to preserve on the economy of doing
large offset printing. So that gets very expensive, so you want
to compress your pages, have small type sizes to reduce your
cost per sheet.
Well, we have got a couple of things that are coming
together. One is, in terms of actual printing technology, GPO
has brought online seven digital inkjet printers, which are no
longer dependent on the very expensive, very time-consuming
pre-press process.
Mr. Phillips. Sure.
Mr. Halpern. Second, GPO is in the process of updating its
composition engine, and the software that both offices use
today and GPO is about 40 years old, and it is way past end of
life. The new system is modern, works on modern standards, and
is far, far more flexible.
Mr. Phillips. Good.
Mr. Halpern. So you take that new software stack, you take
new output technologies, and you combine that with, frankly,
the work that this select committee is doing, which is
demonstrating a willingness to take a look at those practices
we have had in place for hundreds of years and say, ``Hey,
maybe we can do something differently?''
Combine all of those things together, and I think we are at
a good point where we could say--either the House, or the House
and the Senate say, what do our documents look like? What is
the design language we want to use? And how can we do this to
make the information contained in those documents--because that
is the key thing you are trying to transmit--how do we make
that information more accessible?
This committee took advantage of XPub, our new composition
engine, for their final report last year. We hope we will be
able to engage with you again this year on that. And we look
forward to working with the Committee on House Administration--
frankly, anybody else who wants to come to us--to talk about
how we can design a Committee Report for the next century.
Mr. Phillips. Wonderful. And if I could just ask one more.
So we are very much focused on inspiring collaboration and
more cooperation, and one of the items we have considered is
allowing for two lead sponsors on legislation, as long as they
come from each side of the aisle. I would love your thoughts,
each of you, on that subject, and whether or not there are some
impediments that we should be aware of if we were to recommend
that?
Mr. Wofsy. I can--well, from our perspective, we are happy
to work with anybody who wants to work with us. And when I
mentioned--the issue is going to confidentiality, but if two
people are working together----
Mr. Phillips. Okay.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. Then that is--there is no problem
with confidentiality. So----
Mr. Phillips. As long as they consent.
Mr. Wofsy. Yeah. As long as there is consent, we are
perfectly fine with that. Other than that, I think--I think,
for us, it would be a very simple thing to do. I suspect in a
way we are doing it--I mean, we are doing it already to some
level. I actually am asked sometimes to draft bills that are
going to be--that I am working with both sides of the aisle
together on it, so----
Mr. Phillips. Okay. Good.
Mr. Wofsy [continuing]. That does happen.
Mr. Phillips. Good.
Mr. McCumber. If the House rules change and allow it,
certainly something that we can--that is possible in our
programming, yes.
Mr. Phillips. Okay.
Mr. Halpern. So let me put on my old floor hat for a
second. And, you know, as my colleagues said, absolutely. From
a GPO perspective, it really doesn't matter a whole lot from
us.
Mr. Phillips. Sure.
Mr. Halpern. But when--speaking as somebody who worked on
the floor for half of his career, the thing to be aware of is
that raises your level of difficulty, even just a little bit,
for some things. I always look at it from the perspective of
what if it is the middle of the night and we have got to get
something done really, really quickly? How do we effectuate
that?
Sometimes waking that Member up at 1 or 2 o'clock in the
morning who sponsored that bill to say, ``Hey, the Rules
Committee is meeting, and we are moving forward with this,
that, or the other thing, we need to confirm with you if it is
okay if we do this,'' that is hard.
When you might have to do that with two Members, that just
exponentially raised that bar. Now, that said, that doesn't
mean you--that is not necessarily a complete argument against
the idea. It is just----
Mr. Phillips. Awareness.
Mr. Halpern [continuing]. Going into the process eyes wide
open and understanding the floor professionals recognize the--
that it is Members who own these things. Members own the
amendments. Members own the bills. And we need to check with
them and do those checks. So the more of those you add, the
harder that sometimes becomes.
Mr. Phillips. But, based on your wonderful experience, do
you think that might be an incentive for a little bit more
cooperation in the institution?
Mr. Halpern. One can always hope.
Mr. Phillips. Yeah. We get a lot of that. Okay. Thank you
very much.
The Chairman. We have got a couple of members who are
joining us online, but they are both in markups, so the timing
of the questioning is--we may get back to them.
Let me ask a couple other questions. You know, we have
heard from some committee staffs that have described some
challenges with keeping track of legislation that has been
referred to their committee. Again, I think because it is an
email system, not a paper-based system, some committees have
paid for the development of their own systems, but nothing is
provided Housewide.
Perhaps, Mr. McCumber, you can speak to the process as it
exists now, and if you have got thoughts on potential solutions
there?
Mr. McCumber. Sure. So currently committees receive paper
copies of the bills referred to them by GPO. Committees, there
are options available to committees to be notified when a bill
has been referred to them. Congress.gov offers alerts that
staff can sign up for, and it sends an email when bills have
been referred to them. They can also review the Congressional
Record every day, where the bill introductions and referrals
are located.
But there is opportunity that we are evaluating within our
LIMS modernization efforts to improve those communications and
data transmissions to the committee. So our new LIMS
modernization effort is going to be built in a way where we can
more quickly update technology, add additional applications to
it, and really help modernize some of the ways of the past,
especially when it comes to this committee.
The Chairman. Can I click on congress.gov and look at a
committee and see what bills are sitting in there? Is that
accessible on congress.gov now?
Mr. McCumber. Yes.
The Chairman. It is? Okay.
Mr. McCumber. Uh-huh.
The Chairman. The other thing I wanted to ask about was
about congress.gov, the--you know, just the--getting
information up on, you know, bill text and amendments and that
type of thing. There is a sense that there is some delay in
that. I think we have all, at one point or another, looked up a
bill where it says, you know, text isn't available yet.
Can you just help us understand if there are things that
our committee could propose that might smooth out that process
or address any of those delays?
Mr. Halpern. So I will take that one. And maybe it is
helpful to understand what our existing service level goals are
and where we really ran into some problems.
The Chairman. Sure.
Mr. Halpern. So, as I mentioned in my testimony, we--our
goal is to turn around a legislative measure that we get within
a week. There are what we call the hot lists both the House and
the Senate provide, and they are usually driven by floor
action, and they are saying these are the things we need
overnight. So they get prioritized, and everything else is sort
of first in, first out.
During the pandemic, we were forced to have the number of
people we had operating in the proof room to work through
bills. Keep in mind the--bills are not the only thing the proof
room does. We produce both the Federal Register and the
Congressional Record, which is like producing The Washington
Post and The New York Times every single day. And they are
amazing folks, and they are able to pull rabbits out of the hat
all the time.
But we had two sort of--we had a couple of issues in
intention. One was, first, making sure we were able to distance
people enough in that room so that nobody was going to get
infected. But the second was to preserve capacity so that, if
we did have an infection, we could recover. So we had only half
of our staff operating at any one time.
At its peak, we had almost 1,800 bills sitting in the bill
section to be proofread and composed and put online and
printed. Shortly--that was in May of 2021. Shortly thereafter,
we were able to bring our staff back, and we were able to clear
that backlog in about 3 to 4 months.
And, now, the volume varies week to week depending on the
Congress--what is in session, and how much business and those
kind of things, but most weeks, there is only--there are fewer
than a hundred bills left in the bill end at the end of each
week.
Obviously, as I mentioned in my testimony, if you eliminate
that proofreading step, then it is just a capacity issue for
us. So what happens is, if we are pulling a file that is
provided to us by the Clerk, that they are getting from Leg
Counsel, if we no longer take that step of comparing it against
the paper copy and we just--we take that XML file as gospel,
then it is really just a question of our printing and
production capacity. The electrons move pretty quickly.
Any bill that is less than 200 pages, we print on basically
large office copiers. That is the fastest way for us to do
that. If it is more than 200 pages, because of the binding
limitations, that has to go to our full-blown digital presses
and the bindery.
But, if you eliminate that proofreading step, that is going
to speed that up to some extent. But, as I mentioned in my
testimony, you are going to increase your error rate. We catch
lots of things every time we look at a bill. You know, as good
as Noah and his colleagues are, they make mistakes, and part of
our value add is we catch those stylistic or numbering mistakes
or things like that, but things are very easy to catch.
The Chairman. So let me just ask pointedly, do you need
anything from us? I am not asking the question to bang on you.
I am asking because, if there are things that can help smooth
the process or reduce delays, we would love to recommend it to
support the work you do.
Mr. Halpern. I appreciate that. Because we, to some extent,
self-fund, we have been able to sort of be on that leading edge
of technology.
The Chairman. Good.
Mr. Halpern. The couple of things that are challenges for
GPO is my workforce is older than the average Federal employee.
Half of my agency will be eligible to retire in the next 5
years. So finding that next generation of folks to do the work
is critical for us and really one of our chief things.
But, as we sort of proceed through this, we have a good
dialogue with both our authorizing committee and the
appropriators to make sure that we have got resources.
Ultimately Congress is our customer, and you all just need
to tell us what you want, and we will figure out how to deliver
it.
The Chairman. So one lesson from this hearing, if you are
an attorney or working in printing and watching on C-SPAN 8
right now, come work for Congress.
Mr. Halpern. If you are a journey person book binder, call
us.
The Chairman. Yeah, there we go.
Mr. Halpern. We literally need dozens of them, so yes.
The Chairman. Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The first question: Do you believe that we are the three
most significant Members of Congress since you have been here
33 years--the three of us?
Mr. Halpern. You certainly rank up there.
Mr. Cleaver. Yeah, thank you.
I am in Congress in no small part because I was in a TV
debate. My opponent--at one point, we were told to ask each
other questions, and I asked her how a bill became a law. And
she couldn't do it on television.
But what I still think we need to do, even if we know that,
a part of the orientation of new Members, at least when I was
coming in 18 years ago, we had no contact with the
infrastructure of our legislative body. I mean, zero.
Has there ever been workshops with or a dialogue with
incoming Members so they would understand the system? And, if
not, is there a reason not? And, if you think there would be
value in it, I am certainly interested in that.
Mr. Wofsy. I can tell you that, at least for this new--for
the 117th Congress, the Legislative Counsel, my boss and I,
were invited to give a presentation at the New Member
Orientation, which is run by the Committee on House
Administration. So we were able to at least introduce the
Members to the idea that there is an Office of the Legislative
Counsel and that we are the bill drafting and the legislative
drafting advice experts of the House.
At that time, there is only a limit that we can do in terms
of just giving a presentation, mostly just making sure that
they knew we existed and that they should feel free to contact
us, call us, let us know if there was anything that--if they
had any questions about how we do things.
One other thing that I will mention--I don't know if this
is exactly on point--is that some of the leadership, sometimes,
on one side of the aisle or the other, at the beginning of a
Congress, will hold an open dialogue meeting for new staff and
Member offices to come and meet Legislative Counsel. And I have
presented at those things before, where--this is not for the
Members, but it is for the staff, again, even before they have
started their jobs, to let them know who we are and give them
just a basic introduction that, you know, we are here, we are
here to help, and that we are available to them.
I think that there are certainly more things that could be
done to kind of provide this kind of information early on.
House Administration, when it puts together its New Member
Orientation, I think that they would--I never presume to speak
for anybody, let alone House Administration or in some ways my
bosses, but I think that they would be very interested and
eager to kind of talk about how we could expand those
opportunities.
Mr. Cleaver. Anybody else?
Mr. Halpern. Do you----
Mr. McCumber. I would just add that the Clerk's Office,
during orientation, meets with the new Members on the floor,
gives an overview of the Electronic Voting System, reviews some
of the positions on the rostrum, and then, most recently,
through the Congressional Staff Academy, I believe the last two
Congresses, we have put on a course together in conjunction--in
coordination with the Parliamentarian's Office for committee
clerks for what they need or what we need from them and how we
can assist them to do their jobs better.
And then, just this year, we launched a clerk course
through the Congressional Staff Academy where participation has
been through the roof, actually, where it is a 90-minute
session on everything the Clerk's Office does, what we can
offer you, and really establishes those relationships. And we
get great feedback from those for how we can improve along
those lines.
Mr. Halpern. Well, I was actually on the panel that
immediately followed Noah and Wade at New Member Orientation,
but I was there in my former staffer hat. Not a lot of folks
know what GPO does, and we would love folks to come visit so we
can show you what we do.
We are actually the only large-scale manufacturer here in
the District, and we realize we are a little bit off the beaten
path being behind Union Station, but we would love the
opportunity to tell folks how we fit into the system. And, if
folks want to come visit, we are more than happy to host.
Mr. Cleaver. All right. Thank you very much.
Obviously, there is some contact with incoming Members and
their staffs. But those can be enhanced. I mean, all right.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Vice Chair Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to follow up on electronic voting. So when did we
start using this in the current system?
Mr. McCumber. 1973.
Mr. Timmons. Has it been changed at all since then?
Mr. McCumber. So updates, the display boards that you see
were installed in 2000--updated in 2010. The summary displays
on----
Mr. Timmons. What did it look like before?
Mr. McCumber. It was like--plexiglass isn't--I don't
believe it was plexiglass, but, like, sliding----
Mr. Halpern. It was a laminate in front of fluorescent
bulbs.
Mr. McCumber. And so, when there was a membership change
and they had to redo the alphabet, they would be up there
moving everybody down or up to accommodate it, but now it is
all the digital display.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. I mean, it would not be challenging, if
there was the will, to create an app and use the app instead of
this, and probably even be more secure. Yeah, face ID on your
cell phone. I mean, I am sure that there is a lot of
traditional people here, but it is 2022. So, I mean, talk about
how challenging that would be, assuming there is the will?
Mr. McCumber. I can't really speak to the technology
aspects of it, but, certainly, if that is what the Congress
would direct us to do, that is certainly something that we
could do.
The Chairman. Can I pull that thread real quick?
I mean, so we just had a hearing on continuity of Congress,
right.
Mr. McCumber. Uh-huh.
The Chairman. In a world in which the House was
inaccessible, do we have a backup plan?
Mr. McCumber. Yes.
The Chairman. What is it?
Mr. McCumber. There are several mobile EVS systems that are
available and kept updated.
The Chairman. Okay. I'm sorry. Go ahead.
Mr. Timmons. My understanding is that Natural Resources is
the only committee that uses electronic voting.
Mr. McCumber. It is my understanding, yes, sir.
Mr. Timmons. How challenging would it be for other
committees to adopt electronic voting?
Mr. Halpern. I can actually take some of that question,
because I was here when that decision got made. So I believe
the chair at the time was Rob Bishop from Utah, and I think
there are commercial systems out there that they can--that
could easily be implemented. At the time, both us in the
Speaker's Office and the Clerk's Office were sort of unwilling
to take responsibility for that particular system.
I think the one key thing to keep in mind--and I--again, I
have done a lot of things over my career. So, if you remember
the voting mishap that occurred in 2007, one of my jobs was I
wrote the report that sort of detailed what happened there.
Well, one of the key things to keep in mind is the EVS is
not connected to the internet, and that is one of the key
security features that it has.
That is not to say that, you know, the really smart people
in the Clerk's Office and in the outside world couldn't figure
out a secure way to connect it to a broader network. But when
you bring down the walls, when that system is no longer as
isolated as it is, that security is going to go down. Not to
say that you couldn't figure out other measures to build up
walls again, but one of the key defenses wouldn't be there.
Mr. Timmons. So I think about time a lot, because we have
limited time, and we are rarely here. When we are here, we are
overwhelmed. But, you know, when we have a bunch of amendments
in committee, and we are voting in committee for hours--I mean,
it can be hours. That is just really inefficient, and it takes,
I think, 2 or 3 minutes to call the whole roll and vote by
voice. And I just feel like--save a lot of time.
Mr. Halpern. I don't disagree. And so there are lots of
countervailing issues here. One is sort of the collegiality
requirement, making sure that the folks are in the room. And I
realize, with the pandemic, the House adopted proxy voting, so
that is sort of its own question.
Mr. Timmons. And, technically, you are only making sure my
card is in the room.
Mr. Halpern. I am sorry?
Mr. Timmons. You are technically only making sure my card
is in the room. I don't do that, but it has been done before.
Mr. Halpern. Good floor staff will make--do their best to
try and make sure that the card is with the right person.
Mr. Timmons. Sure.
Mr. Halpern. But--so you have got to make sure that it is
you who is casting that vote. You know, the Constitution
doesn't invest that power in your legislative director or your
chief of staff or anybody else. It is in you.
I think there is probably some room for some innovation
within committees to speed up that process. I have ran a large
number of committees. Financial Services had a huge number of
members, and--it was my boss at the time--I guess it was the
early 2000s--Mike Oxley, who went to Denny Hastert to ask for
the ability to roll votes in committee because, prior to that,
you didn't even have that ability.
So I totally get it. I think there are probably some
opportunities for innovation there. The one thing that I would
argue for, as somebody who believes that data is important, is
whatever systems that committees adopt, they should be using
the same data standards that the Clerk and GPO and Leg Counsel
use so that, as the Modernization Committee suggested, we can
build that database of committee votes and have that
information be interoperable and utilize that data in the
future.
Mr. Timmons. Last question in regards to time. We made a
recommendation last Congress that we should travel less and
work more. People have proposed the 2 weeks on, 2 weeks off
calendar. Would that create any challenges for you all to
continue performing at the level that you are currently
performing at?
Mr. Wofsy. It is hard to say. I think that there was--there
is a sort of assumption that, when the Members are away, when
they are back in the District or wherever, that the staff have
a lot--that things slow down and that the workload kind of
decreases. What I have--it is very--this is one of those things
in which it is so dependent upon the particular Member office.
It is so dependent upon the particular areas of law that the
Member is concerned with, because there are many staff who say,
``Okay, the Members are gone, now we can actually get our work
done.'' In other words: Now I don't have the Member, you know,
coming up to me with brilliant new comments and brilliant new
ideas to distract me from the work that I am doing to try to
get this bill drafted with Legislative Counsel. So there are
oftentimes when the Members are gone that some of us are even
busier.
So it is very hard to make a generalization about that,
other than our concern is that, if that process will help us
help you--in other words, if they are taking advantage of the
time to research things and to answer the questions and to
engage in the iterative process, then whatever helps that is
fine with us.
Mr. McCumber. Yeah, there would be no concerns on our end.
No.
Mr. Halpern. Likewise, if congressional work drops off, we
have other work for our folks to be doing, so----
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Go ahead.
Mr. Cleaver. For the first time since I have been here, the
MRA was increased very recently, I think to the delight of at
least the members of this select committee. I am wondering if
we would be in a better position of coming to you for help in
legislation if Members had what the Senators have, which is a
general counsel. Almost every one of them--maybe all of them--I
have never met one who didn't have--they have counsel on their
staffs who then interacts with you.
I know you probably don't want to get into responses to
suggest that you are supporting an increase in MRA, but I am.
So if you can answer the question based on you trying to talk
me out of it.
Mr. Halpern. Do you want to take that?
Mr. Wofsy. Okay. Great. So our--the thing that I was--that
I would say would be that anything that encourages good people
to stick around and to continue to gain an even greater depth
of knowledge of the legislative process and of particular areas
of law that they want to focus on, that helps us because, when
I started, it was not unusual for the staff of Member offices
to stick around for 5, 10, 15 years, and even more so with
committee staffs.
I think--let's--I want to bring the committees into the
discussion because committees are supposed to be the experts on
particular subject matter areas of law. And, when I first
started, the people who worked on the committees were--on
either side of the aisle, were people who had been around
forever. And I learned as much from them as they learned from
me.
And anything that will get good people to want to make, if
not a whole career, at least want to devote themselves to a
greater indepth knowledge of the legislative process and of how
an idea becomes law, anything that does that from our
perspective is terrifically helpful for our office, and I will
just make the statement: it is good for Congress.
When I mentioned earlier about the 20,000 lawyers in the
executive branch and 500 in the entire legislative branch, it
strengthens Congress as an institution to carry out its Article
I duties if the people who work for Congress know what they are
doing.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you.
Mr. Halpern. So, again, putting on my former House staffer
hat, I would totally associate myself with everything that Noah
said.
When I was coming up in the late 1980s, early 1990s, the
way that you learned around here was really by doing, and I
have learned because my portfolio of issues happened to
coincide with the head of the Office of Legislative Counsel at
the time, and that is how I learned to draft. That is how I
learned to navigate through a legislative document.
I don't know that there are necessarily the same kinds of
opportunities, so having--just having the ability to hire
somebody with a law degree doesn't necessarily guarantee you
that same outcome. It is having somebody who is smart and has a
good background, but also has the opportunities to learn with
Noah and his colleagues, with Kevin and his colleagues, and our
other folks in the Parliamentarian's Office who are also very,
very key to all of this.
I think having folks who are willing to do the work and
actually learn the intricacies of this very, very complex
system are really key to delivering for the Members that we all
work for.
Mr. Cleaver. I have done the commencement at two law
schools, so I know law, and I think it would be difficult for
anybody to come, whether it is a staffer or Members, who is not
going to learn on the job. I don't think that is possible up
here--haven't been here for a while. And so I do think that--I
mean, you can get one of the best lawyers coming out of
college, and they are going to come up here lost because it is
going to take time.
But I do think, you know, that it may reduce your workload,
but it also gives a higher level of confidence in the Member
that, you know, when I want something done, I have got somebody
who can do it, and then work with the institutional staff. You
know, I just--I think it would work much smoother.
And I thank you for all three of you agreeing with me.
The Chairman. All right. I want to thank our witnesses for
their testimony today. And, importantly, going off script for a
bit, I just want to thank the people who work with you and for
you. This place functions because of them, so thank you for
that.
Mr. Halpern, I also want to thank you for working with our
committee on our report from the 116th Congress, and we look
forward to working with you on this Congress. You and your team
brought some terrific innovation to that report, and I think we
are better off for it.
Mr. Wofsy, I hope that this hearing didn't convince you to
rethink your career choice, so thank you for being here.
I also want to thank our--the members of our committee for
their participation, including those who were able to join
online.
I want to thank our staff once again for pulling together a
terrific hearing with some terrific experts. So thank you to
our team.
And, to the stenographer, I am sorry that we talked so
fast.
So, without objection, all members will have 5 legislative
days within which to submit additional written questions for
the witnesses to the chair, which will be forwarded to the
witnesses for their response. I ask for witnesses to respond as
promptly as you are able.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the chair for inclusion in
the record.
And, with that, this hearing is adjourned. Thanks,
everybody.
[Whereupon, at 11:38 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]
