- PROFESSIONALIZING & ENRICHING THE CONGRESSIONAL INTERNSHIP AND FELLOWSHIP EXPERIENCE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROFESSIONALIZING & ENRICHING THE CONGRESSIONAL INTERNSHIP AND
FELLOWSHIP EXPERIENCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE MODERNIZATION OF CONGRESS

of the

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 29, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-03

__________

Printed for the use of the Select Committee on the Modernization of

Congress

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-294               WASHINGTON : 2022

SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE MODERNIZATION OF CONGRESS

DEREK KILMER, Washington, Chair

ZOE LOFGREN, California              WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina,
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri             Vice Chair
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              BOB LATTA, Ohio
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia             DAVE JOYCE, Ohio
GUY RESCHENTHALER, Pennsylvania
BETH VAN DUYNE, Texas

COMMITTEE STAFF

Yuri Beckelman, Staff Director
Derek Harley, Republican Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

OPENING STATEMENTS

Page

Chairman Derek Kilmer
Oral Statement.............................................     1
Vice Chairman William Timmons
Oral Statement.............................................     3

WITNESSES
panel 1

Dr. James Jones, Assistant Professor of African American Studies
and Sociology, Rutgers University-Newark
Oral Statement.............................................     4
Written Statement..........................................     7
Mr. Carlos Mark Vera, Co-Founder and Executive Director, Pay Our
Interns
Oral Statement.............................................     9
Written Statement..........................................    11
Ms. Audrey Henson, CEO and Founder, College to Congress
Oral Statement.............................................    14
Written Statement..........................................    17
Mr. Travis Moore, Founder and Executive Director, TechCongress
Oral Statement.............................................    19
Written Statement..........................................    22
Discussion.......................................................    41

panel 2

Ms. Emily Hashimoto, Director of Career Content, Idealist
Oral Statement.............................................    49
Written Statement..........................................    52
Ms. Amiko Matsumoto, Senior Executive Coach and Facilitator, The
Partnership for Public Service
Oral Statement.............................................    56
Written Statement..........................................    59
Mr. Rod Adams, US and Mexico Talent Acquisition and Onboarding
Leader, PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC)
Oral Statement.............................................    62
Written Statement..........................................    65
Discussion.......................................................    68

PROFESSIONALIZING AND ENRICHING THE CONGRESSIONAL INTERNSHIP AND
FELLOWSHIP EXPERIENCE

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 29, 2021

House of Representatives,
Select Committee on the
Modernization of Congress,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 2:02 p.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Derek Kilmer [chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Kilmer, Cleaver, Perlmutter,
Phillips, Timmons, Rodney Davis of Illinois, and Van Duyne.
The Chairman. The committee will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the committee at any time.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement. I promise I will try to keep it under 5 minutes.
Two weeks ago, we invited our colleagues to a Member Day
hearing so that they could share their ideas for how to make
Congress work better for the American people. We heard a lot of
great ideas. I think it is clear that there remains a lot of
opportunity for us to make some positive change over the next
20 months or so.
But one area that really stood out to the members of this
committee at our Member Day hearing was just the various
recommendations for improving staff capacity and diversity.
I would like to say this is a new issue--it is not. Our
colleagues raised similar concerns about staff recruitment and
retention and diversity in our Member Day hearing at the start
of the 116th Congress. And we listened to those concerns, and
we had several hearings and virtual discussions focused on
boosting staff capacity and diversity. In fact, the committee
made a number of strong recommendations in this space and I am
proud of the work we did.
But that work is far from finished. The staffing
recommendations we made in the 116th began to get at some of
the challenges staff face, but those challenges are many, and
for a bunch of institutional and political reasons they can be
hard to fix.
So the irony is that these issues should be easy, because
if there is anything we can all agree on it is that our staff
are dedicated public servants who deserve the kind of pay and
benefits that modern workplaces offer.
Our staff choose careers on the Hill despite the long hours
and lower pay compared to what they could make in the executive
branch or the private sector.
They have a relative lack of job security. Like the Members
of this Committee, they are on a 2-year contract with hundreds
of thousands of people making the decision about contract
extensions.
We know that Congress is fortunate, though, to attract such
talented and hardworking staff, and we also know that it is
hard to keep them here.
I am afraid it is going to keep getting harder unless we
figure out how to make Congress a place that not only attracts,
but holds on to talented staff.
So what does all this have to do with professionalizing and
enriching the congressional internship and fellowship
experience, which is the topic of our hearing today?
Well, the answer is everything. Everything because
internships are really the main pipeline to a career on the
Hill. So many staffers begin their Hill career as interns and
it is how you get a foot in the door and begin to work your way
up the staffing ladder.
I will confess, the summer after my freshman year of
college I served as an intern for a Member of Congress for whom
I have great affection, for whom I have tremendous respect, and
with whom during my internship I had very limited interaction.
In fact, the longest I got to spend with him was on my very
final day of my internship. He invited me into his office and
he said, ``I am now going to teach you the most important
lesson of your internship.''
And I leaned forward eager to get his lesson. And he said,
``There are people in this town who would kill to learn what I
am about to share with you.''
And I leaned further forward in my chair. Then he opened up
his desk drawer, he pulled out a cigar, and he said, ``I am
going to teach you how to light and smoke a cigar.''
So that was my internship experience. But, listen, we know
that many Hill careers do begin as internships. What we don't
know is how many potential Hill careers end because of
internships. And.
That is something we really need to consider. Through no
fault of their own, some interns end up with supervisors who
are poorly trained at managing, if they are trained at all.
There can be a lack of consistency to the work they are given
or a lack of clarity around professional goals. Others may feel
out of place because they don't see other interns who look like
them or who share common backgrounds and experience. And these
are deterrents to pursuing a career on the Hill.
They are also things we can and should fix. Congress needs
to figure out how to recruit interns who reflect the diversity
of our constituencies and then provide those interns with an
experience that makes them want to pursue a career on the Hill.
The same logic applies to fellows. Congress desperately
needs the expertise that fellows can provide, but the process
of getting them to the Hill can be exceedingly difficult. While
rules governing Hill fellowships are necessary, navigating them
shouldn't be a deterrent to serving.
So streamlining the process for placing fellows and
ensuring that their Hill experience is fulfilling will actually
help Congress retain fellows.
So I am looking forward to hearing what the experts who are
joining us today recommend. This committee is all about good
ideas for making Congress a more effective and efficient
institution. I think we can learn a lot by listening to people
who have done the research and figured out what it takes to
make internship and fellowship programs successful.
So with that, I would like to now invite Vice Chair Timmons
to share some opening remarks as well.
[The statement of The Chairman follows:]
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to both our panels of witnesses for being
here today to talk about staffing challenges on Capitol Hill.
A robust Capitol internship program is crucial to the
success of not only Members of Congress, but those young people
who make up that program. Many staff here in Congress and some
Members started out as interns on the Hill.
I actually was an intern in 2006. I was fortunate enough to
transition to a job as a staff assistant, and I was working for
then Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist. And when he decided not
to run for office, I actually left the Hill and moved back to
South Carolina because pay was just generally abysmal, and it
was hard to make ends meet.
So I know these challenges personally, as I am sure several
of you do as well.
The internship program has so much potential. It can do so
much good. But, unfortunately, for too many people internships
are an obstacle, not a stepping stone in their career.
For years, committees in Congress have talked about
staffing challenges. As far back as 1946, recommendations have
been made regarding congressional staffing. That just goes to
show how hard these institutional challenges are to fix.
Attracting talented and hardworking interns and retaining
qualified staff is a struggle for many offices on the Hill. I
am looking forward to hearing from our witnesses today on what
recommendations we can work towards to keep that talent here on
the Hill.
The committee made several recommendations on this topic in
the 116th Congress, and I welcome discussion on how we can
improve and build upon those recommendations in order to
attract and retain qualified and diverse interns and staff.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to this
hearing. And I will yield back. Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Timmons follows:]
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Vice Chair.
Today, we have two panels of witnesses. Our first panel
features four experts on congressional internships and
fellowships, and our second panel features three witnesses who
will share best practices and experiences from running
successful internship programs off the Hill.
Witnesses are reminded that your oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. And without objection, your written
statements will be made part of the record.
Our first witness is Dr. James Jones. Dr. Jones is an
assistant professor at Rutgers University and a leading expert
on congressional staff diversity. He has authored two
groundbreaking policy reports on racial representation among
congressional staff, including ``The Color of Congress,'' which
analyzed racial representation among House interns.
Dr. Jones is a former congressional intern. We are part of
a club.
Dr. Jones, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF DR. JAMES R. JONES, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, RUTGERS
UNIVERSITY-NEWARK, ON BEHALF OF HIMSELF; CARLOS VERA, CO-
FOUNDER AND EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, PAY OUR INTERNS; AUDREY HENSON,
FOUNDER, COLLEGE TO CONGRESS; AND TRAVIS MOORE, FOUNDER AND
DIRECTOR, TECHCONGRESS

STATEMENT OF JAMES R. JONES

Mr. Jones. Thank you so much.
Good afternoon, Chair Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons, and other
members of the committee. Thank you so much for the opportunity
to speak with you. As you mentioned, I am here because a paid
congressional internship changed my life.
As a CBCF intern, I observed the inner workings of
Congress, which provided me with an education on democratic
institution that far surpassed anything I learned as a
political science major at college.
At the same time, I witnessed the shortcomings of Congress
as an institution where people of color are underrepresented in
the congressional workplace overall and conspicuously absent
from top staff positions.
This work experience set me along a path to become a
sociologist, and I have spent my academic career studying how
inequality in the congressional workplace is created and
maintained and its effects on our democracy.
Today, I want to talk to you about one dimension of my
research and what I believe to be the most important reforms
that Congress can adopt to improve racial representation in its
workplace: collecting the data necessary to see and fight
inequality.
As you know, in 2018, Congress passed legislation to
provide House and Senate offices with allowances for paid
internships. I led a research project for Pay Our Interns that
investigated who congressional offices paid that first year.
Now, sadly, we found that these paid opportunities were
unequally distributed along racial lines. In our last report,
``Who Congress Pays,'' we showed that White students were
overrepresented amongst paid interns and Black and Latino
students were underrepresented.
For example, White students make up about 52 percent of the
national undergraduate population, but accounted for about 76
percent of paid interns. In contrast, Black and Latino students
make up about 15 and 20 percent of the undergraduate population
but accounted for 7 percent and about 8 percent of paid
interns, respectively.
Now, as you guys have mentioned, these findings are
disappointing for many reasons, but chief among them is that we
know that internships often lead to paid staff positions and
even often lead you to becoming a Member of Congress
themselves.
Paying congressional interns for the labor is an important
first step in strengthening congressional capacity. However, as
my research indicates, there is so much more work to be done.
There is a need for more funding to pay interns a living wage,
and congressional offices should adopt more diverse recruitment
practices.
However, increasing racial representation amongst
congressional interns is not just about resources and
recruitment. It is also about establishing and promoting
transparent hiring practices.
Let me explain how this all works together.
As I see it, what sets Congress apart from the many other
workplaces that are majority White is that congressional
workplaces are exempt from many Federal workplace laws.
These exemptions have made Congress a nontransparent and
insular work institution, and they are a key mechanism through
which racial inequality is created and maintained.
So, for example, Congress does not collect demographic data
about the racial and gender identities of its workers. Most
employers are required by Federal law to collect these data and
this is a process which is often a part of new employee
onboarding.
These demographic data have been an invaluable resource for
researchers like myself to investigate the presence of
discrimination. Put simply, these data help determine racial
and gender disparities in pay, promotion, and retention.
Now, unfortunately, Members of Congress have exempted
themselves from these demographic reporting requirements. This
lack of transparency makes the congressional workplace a black
box where racial inequality is allowed to fester undisturbed.
It also denies voters the ability to hold their elected
officials accountable for hiring staffers and interns who look
like them. As we know, in a democracy the perspectives of
voters is paramount. In order for them to make informed
decisions about how they are represented, they need
information. So this opacity is in a sense a threat to our
democratic process and an inclusive and multiracial democracy.
Last year, Representative Aguilar successfully proposed an
amendment to the legislative branch appropriations bill to
collect demographic data on all paid House interns as a method
of improving transparency and representation. This is a step in
the right direction.
However, Congress should go further. It needs to collect
and publish demographic data on paid and unpaid interns, as
well as fellows, to ensure that these work opportunities are
equitably distributed.
Data collection should include information about their race
and their gender, as well as other important factors, like
socioeconomic status, in order to identify if those who are
most economically disadvantaged are able to work in the
People's House.
Now, to be sure, these data alone will not solve the
problem of an unrepresented class of interns and fellows.
However, we cannot address this vexing democratic dilemma
without it. This information is vital for understanding the
scope of the problem, setting benchmarks, and measuring
progress.
It matters who works in the Halls of Congress. It is often
said that today's interns are tomorrow's leaders. Today, the
highest ranking women in government, Speaker of the House Nancy
Pelosi and Vice President Kamala Harris, both began their
political careers as congressional interns.
It is vital that Congress does everything possible to
ensure that the leaders of tomorrow reflect the diversity of
this country. To do this, Congress must adopt diverse and
transparent hiring practices.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Jones follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Jones.
Our second witness is Carlos Vera. Mr. Vera is the co-
founder and current executive director of Pay Our Interns.
Originally from Colombia, Carlos was raised in California,
but moved to Washington, D.C., to attend American University.
While at AU, Carlos was an unpaid intern at the White House,
the European Parliament, and the House of Representatives.
Carlos' efforts on Capitol Hill led him to be named a
Forbes 30 Under 30 Honoree, an Echoing Green Fellow, a
Camelback Ventures Fellow, a Top 20 Changemaker by NBC Latino,
and an Aspen Ideas Fellow.
Mr. Vera, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF CARLOS VERA

Mr. Vera. Chairman Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons, members of
the Select Committee, thank you so much for inviting me to
testify on this important topic.
My name is Carlos Vera, and I am not only the ED of Pay Our
Interns, but I am also a former unpaid House intern myself.
Pay Our Interns is all about creating equitable pathways so
that we have institutions that reflect our great Nation. The
recent report we released alongside Dr. Jones shows that there
is much more work to be done.
Students who attend private universities are
disproportionately overrepresented compared to those who go to
public schools. We found virtually zero students who attend
community colleges.
And, of course, the racial demographics need to improve,
and that is because equity needs to be put at the center of
this program.
With that being said, Congress should be proud of how far
along it has come. In 2017, when Pay Our Interns released our
report, it showed that less than 10 percent of House offices
offered paid internships. That number now is over 90 percent.
Here are some recommendations that we believe will
strengthen the program.
The fund for interns needs to increase. Our data shows that
the average stipend for a House intern is about $1,600 for a
full internship. That simply is not enough to live and intern
in D.C.
Thankfully, there is effort by Representatives Adam Smith
and Seth Moulton that would increase the fund to $40,000. This
will allow for stipends to increase closer to $15 an hour.
Additionally, the internship fund not only is accessible to
personal offices, but also leadership offices. Unfortunately,
committees do not have dedicated funding to pay their interns.
And we know that some of the most memorable, enriching ones
are in committees. So there is an effort being rep by Darren
Soto that would provide $70,000 for each committee to pay
interns and fellows.
We also believe that you need to broaden recruitment. The
reason why top schools and those in D.C. are overrepresented in
the intern population is because those schools have large
endowments, they have resources, they have buildings and staff
that basically make sure that their students get these
opportunities.
State schools, community colleges, and MSIs simply cannot
compete. That is why we believe that it is important, you know,
look at your district. If you have a community college, if you
have a Tribal college, reach out, partner with the career
center, with the political science department. Do a quick 20,
30-minute webinar. That will make a huge difference.
And beyond that, it is also about equitable access and
transparency. I was at a college in Wisconsin encouraging
students to apply and one of them got on the website of their
Member and they raised their hand and they showed their phone,
and the Member's website stated that all their internships were
unpaid, even though I personally knew that they did pay some
interns.
Believe it or not, that is a huge deterrent for a lot of
folks. The single factor in deciding whether they apply or not
is, ``Can I afford to come to D.C.?''
So we highly encourage offices, you know, you don't have to
put how much money, because I get that it fluctuates, but at
least putting that a stipend is available really incentivizes
working class youth to apply for these positions, especially
since our study showed that 90 percent of House offices either
don't mention pay or mention all internships are unpaid.
Additionally, we believe in expanding remote access.
Current House rules only allow for interns to telework during
pandemics and other emergencies. We believe it should be
permanent. Representatives Jayapal and Omar are leading the
push to make this permanent, and this will allow folks that
could intern from their home in Idaho, Texas, or wherever in
the country.
We believe that the committee should look at creating an
intern support office. Once a fund was created over 80 offices
reached out for help, because we know a lot of intern
coordinators are just a year older than interns and have other
responsibilities. By having an office dedicated to this, it
could really be a game-changer.
The last one is looking at housing. There is an empty
dormitory building used for the now defunct House page program.
It is no longer being used and Congress should consider using
that for working class youth.
And most importantly, looking at increasing the MRA. Our
work will be futile if interns become staffers and they have to
quit because they can't afford to live in D.C.
And, lastly I am very encouraged because in a time of deep
polarization, the fact that Republicans and Democrats have come
together to work on this gives me hope.
Thank you very much.
[The statement of Mr. Vera follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Vera.
Next, we will hear from Audrey Henson. Ms. Henson founded
College to Congress in 2016, a nonprofit dedicated to creating
a more diverse, inclusive, and effective Congress by empowering
the next generation of public servants after being inspired by
her experience landing and navigating her first congressional
internship.
A Pell Grant student, Ms. Henson had to work two part-time
jobs and take out student loans to afford the opportunity to
intern for free in Congress and later became a full-time
staffer.
College to Congress is disrupting the pipeline of
congressional staff and systematically changing the way our
laws are written by helping students from rural, low income,
and disadvantaged backgrounds secure full-time internships in
Congress and covering the actual cost of an unpaid internship.
Ms. Henson, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF AUDREY HENSON

Ms. Henson. Thank you, and good afternoon, Chairman Kilmer,
Vice Chairman Timmons, members of the committee staff, and, of
course, good afternoon, interns. Thank you for having me back
here today to provide some recommendations on how we can
improve congressional internships.
My name is Audrey Henson, and I am the founder and CEO of
College to Congress, a nonprofit I started in 2016 to
systemically change Congress by empowering a diverse,
inclusive, and effective generation of public servants.
I am here before you today to deliver some innovative and
out-of-the-box solutions that I think Congress can adopt pretty
quickly to start to fix this problem that, quite honestly, is
having a profound negative effect not only in your offices here
in Washington, but also back home in your districts.
As we all know and have agreed today, internship
opportunities are the hallmark of a Member of Congress' tenure.
We know that a congressional internship often leads to a job on
the Hill, a career in public service, and at times can inspire
a run for a future political office.
But what about the vast majority of interns who end up
going back home to the district?
Although that internship impacted that one student, it
shouldn't have ended there. The knowledge and the skills that
they learned in our Nation's leading institution should have an
exponential ripple effect inspiring dozens, if not hundreds, to
become more civically engaged and have a more favorable view on
Congress.
To encourage this outcome, we must ensure that internships
are meaningful, that they are engaging, that they are
overwhelmingly a positive experience. And you are going to get
to do that by guaranteeing that interns have the training they
need to succeed and streamlining the application process.
To guarantee that interns are adequately trained and to
succeed on day one of that internship and make sure it is right
for them, we are recommending a public-private partnership with
College to Congress, so that we can provide training and
resources before they even arrive in Washington.
Each office has the sole responsibility of shaping their
own internship programs and equipping interns with skills that
lead to future professional and personal success. But what if
that office is unable to provide that world-class experience we
all strive for?
We all know what it is like to have an intern coordinator
who has way more work than they have time to do, maybe it is
approps season and the leg staff doesn't have much one-on-one
time.
Well, that is why we think Congress desperately needs to
standardize training for all incoming interns before they even
arrive.
So far, College to Congress has trained more than 800
prospective interns on our own curriculum, C2C-University. Our
coursework teaches interns the ins and outs of Congress,
everything from answering the phones to even introducing
legislation, so that they are ready to serve your office and
your constituents on their very first day.
C2C-University prepares them for a successful and
meaningful experience and helps students decide beforehand if
they actually want to invest their career on Capitol Hill and
spend their summer--and sometimes even their savings--trying to
figure out what they want to do with their life.
As you can imagine, training them beforehand is going to
have the added benefit of creating a better experience and
match with your office as well.
We recommend that Congress engages in a public-private
partnership with College to Congress to equip prospective and
current interns with the skills they need to be successful in
your office and beyond.
So, much like the actual internship program, the
application process is also a logistical nightmare for students
and offices. Each office has a different requirement and dates
that vary from office to office, making it challenging to find
the right fit.
One straightforward solution to help fix this problem would
be for the House to adopt a standard application that all
offices would use that makes it more accessible as well for
interns to apply and to figure out where they should go intern.
This common application would ask basic demographic
questions, include written answers, like why they want to
intern, what policy issues they are interested in, and what
leadership management style they prefer.
A standard application ensures the interns are matched with
the right offices and they participate in the most meaningful
opportunities available. It also streamlines the process of you
finding your constituents who are interested in coming up and
interning.
Congressional districts, your office up here, would all
benefit from this common application.
Members of Congress have an obligation to their
constituents to provide a world-class opportunity that benefits
not only their office, but also their communities back home. An
internship can serve as a gateway to a career on Capitol Hill.
But for those who take their talents elsewhere, we should
strive to leave a lasting impact that shapes the future of so
many more that don't make it to Capitol Hill.
We all agree that interns deserve to be paid more and that
we should expand the availability of remote internships. But
what good does that do if they aren't meaningful?
We at College to Congress strongly believe that Congress
can provide these meaningful opportunities--with relative
ease--by first creating this public-private partnership with
us. Second, creating a common application that the House
offices all use. And third, ensuring that every opportunity is
truly meaningful.
I am more than happy to dig into your questions and provide
more detail on how this can be achieved, and, of course,
partner with your offices to ensure that you are providing
meaningful opportunities that are sure to last a lifetime and
not just a semester.
Thank you.
[The statement of Audrey Henson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Henson.
And our final witness on this panel is Travis Moore,
founder and director of TechCongress. Previously, Mr. Moore was
the legislative director for Representative Henry Waxman, the
former chairman and ranking member of the Energy and Commerce
Committee, who had jurisdiction over wide-ranging matters of
technology policymaking.
He has launched a number of programs to build human capital
and improve technological capacity inside and outside of
Congress, including the first congressional digital
communications training program in Congress.
Mr. Moore, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TRAVIS MOORE

Mr. Moore. Wonderful.
Well, thank you, Chairman Kilmer, Vice Chairman Timmons,
and esteemed members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today.
I am the founder of TechCongress, and we are a startup
nonprofit placing computer scientists, engineers, and other
technologists as policy advisers to Members of Congress through
our Congressional Innovation Fellowships.
Technology is reshaping society--and Congress and its
work--in fundamental ways and with increasing speed. But many
of our brightest and most creative problem solvers, with hugely
relevant tech and national security experience, who want to
serve their country in Congress, simply can't make it through
the front door of Capitol Hill.
I founded TechCongress because I needed it when I was a
staffer. In 2013, the House was voting on the Cyber
Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act. This was a tough vote
for my then boss, Representative Henry Waxman, and in order to
make an informed vote recommendation, I was trying to
understand a few technical concepts. What is personally
identifiable information? What did it mean to anonymize data?
I am sure you and all of your staffs have been in that
exact situation. You have a tough vote in front of you and you
are trying to understand the concept so that you can make the
best decision.
Well, I searched for staff within Congress that could help
me walk through my questions. But I found that there weren't
staff on Capitol Hill with the necessary tech expertise to help
me. As a result, I went outside the building to a tech company
lobbyist for advice.
And that is because, out of the 3,500 legislative staff
serving in Congress, at my best estimate there are fewer than
20 with meaningful training and backgrounds in technology.
Now why is that?
It is not for lack of supply. We have had 865 technologists
apply for our programs over the last year, some of whom were
willing to take six-figure pay cuts to work in Congress.
And, importantly, these are candidates that come from
communities vastly underrepresented in Congress, including
underrepresented people of color, women, and veterans. In fact,
nearly 25 percent of our fellows to date are veterans, over 43
percent are people of color, which I am extraordinarily proud
of.
We are the first organization in Washington or politics to
offer a referral award for women, underrepresented people of
color, and veterans to join our program.
But the core staffing challenge for Capitol Hill is that
the pipeline that feeds staffing roles have not evolved to meet
the needs of the institution and the country. If you are a
technologist with professional experience who wants to serve
your country in Congress, there is no clear entryway for you.
Fellowships can help solve that problem, however. And here
is the good news, we are making progress on building tech
capacity in Congress while supporting the incredibly
hardworking and underresourced staff on Capitol Hill.
First, Congress is hiring technical staff, including a
number of our alumni. We are proud to see this incremental
progress and we need much more.
Second, Congress is creating tech talent pipelines.
Senators Cotton and Shaheen offered the Technology National
Security Fellowship program as part of the Defense
Authorization in 2020. This fellowship is a joint program
between DOD and Congress and the first cohort of recent STEM
grads will arrive on Capitol Hill this fall.
Third, we had a team of fellows that were able to pilot the
bipartisan proposal from Leader Hoyer and Leader McCarthy for a
Congressional Digital Service on this very committee, and we
are so, so grateful for your hosting of our team.
And, fourth, fellowships are building bipartisan working
relationships. We have had great ideological diversity in our
program. Fellows end up being frequent collaborators in an
institution where, let's be frank, bipartisan relationships are
increasingly on the wane.
But we can do more, and I would like to highlight few
recommendations for how Congress can better invest in and
support fellowship programs.
First, Congress should expand the two fellowship programs
it already funds and operates, the Technology and National
Security Fellowship and the Wounded Warrior Fellowship Program.
Because so many veterans have significant technical expertise
from their time in military service, expanding these programs
would have the dual benefit of meeting the need for both
national security and technical talent.
In addition, Congress should encourage other committees,
including Energy and Commerce and Veterans' Affairs, to follow
the lead of HASC and SASC and create parallel fellowship
program pipelines for STEM grads to enter Congress and those
agencies.
And finally, Congress should improve how it supports
fellowship programs, including by creating a central
registration system for fellows and detailees, developing
training opportunities with CRS and the new Staff Academy,
creating opportunities to network and gather, like exists for
summer interns, and working with OPM to help Presidential
Management Fellows learn about opportunities to serve in
Congress.
So thank you for having me and for all the hard work of the
committee to date, and I look forward to questions.
[The statement of Mr. Moore follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Moore. And way to stick the
landing on the 5 minutes.
We are now going to move to questions. The order I have is
myself, and then Vice Chair Timmons, then Mr. Cleaver, then Mr.
Davis, then Mr. Perlmutter, and then Mr. Phillips. And then we
will slot folks in if they show up afterwards.
So let me start by just recognizing myself for 5 minutes. I
want to start with Mr. Vera.
Your report found that 92.5 percent of Representatives use
the allowance that is provided to pay interns. This isn't
coming out of a Member's budget. So why do you think that
number isn't 100 percent?
In doing the research for your reports on Hill internships,
were you able to discern why some personal offices still have
unpaid internships? And what explanation do offices have for
that?
Mr. Vera. Chairman, you bring up a great point. The way
that appropriators created this fund was separate from the MRA.
You use it. It doesn't count against it. It doesn't count
against your cap. So there really is no reason not to use it.
What we have noticed is, I think one is that old belief of,
``Oh, my constituents will be proud that I sent some money back
to the Treasury,'' I guess, which really doesn't make sense.
Or the second I think is some offices don't really know how
to access it or just have a lot of questions around it, which I
think kind of goes to support.
And then I think third is, it is a minority, but some
offices don't really see it as valuable. And we are obviously
trying to change that.
The Chairman. You think there are recommendations this
committee could make to get that number a little closer to 100
percent?
Mr. Vera. Well, I think it wouldn't hurt, because I know
that the CAO is tracking by quarter how much each office is
using, reaching out and kind of trying to get a sort of
discussion as to why they are not using it. Because, like you
said, there really is no reason not to use it.
The Chairman. Mr. Moore, I wanted to follow up with you as
well.
So did the fellows in your program by and large go on to
careers in Congress? And can you discuss just some of the
barriers they may run into when trying to start their career in
Congress after a fellowship?
Mr. Moore. Sure, yeah.
So we explicitly select for folks that do want to start
their careers in Congress. And, again, there are hundreds and
hundreds of folks coming from Silicon Valley or the tech
industry that want to do this work and it is a question of
creating a pathway for them.
Most want to stay, but it is hard. I mean, Congress is an
incredibly competitive workplace.
I will say what makes it harder are some of the--Congress
is sort of unique in how untransparent it is about some of its
hiring. I was looking at the House job board yesterday and read
a position that said something like: Senior Democrat is seeking
highly energetic, motivated, organized staffer.
In no other world or industry, say, you are Google, are you
going to post: Tech company looking for engineer to do
engineering roles. We need more transparency in the hiring
process.
And I do think that there are other things that Congress
could do, like trainings through the Staff Academy, gatherings
modeled on the summer intern series, that would help with
fellows.
The Chairman. I want to ask the same question that I asked
to Mr. Vera, though, Travis. So particularly with regard to the
posting that you shared, so if you are this committee, are
there particular recommendations that we could make to address
this?
Mr. Moore. So I would say I don't know whether you can
mandate that Members name the Member that they are hiring for
when they are introducing job postings. I think that would
help.
I saw on our Slack yesterday, around a specific job, a
dozen messages for folks trying to just figure out which Member
was hiring for a tech staffer. So I think that is one.
I think having a centralized job board that is independent
of party. I know each caucus has their own job board, but you
go to House.gov in the Clerk's Office, it is not there. The
Clerk's Office, that website says, call the clerk or show up to
the Ford Building if you want a list of recent vacancies.
And I also think investing in H.R. software that is
available to all of your teams that helps you sort through
applications. I know when we got applications for roles, we get
500 applications. You need the tools to help you sort through
those. Those are things that the institution could invest in
and make available to offices.
The Chairman. Terrific.
Let me yield back the remainder of my time.
Vice Chair Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, Mr. Vera, we are updating our website right now to
say that we offer competitive intern pay. I looked on our
website and I, literally, I was like, well, this is an easy
fix. So thank you for that. It is getting updated right now.
I also wanted to ask you, so all these numbers are hard to
get because I guess there is an assumption that interns are
working 40 hours a week, maybe 40-plus on a full session week,
or maybe less on weeks that we are not in session. And then
obviously the pandemic creates some challenges because nobody
is in the office.
So you referenced a number, 92 percent were using the fund
for interns in D.C., and you referenced a quarter system. What
quarter was that?
Mr. Vera. So what we looked at was payroll records from
July to September of 2019. We did not do last year because of
the pandemic. And we did not, we have got to be fair to
Members, because we knew that there were definitely some
hiccups there.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you.
And I think, and this is to Dr. Jones' point, I mean, we
really don't have good metrics for a lot of these things. We
don't have good ways to track it.
I mean, if you are paying somebody 16--and I have been
texting with my chief of staff and my deputy chief of staff
about this, because, I have to admit, I do defer to them on a
lot of this--but if you are paying them $1,600, $1,800 a month
but they are not working 40 hours a week, there is kind of this
question there.
And then, I mean, I don't know. It is very complicated.
So I guess a standardized approach to this to where it is
not a bulk pay, if we went hourly. But, again, that is not how
it is done right now. So I guess there is some standardization
so we are all using the same kind of language about this.
And, Dr. Jones, to your point, I mean, I can't believe that
we in 2021 are not tracking diversity data as it relates to
hirings and internship.
The methodology--I know that it was very painstaking to
actually create the data that you are referencing--but the
methodology is still imperfect.
So I guess the question becomes, maybe instead of creating
the transparency that you are referencing--and I would be in
favor of it, but I can understand certain people might not--but
what do you think about anonymizing it to where we are more
talking about Congress as a whole as opposed to getting
something that a Member could potentially have a ``gotcha''
moment?
Maybe an easier thing to do would be to anonymize the data
just so we can say the House as a whole. What are your thoughts
on that?
Mr. Jones. Yeah. So I think this is a good point. This is
actually the way that I think about this personally, because I
actually think it is an institutional problem. It is not one
particular Member of Congress.
And so I think there are various ways in which you could
present the data. But I think the question is--I think we have
a lot of questions. And as researchers, there is a lot we
actually just don't know because of this data.
So if I can go back to your point that you just brought up,
just coming up with these figures. So one is us getting this
data that is not available, but then it is using the data that
the House and the Senate does provide. And it is really a
little bit complicated. It is all about how staff are paid and
this data is reported.
So, for instance, we looked at that first year the House
implemented this policy from April 2019 to September. And so
that is where you get our averages about the average stipend.
So in the House, I believe, it was around $1,600, and that is
for about 6 weeks.
Now, to get that, what the House reports is the intern's
first and last names, their office, and their pay. So there is
this wide variation.
And in some instances the data is actually really bad
because sometimes an office will input that a large chunk of
money for just one day of work or one week of work. And so it
is this really complicated and not standardized way of how
employees are being paid.
And we don't know how many hours. So this is just on a
length of time on that question.
Mr. Timmons. I am with you. Let me finish up. I don't want
to go over my time.
I feel like there might be an opportunity to use technology
to create a portal where we can standardize all this
information, gather the data, and maybe even do some more
standardized onboarding.
I mean, I know every office has to deal with onboarding. So
if there was a portal that we put all of this information into
and then we could learn from it and it could be more
instructive of what policies we need going forward that may be
helpful.
Mr. Chair, I am not going to go over. I yield back. Thank
you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chair Timmons.
Next up, Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Vice Chairman.
Thank you very much.
I want to follow the rules. Perlmutter and Davis don't have
on ties. I think--I mean, that is probably interfering with our
ability to get interns. But I will leave that to the two people
in charge and proceed.
Thank you for being here, all of the witnesses today, and
you made some very interesting comments.
One of the things I want to follow up on--I think it was
Mr. Vera who may have said this--about 12 years ago my daughter
was interning in Kit Bond's office on the Senate side. She
stayed at the Johnson dorm, I think it was called Johnson, and
it cost $800 a month.
So my wife and I actually had to pay for her to be an
intern, $800 a month for the rent, and then we had to pay for
her living costs. And I think that that kind of thing is
probably discouraging people from wanting to do it unless they
come from families that are well off, and most of them are not.
I am going to ask you a question. What amount of money, Ms.
Henson, all of you, Mr. Vera, Mr. Moore, what amount of money
do you think would be acceptable and actually realistic for an
intern to be in Washington each month? I know it will be a
guess, but I want to find out how close I am thinking to what
reality is.
Ms. Henson. It is a great question, Congressman.
When we have looked at the last 4 years and what we have to
provide to support our interns, it ends up being about $16,000,
$1,700 a month. You have to take into account D.C. rent,
professional clothing, food, their flight to and from
Washington.
That can break down a couple different ways. I think one of
the easiest places to start is to match D.C. minimum wage. They
are working in D.C. and they are not even making the D.C.
minimum wage here.
And so that could be one easy place to just start right
away.
Mr. Cleaver. Yeah, that is really embarrassing. I mean, we
are in the District and not even honoring the law.
Anybody else with something that would be dramatically
different?
Mr. Jones. I would go around almost about $5,000. And this
is what we talked about in our report, ``Who Congress Pays.''
Thinking about just living expenses, housing, I think $800 is
actually pretty cheap in D.C. It is the 10th most expensive
metropolitan area.
But I think we can look at other programs, programs like
the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation or the Congressional
Hispanic Institute.
So for their internship programs in the summer, which are
about 6 to 8 weeks, they are paying a stipend of about $3,000
to $3,500. They are also providing housing for free. So that
would get you to the $5,000 mark. We are also thinking about
transportation to and from D.C.
And also we are thinking about socioeconomic status. When I
first interned in Congress, I had to buy a whole bunch of suits
because I had never worked in a professional workplace ever. So
I think we also think about just the different costs that
interns have to incur to do this work.
One last point. Often, if they want to count this towards
college, the college will charge them as college credit. So
there is another cost upon doing this internship.
Mr. Cleaver. We also had to--we operated a full-time
school. And Congressman Davis may even know some of the costs.
We had to run a school for the interns, I mean, like a full-
time school with credits and so forth. So the cost probably
went up significantly. But they were not paid.
One final question, Mr. Chairman, and that is, the interns
stayed in the building. I know it was empty last year. And it
would seem to me that if we are continuing to allow that
building to just sit there, we are destroying the building by
not using it.
So whatever we recommend, I think it has to include that
building, if for no other reason than being good stewards of
the taxpayer's dollars.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cleaver.
I am not sure if anyone wants to respond to Mr. Cleaver's
final point there.
Mr. Vera. I was just going to say that we did a survey to
interns asking what is the number one thing they care about. It
wasn't even pay. Pay was second. It was housing. And I really
think, to your point, if you are using that building, it could
really be a game-changer, because too many people are taking
out student loans to do public service internships, and that is
just ridiculous.
Mr. Cleaver. Yeah. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cleaver.
Next up, Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. Hey, thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you, Mr. Perlmutter, for joining me in the
Tieless Caucus today.
Always great to see my good buddy Emanuel, too.
Hey, look, what is great about this committee is we want to
work together. And I think a lot of great recommendations.
And I am so glad, Carlos, you mentioned we are actually
moving in the right direction when it comes to Congress and
internship opportunities. Up until a few years ago, and up
until this committee started talking even further about
congressional internships, you had to take paid interns out of
your MRA and out of your head count that we are limited to.
I mean, there are ideas that we ought to be able to put
together to make sure that there could be D.C.-based interns,
district-based interns. The cost of living, clearly, is much
different in Washington, D.C., than it is in one of my district
offices. And we have to also take that into consideration.
But the elephant in the room right now that no one is
talking about is, we could have all these great ideas about
internships, we could have all this great knowledge that a lot
of us have in being able to work at a younger age in and around
Washington, D.C., getting that experience--with Derek, I don't
know if you still smoke cigars after you learned from your
former boss as an intern.
But you know what? We don't have D.C. open right now. No
intern in Washington, D.C., or in our district office is
getting the same experience that every one of us and all of you
are talking about right now. Not one.
So we have got to also lead on this committee about getting
our Congress reopened again. There is absolutely zero need to
open a place of housing for interns right now when we don't
even have Congress open again. We don't have them giving tours,
we don't have them talking about what it is like to work in and
around this institution, because they are not there, visitors
aren't there.
So we would like your help in actually working to make sure
that we can get some of these plans put in place before interns
come back onto campus so that we are ready to hit the ground
running when they do. But unless the majority works with this
committee, works with us to be able to find a plan to reopen
the campus, we may be getting ahead of ourselves.
And, frankly, I think a lot of the testimony reveals that
the status that we are in right now is not helpful to getting
those experiences that many need to be able to make this a
career.
Good news is, we have got a lot of opportunity here with
student loan repayment programs that have actually kept people
in Washington, D.C. I am open ears to suggestions about
increases to head count, increases to off-MRA funds available
for interns. But at the same time, we also can't price
ourselves out of opportunities that would work in and around
our district.
I am interested to hear what any of the witnesses have to
say about the current COVID status we are in in Washington
right now and how that would impact any of your ideas.
Ms. Henson. Congressman, I appreciate this question so
much, because when I was speaking about the meaningfulness of
internships, this is exactly why.
Pre-COVID, as you know, you are a former staffer, interns
were constituent facing. They were doing tours. They were
answering phone calls. They were working in the front office.
And while we are proud and happy to have helped 226 offices
start virtual internships, and we do want to keep them because
it keeps Congress accessible, we don't want that to be the
status quo.
Because what we are hearing from both these offices and
these internships is it is not as meaningful. They are not
learning as much. They are not able to interact with the
Member. They are not able to interact with staff.
And if we want to be able to make sure, again, that this
internship has a lasting impact, that they are going to go back
to their district, say great things about Congress, say great
things about their time with you, then we need to get them here
and show them how it operates.
I think we can all agree there is an energy about Capitol
Hill and about our unique perspective to all want to work
together to change certain policy issues to help America, and
we are not seeing that play out virtually.
So I agree we need to find a way to open, to safely bring
interns back, and to ensure that they are doing some sort of
capstone program. So they need something they can walk away
with.
Maybe it is communications focused, where they get to draft
a press release or a tweet. It could be policy focused, where
they do a deep dive on an issue that is unique to your
district. It could even be operations focused. We all know
schedulers and chiefs make everything run on time.
So we would encourage those two things. Reopen, do it in a
safe way, but let's also make sure that we have some sort of
capstone project the intern can walk away and use to get hired
in the next job and say, ``This is what I did when I got to
intern in Congress.''
Mr. Davis. Mr. Chair, I think I am out of time. But I agree
with everything you said. And I appreciate the witnesses.
Thanks for the opportunity to be on.
Lastly, I think it is imperative, too, that part of this
process is we get back to our committees. And instead of doing
these virtually, let's get back to doing face-to-face and
giving people and future interns the opportunities they
deserve.
So I yield back no time that I have, Derek.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
Next up, Mr. Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Timmons, and to our witnesses.
I love this hearing because I am one of those who would
never be a Member of Congress now if I wasn't an intern for
Senator Patrick Leahy back in 1989, 30 years ago, which either
makes him really old or me really young. So I am going to go
with the latter today.
But, actually, this is too important. There we go. Just in
case anybody was going to do a little bit of due diligence on
me.
But a lot has changed since 1989 and a lot hasn't. Interns
are still underpaid, underdeveloped. And while I think it is
fair to say that they surely represent the geographic and
political diversity of the country, they do not reflect the
economic and racial diversity of the country.
Mr. Vera, I would love to start with you, and two
questions. How can we be more proactive and intentional about
identifying and recruiting high-potential interns from around
the country? And if you could answer that, along with a little
bit more information about your House intern resource office?
My colleagues and I are intrigued by that and would love to
learn a little bit more.
Mr. Vera. Thank you, Representative Phillips.
Actually, we met with Chairman Leahy 2 years ago, and he
has been paying interns, I think, since the 1970s. And over, I
think, half of his staff currently started off as his interns,
which I think says a lot about him.
And then to your second point, a lot of it is kind of like
what I said about reaching out to community colleges and
minority-serving institutions and HBCUs in your district. There
is also a society for Black political scientists association.
There are all these organizations that you can really reach out
to and they get excited about these opportunities.
The problem we have right now is many offices are over--
there is a lot going on. Staff have a lot to do. And what
happens is, you just put it on your website, maybe you send it
to one or two colleges, and you have these schools, like Ivy
Leagues and everything, they have the resources, and they make
sure that their students apply, get their resume, and all that.
Meanwhile, I spoke at an HBCU in Texas, and after I spoke
to the students the director came up to me and he said, ``Do
you want to know how many staff I have?'' I said, ``I don't
know. Five or 10?'' He said, ``You are looking at him.'' He
said, ``I have 9,000 students.''
The majority are first generation, Pell Grant recipients.
Their parents don't have those networks. And they are going to
a school that can't give them the resources to compete with a
Harvard or Stanford.
So I really do think it is doing that intentional outreach
to these specific schools and organizations.
Mr. Phillips. Can you talk a little more about your House
intern resource office?
Mr. Vera. Yes. Apologies for that.
So this idea has been going around for I think for a minute
because I don't think it is all about, simply about money and,
you know, resources. I really do think that, you know, it comes
down to a lot of offices have a lot of questions about
internships, and you can get really into like the minutia of
it.
And just having that, you know, small office, maybe two,
three people that folks can reach out to, right? Because right
now it is House Admin, and they themselves have a lot of work
to do, you know. And I think that is part of the reason why
there is a delay for this whole program, right? Like, the funds
were supposed to be available January 2019. They weren't
available until almost April of that year.
So just having that office--I believe Rep. Tony Cardenas is
the one that really is thinking about this. You have folks from
Demand Progress that came up also with this idea. But I just
think having that group, kind of like that diverse inclusion
office, that could just be there to answer any questions.
So one quick example: A lot of offices don't know that if
you pay an intern at least $100 a month, they are considered an
employee and can benefit from travel benefits. That is a game-
changer for a lot of people. So yeah.
Mr. Phillips. I appreciate it. And by the way, I am going
to have to go check my 1989 tax return and see if Senator Leahy
paid me. If he did, it was about $3 a week. Nonetheless, thank
you.
Dr. Jones, I don't have much time left. Maybe quickly, if
you could, talk about the idea a silver lining of COVID was our
ability in my office to attract a lot more interns who never
would have been able to come to Washington, surely, because of
the remote and virtual context.
Do you think that is something that we should be thinking
about and institutionalizing as we move forward, to broaden our
reach and for those who can't physically make it to Washington
to include them as well?
Mr. Jones. Yes. I mean, you know, as someone who has worked
in Washington, I think there is something magic about being in
the buildings. But I think we should work on a variety of ways
of making Congress accessible, right?
So, you know, I worked in my district office as well, and,
you know, I learned firsthand what it means to do constituent
services, right? I think there are some challenges to remote
learning. And so I personally wouldn't recommend that in the
long term without Congress doing the necessary work to make
sure that these internships are of as high quality as they
would get in person.
And just if I could add one more thing, mention what Rep.
Davis said about bringing people back to Capitol Hill, is that
I think there is definitely a need about data transparency, as
I was talking about, but also just measuring-if interns are
satisfied with their internships, if they are learning.
And this is not something that, you know, needs to be
reported to the public, but this could be something that is
held internal data with an intern office or with a diversity
like inclusion office. And you could actually incentivize
offices who perform really well on these indexes of, you know,
providing a high quality internship.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you. I know I am out of time. I was
going to ask Audrey about bipartisanship, but I am going to
have to move on. Thanks, everybody.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
Unless any of my colleagues have any further questions for
this first panel--I don't see anyone waving at me or proposing
landing the plane--we will thank this panel of witnesses. Thank
you all for sharing your time and your insights.
And we will proceed to our second panel if we can get them
elevated onto the zoom.
So our first witness of our second panel is Emily
Hashimoto, director of career content at Idealist.org. Ms.
Hashimoto came to Idealist in 2012 with a background in
political campaigns, fundraising, advocacy, and higher
education. She oversees the way Idealist supports organizations
and helps to create new tools that support the nonprofit sector
as a whole.
Ms. Hashimoto, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
share your testimony.

STATEMENTS OF EMILY HASHIMOTO, DIRECTOR OF CAREER CONTENT,
IDEALIST; AMIKO MATSUMOTO, SENIOR EXECUTIVE COACH AND
FACILITATOR, THE PARTNERSHIP FOR PUBLIC SERVICE; AND RODERICK
ADAMS, U.S. AND MEXICO TALENT ACQUISITION AND ONBOARDING
LEADER, PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (PWC)

STATEMENT OF EMILY HASHIMOTO

Ms. Hashimoto. Thank you. Chair Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons,
and members of the Select Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to speak with you today.
Again, my name is Emily Hashimoto, and I work at Idealist,
a nonprofit organization founded in 1995 to inspire, connect,
and support the social impact sector.
Our primary platform, Idealist.org, hosts jobs,
internships, and volunteer opportunities posted by over 100,000
nonprofit organizations and government agencies. We serve over
1 million members with a wide range of professional experience
and interests. Our community is also racially diverse, with 20
percent of users identifying as Asian, 20 percent identifying
as Black, and 12 percent identifying as Hispanic.
As the committee seeks to improve the quality of
congressional internships, what I share today is the cumulative
wisdom of over two decades of devoted concentration on
attracting top talent, what makes work meaningful, and how to
inspire others to do their absolute best.
So our first recommendation is drafting a compelling
internship listing. Finding great interns starts with a great
listing. We recommend that hiring managers make explicit where
the intern will physically do their work, whether it is in
person, remote for now, permanently remote, and so forth. This
is particularly important, of course, in this time of pandemic.
We also recommend including a description of what interns
can expect to get out of this educational experience, like
participation in an important event or credit for contributing
to a major project.
We recommend only including role requirements in the
listing. As you may know, potential candidates may take
themselves out of the running, especially Black, indigenous,
and other people of color, women and other traditionally
marginalized groups, if they have, for example, everything a
listing asks for except one thing that could be taught on the
job. Candidate pools are typically larger, richer, and more
diverse when using this tactic.
And we also recommend requesting a sample task as a part of
the application, like answering an email from a fictional
constituent. This is a great tool in learning very quickly
which candidates are the most qualified and engaged.
Next, we recommend diversifying advertisement. To reach a
larger audience and further diversify the candidate pool, we
recommend sharing opportunities broadly and outside of
traditional networks. So posting on our site, for example, at
Idealist.org, or internships.com, or developing relationships
with local colleges and universities.
Next, and this is a big one, already been discussed: Pay
interns for their work. Offering compensation enables interns
to dedicate more time and focus to their internship as they are
less likely to seek out additional part-time work to meet their
financial needs. Compensating interns will bring offices more
candidates of diverse backgrounds and may ultimately broaden
the talent pipeline to the Hill.
The practice of offering unpaid internships can unfairly
advantage people who can afford to provide their time and labor
for free, thereby providing less access to those who cannot. I
offer my own story as someone who had three unpaid internships
in college. I am grateful for those experiences, but I am
deeply aware that the opportunities I was able to apply for and
accept were only an option because my family could afford it.
Not everyone is as fortunate.
Finally, we recommend managing with intention. Since
interns usually have a longer learning curve, due to less
professional experience, managing them can be a tall order.
Those managing interns may need more resources or strategies to
fully support their new hires. Specific plans to try to ensure
for a fruitful work experience for interns include
collaborating with interns to set goals, offering support
through weekly meetings, and sharing resources and examples of
past projects, inviting interns to meetings with other staff or
partners as well as to events and presentations, providing
staff for interns to talk about their career goals and
interests, and, finally, at the end of the internship
conducting an exit interview to reflect on management practices
and internship programming. Interns will feel heard, but more
than that, offices will have a lot to gain from this vital
feedback.
While we have a lot to say on this topic, it is something
we put into practice at Idealist, best exemplified by our
director of career programming, Kevin Kennedy, who started off
8 years ago as an intern. He says that his Idealist internship
was the best one he ever had. It wasn't just about getting
paid. Kevin felt supported by his manager. He felt like he was
a part of the team, invited to lunches and meetings. He was
offered exposure into the details and the inner workings of the
program. He wasn't just the intern. He had real
responsibilities and ownership over his work. All of this made
him care deeply, and he wanted to be there every day, a choice
he continues to make almost 9 years later.
It behooves all of us who already work in social impact,
who spend our workdays reaching for a better good to pave the
way for others to join us, younger voices, traditionally
marginalized voices, people who also want to build a better
world but don't have the lived experience or connections that
enable people like me and many of you here to move from
fulfilling internships into careers that matter.
Again, thank you for the opportunity, and I look forward to
answering any questions you might have.
[The statement of Ms. Hashimoto follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Hashimoto.
Our second witness is Amiko Matsumoto, senior executive
coach and facilitator at the Partnership for Public Service,
where she leads talent management and organizational culture
efforts to ensure the Partnership continues to be a great place
to work. She has run community service and service-learning
programs in higher education, managed grants, led an agencywide
strategic initiative as a Federal employee, and served on local
and national boards.
Ms. Matsumoto, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
share your testimony.

STATEMENT OF AMIKO MATSUMOTO

Ms. Matsumoto. Thank you. Chair Kilmer, Vice Chair Timmons,
and members of the Select Committee on the Modernization of
Congress, thank you for the opportunity to join you today and
for your time and attention to make Congress work better.
My name is Amiko Matsumoto, and I do oversee the internship
program for the Partnership for Public Service. We are a
nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to making the
Federal Government more effective for the American people. I am
pleased to highlight three elements of our intern program that
help provide quality work experiences and growth for interns
and benefit the Partnership as well.
For context, we recruit interns through Handshake, which is
an online platform designed to democratize opportunities, and
other networks as well, including Idealist. As a result, we
hire interns from a broad range of colleges and universities
across the country.
We have three cohorts of interns per year. A group of
approximately 20 interns joins us each fall, spring, and summer
for 3 to 4 months each. Our interns are typically college
students, recent graduates or graduate students. We pay
interns, and our hiring process includes steps for equity and
inclusion to help ensure diverse hires.
There are three aspects of our internship program that I
would like to highlight today: our program structure, our work
with supervisors, and ways we engage interns throughout our
organization.
First, we are intentional in how we structure our intern
program. Prior to recruiting each cohort, each team identifies
specific projects with which interns can assist. This allows us
to build portfolios for interns and hire to meet our needs. It
also gives each team the opportunity to reflect on best ways to
engage the interns and ensure that their time will be well-
spent.
We deliberately start the interns in each cohort at the
same time. This enables us to realize efficiencies by grouping
interns together for onboarding and professional development
throughout their term. Additionally, this cohort model provides
opportunities for interns to develop relationships with their
peers.
At the beginning of their term, each intern is assigned a
supervisor in their home department as well as a buddy who is a
staff member from a different part of the organization and
outside the intern's reporting line.
Additionally, we have three intern coordinators who share
responsibility for program operations, including professional
development, hiring, and serve as points of contact for the
intern. The supervisors, buddies, coordinators, and staff,
along with peers in their cohort, provide a robust support
system that provides interns with multiple resources to help
them navigate the organization.
To ensure expectations are clear for both the intern and
the Partnership, each intern develops a learning agreement with
their supervisor that codifies the intern's work expectations
and professional development interests. The supervisor meets
regularly with the intern throughout the term to review work
products and to discuss growth opportunities.
We provide professional development throughout each intern
term. This includes biweekly meetings that provide a space for
interns to discuss challenges and present their work to others.
They also receive training on a variety of skills needed in a
professional setting, such as notetaking, Excel, and
networking.
The second topic I would like to discuss is the focus on
our supervisors. We understand that supervisors need to be
equipped to help interns navigate what may be their first
professional experience, from managing time to creating a
quality work product. We work with supervisors to ensure they
have the communication and management skills necessary to
engage interns in a meaningful way. We train supervisors to
provide effective feedback that includes completing performance
assessments.
Our supervisors meet monthly with intern coordinators and
HR staff to engage, exchange ideas, and receive program
updates. By ensuring supervisors are well-equipped to provide
interns with a quality experience, they develop leadership
skills that far outlast any intern term.
My third point focuses on integrating interns into the life
of the organization. Though interns are with us just a short
time, welcoming them as team members in our organization has
many benefits. Each cohort meets with members of our C-suite,
and we encourage supervisors to help their interns set up
informational interviews with other staff.
We encourage interns to take full advantage of activities
and events for the Partnership community, to get a clear idea
of our mission and gain perspective on the value of public
service. Some examples of those activities include
participation in service projects and brown bag lunches with
our board members.
We have redoubled our efforts to keep the community
connected as we work remotely during COVID. We have scheduled
virtual coffees as well as organization-led activities, like a
virtual bingo and trivia competitions, to increase camaraderie.
We actively solicit feedback from interns, including a midpoint
check-in with the coordinators and HR staff, and an exit survey
that provides data to drive decisionmaking as we prepare for
the next cohort.
By investing in our interns, we develop a talent pipeline
that has resulted in several full-time hires. Roughly 10
percent of our current staff started as Partnership interns,
for example. When our interns are hired someplace other than
the Partnership, we have created through them a cadre of
ambassadors who understand the value of public service and can
champion our work and are skilled to make a positive difference
wherever they go.
Thank you for your interest in improving the intern
experience wherever that may be. I am happy to answer any
questions you may have.
[The statement of Ms. Matsumoto follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Matsumoto. I appreciate your
testimony.
And last but not least, we are joined by Rod Adams. Mr.
Adams is PricewaterhouseCoopers U.S. and Mexico talent
acquisition and onboarding leader and also serves as the co-
lead of PwC's Digital Accelerator Program. He is based in
Chicago and has 25 years of professional experience, beginning
in client service before transitioning to human capital.
Mr. Adams leads a team that is responsible for hiring more
than 15,000 full-time professionals and interns annually. He is
focused on driving innovation through PwC's recruiting programs
and delivering on PwC's commitment to future-proof the
workforce through digital skills training.
He spent the majority of his career with PwC in talent
acquisition and sourcing and is focused on building a more
diverse and inclusive workforce by leveraging digital tools and
disruptive strategies to create authentic, long-lasting
relationships with key talent.
Mr. Adams, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RODERICK ADAMS

Mr. Adams. Thank you very much. And good afternoon,
Chairman Kilmer, Vice Chairman Timmons, and the other members
of this select committee. Thank you for inviting me to testify
at the hearing today.
I appreciate this committee's focus in this area of
attracting interns as part of the Hill's long efforts to
improve staff recruitment, retention, and diversity. I am
honored to have the opportunity to share what we do at PwC, our
holistic approach and our internship program.
So, as I said, my name is Rod Adams. I am our U.S. and
Mexico talent acquisition and onboarding leader. I have been
with the firm for 25 years, started with PwC right out of
college so I have been here my entire career.
I have been largely focused on and have built expertise in
designing and implementing human resource process and
strategies across the candidate and employee lifecycle. PwC is
a professional services firm which helps our clients solve
problems across a variety of areas: management consulting, tech
consulting, audit, tax, as well as other things.
Throughout my career, I have been passionate about building
a diverse and inclusive workforce. You know, at PwC, we
strongly believe that inclusive teams composed of people with
different cultural backgrounds, perspective, experiences, help
us live our purpose. A diverse workforce allows us to solve
important business problems and to build trust in society, and
our commitment to recruiting diverse talent helps us achieve
that goal.
So, as was said, my team is responsible for hiring close to
15,000 professionals and interns annually. Over the past few
years, we have been transitioning to an increased virtual
recruiting approach. Today all interviews are conducted
virtually, the first round and second round, and we continue to
host more events virtually.
Obviously, some of this was a result of the realities that
were presented to us by COVID-19, but we have been on this
journey for multiple years. We started doing interviews
virtually before the events of the last year and have been
looking to augment, you know, what we do to digitally enable
how we engage with candidates and have invested, you know,
around the firm a significant amount of money in our digital
and technology efforts.
So, as it relates to hiring, of the 13,000, 15,000 we hire,
approximately 5,000 are interns, and we do have three different
types of interns for our candidates. So I will explain each one
of those.
The first we call it a Start Internship. It is for
primarily rising juniors, individuals just finishing their
sophomore year, and rising seniors. It is a summer internship
focused on diversity. So it is diversity. It is uniquely
designed for high-performing college students who have self-
identified as a member of traditionally underrepresented
groups, individuals with disabilities, or veterans.
So the students are selected for an internship, and they
will during that internship learn about our professional
services industry. We are really looking to get students
interested in what we do.
They will also have the opportunity to develop professional
and technical skills as well that we believe are necessary for
success in the business world: leveraging data analytic skills
and things of that nature to solve important problems in a
program that we call Skills for Society, which provides pro
bono work for not-for-profit organizations.
Last summer, we collaborated with FIRST Robotics to analyze
their volunteer data and provide key insights. And that is what
the 700 interns who participated in the project were able to
do. So projects like those help fulfill our purpose but, more
importantly or just as important, build the key skills in
teaming, analytics, storytelling, and data visualization for
those interns.
Our second internship program, also for rising seniors but
in addition to that students going into a 5-year program, as
many of the accounting majors we hire get their master's in
accountancy. So we call it the Advance Internship. It is our
summer internship program, provides interns with the business
foundational skills they need to develop, whether they choose
to pursue a career at PwC or elsewhere.
They have always been an essential part of developing our
firm's long-term talent pipeline. So, as they do this
internship, they are working on actual client engagements. And
so they establish the foundation needed for a full-time job
following graduation. So approximately 70 percent of our entry-
level associates that we hire come from our internship program,
our Advance Internship program.
And then the third is also very similar to the Advance
Internship, but it is specifically for MBA students. They
typically come with prior work experience, and, because of
that, they are able to take on a higher level of responsibility
than our undergrad interns. And most of our MBA interns are in
our advisory consulting practice.
So our interns join PwC. They participate in both in-person
and virtual training. Right now, it is all virtual, but typical
in-person and virtual training, designed to develop their
leadership and technical skills. So out of the gate, all
interns have a training program, regardless of what type of
work they are doing with us.
And then our Leadership Development Experience while they
are with us, you know, aims to build leaders of the future
through in-the-moment coaching. So they get a coach, real-time
development. They also get what we call a relationship leader.
And so as we think about it, just as athletes receive coaching
and adjustments as they play, we want to do the same thing for
our PwC professionals. So our interns experience that right out
of the gate. They shadow partners and employees in addition to
doing client assignments. So they are going to work directly
with engagement teams, and they are able to experience PwC's
commitment to our clients, gain valuable insights firsthand.
And then to further build relationships across the PwC
team, we provide a variety of networking opportunities. So
whether that is a chance to do a community service project with
other interns and staff, a chance to do a lunch and learn, just
a ton of opportunities for the interns to, one, get together
with one another and network and then also network with our
professionals.
So, you know, with that, our workforce and the makeup in
the United States, as we all know, is changing. The skills
needed are evolving. It is important, we believe it is
important to design an internship to build on the skills that
the students are developing in school, to really hone those
skills and, you know, provide that real world element to it.
So thank you for your time, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The statement of Mr. Adams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Adams.
We will head into member questions, and I will recognize
myself for 5 minutes out of the gate.
My first question, Ms. Hashimoto, does Idealist have a lot
of government postings for internships, and have you seen any
congressional office use your service?
Maybe discuss how a congressional office like mine would
use a jobs and internship posting board. What is the value
proposition for a congressional office? How would it improve
our applicant pool? How would it help us screen for high-
quality applicants?
Ms. Hashimoto. Absolutely. Thank you for that question.
That is a great one. For sure, I think that we definitely have
a good number of opportunities working in the government at
various levels. We have city parks departments on the site all
the way--the State Department is also on Idealist posting
opportunities. So it is a wide variety.
And our community is definitely interested in social
impact, and we have learned through the years that that really
takes so many different forms. They would be interested in
working for a corporation who is, you know, working in their
corporate social responsibility department.
So our folks, again, we surveyed them, have lots of
anecdotal conversations, and they are sort of interested in,
again, a wide range of opportunities. And I think sometimes it
is about just not knowing.
And so on our site in particular, there are lots of
nonprofit opportunities, but, you know, for example, were
Member offices to be posting, I have no doubt there would be
interest there. I know some of the positions that come up often
in your offices, for example, like a communications position or
a chief of staff position, those are absolutely sort of common
in the nonprofit sector.
And I guess it sort of depends on the Member office to sort
of say what skills they are looking for. And I would hope, you
know, someone coming with varied experience in the nonprofit
sector, in the for-profit sector, would be kind of a great
addition to an office. I think they would probably be able to
bring a lot of what they have learned and then sort of, you
know, come in and bring something hopefully new and hopefully
fresh.
But absolutely. I think another thing too is just even that
exposure in front of our community. So whether you are, you
know, looking to attract candidates in D.C. or in your district
office, I think it is just another great way to get in front of
people.
And we also offer volunteer opportunities as well. So that
is sort of another thing. If there are opportunities with your
offices, again, in either location, I think that is another way
to get in front of a lot of people. Yeah, about a million or so
a month.
The Chairman. Let me ask Mr. Adams or Ms. Matsumoto, so,
you know, our committee has an opportunity to make
recommendations to make Congress work better.
So give us a first step that Congress ought to take to
ensure a high-quality intern program that actually creates
educational value for its participants across every
congressional office. What would you do? Is it training the
intern managers? Is it creating a shared curriculum? Is it a
resource office for interns? Is it something else? Give us some
advice.
Mr. Adams. Would you like me to go first----
The Chairman. Sure, take a swing.
Mr. Adams [continuing]. Amiko? Okay. Yeah, so a number of
things that I would suggest in no particular order. I do think
that 100 percent having a deliberate approach that is somewhat
centralized is important. As I have been in my role, there was
a time where we were very decentralized in our approach. So
what we looked for, how we trained, you know, how we set up,
you know, the connectivity around interns varied from group to
group.
And we made a conscious decision that we wanted to create a
consistent experience. So starting with training, depending on
what type of job they are coming in, regardless of where they
are--obviously, we are a national firm--regardless of where
they are, they are going through the exact same training at the
exact same time at the beginning of their internship to
position them to be able to do the work that we are asking them
to do. So having that consistent training program I would
recommend.
Their support network is set up the exact same way. So they
get a buddy. They get a coach. They get a relationship leader.
And then they are kind of in a pod of six to eight interns
within the team that they are working with with that coach
relationship leader and buddy, and that is their support team
for the full 8 weeks that they are with us over the summer.
Those individuals are helping them from a learning perspective
but just also helping them figure out how to navigate, you
know, PwC and corporate America. So I do think that that is
important.
And then the last thing I will point out and I will turn it
over is I know on the first panel there was a lot about paid
internships. Our internships are paid and clearly support that,
but there are benefits outside of a paid internship that really
resonate that we see and hear from our interns.
We have got, as an example, as a part of our training they
have the opportunity to earn badges. So there is training that
they can do where they can earn a digital visualization badge,
for example. That goes with them, right. So they are now able
to put that on Handshake or wherever it is where they are being
recruited and show that they got a skill that they learned as
part of their internship. That is a benefit that we have gotten
a lot of traction from, as well as they are so focused on--and
I know just by doing an internship with you, they are kind of
demonstrating this, but they are so focused on giving back.
So having opportunities during our internship where they
can give back to the community and do it together--and it is a
connectivity opportunity as well as an opportunity to have an
impact socially--means a lot to them as well.
The Chairman. Ms. Matsumoto, I may come back to you. I want
to give my colleagues an opportunity to ask questions. And if
you don't get a chance to weigh in on that, I may before we
wrap ask you to answer it as well.
Vice Chair Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This has been really helpful. I want to start with Mr.
Adams. Could you talk about the manner in which you track
gender and racial makeup of your both different levels of
people that actually work in your company versus interns, and
in addition to that, what steps you take to make sure that it
is an appropriate makeup, gender and racially, across the
spectrum. Does that question make sense?
Mr. Adams. I think so. I think so. So, you know, I will
start with what steps we take to make sure it is an appropriate
makeup. So, first of all, we look at, you know, the external
data points, the pipeline, to say, okay, we have got certain
skill sets we are hiring. What do graduation rates look like?
Things of that nature, so that we kind of understand, you know,
are we at parity with what exists in the marketplace or
exceeding what exists in the marketplace? If not, what do we
need to do differently?
So it starts with attracting talent, right? And I have
always been passionate about we have to get the right talent in
the door, diverse talent in the door. So to me, that is a lot
about, where are you going and how are you articulating your
opportunities to individuals of different backgrounds?
Because what interests, you know, one individual may not be
what interests another. Like, we are not--we can't--we have got
to be personalized in our recruitment approach. So, one, where
are you going? We do have a long list of schools we actively
recruit from. We have been deliberate to make sure that list is
inclusive. We have got 35 historically Black colleges we
recruit from as well as 41 Hispanic-serving institutions. We
have been deliberate to make sure our list includes those
schools.
You know, regardless of the school we recruit from, even if
it is not one of those institutions, engaging with the minority
student organizations on campus to sell what we are looking for
in our firm and the value we bring, the career opportunities,
huge, huge part of our efforts.
And then, as interns, when they come into the door, we
recruit them, we get them in the door, you know, how are we
connecting them to individuals that have similar backgrounds,
interests, look like them, is all important. And we make
everything available, and we let the students select what do I
want to get engaged with? So do I want to get engaged with the
network, you know, our Black networking circle, because that is
important to me. We don't force it, but if it is something that
is important to them, we make it available.
And so once they get their--making sure they, again, have
that network and support and they have an opportunity to engage
and see people who look like them, have experiences like them,
things of that nature.
Mr. Timmons. That was really helpful. Thank you. So, after
the internship going all the way up to senior leadership, are
you taking steps to make sure that the proportionality is
appropriate, or how does that work?
Mr. Adams. Sorry, I put myself on mute. Yes, absolutely.
Absolutely. So I will just give a couple examples. You know, we
do believe that we need to be deliberate in that space as well.
So, as new hires joined as associates, we have a 2-year, we
call it an onboarding program. We like to name everything, so
we have named this Thrive. And it is a program specifically
meant for underrepresented minorities, to provide them, you
know, the additional insights, support that they may be
interested in or need as they are looking to progress.
What we have found is the first 2 years in our organization
matter so much. Getting off on the right foot, getting the
right relationships, getting on the right clients, getting the
right experiences matters so much. So we use that program just
to have an extra layer of certainty that we are getting them
those right experiences, getting connected with the right
individuals.
So, you know, as an example, that is one of the things that
we do. But throughout--you know, so our progression is
associate, senior associate, manager, director and then
ultimately partner. That is kind of the levels within the firm.
And each one of the levels that you progress up, there are
different interventions that we have with those in the
underrepresented minority groups to help shepherd them through
that experience and continue to help them be successful and
progress through the firm.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you for that. And I am out of time, but
at the end, I am going to come back. And one of the concepts we
had earlier in the last panel was that Congress should track
all of its data for interns and beyond. We currently do not
have any good tracking system. So I just wanted to hear any of
your thoughts on that. I think that we probably should be
tracking it.
So I will yield back, but will circle up on that at the
end. Thank you so much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Vice Chair Timmons.
Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Vice Chairman.
Look, I am going to ask you guys some pretty tough
questions, candid. And I have thought about it, and I think,
you know, I might as well do it so this can be beneficial.
There is a lot being written about Congress and these times
in which we live and so forth and function. Is Congress a place
you think that still has an image glamorous enough to attract
young, brilliant people to want to be in the mix on this Hill
surrounded by fencing?
Don't worry about hurting the feelings of the chair and the
co-chair. Just say it out. I think it is important really
because I think, you know, we are talking about trying to bring
more, you know, young people in, interns, bright people. And,
you know, when I saw the title of our hearing, I thought, you
know, we need to really go down into the roots to find out, you
know, just how attractive or unattractive we are.
Ms. Hashimoto, anybody who wants to go first. I mean, don't
be too eager to hurt our feelings.
Ms. Hashimoto. No, I will take it, and I appreciate that
question. And it is a great--actually, I thought that was going
to be about the pandemic. I think perhaps it was a little bit,
but not totally. And that is a sobering question, and I think
it is a good one.
My gut says yes. I mean, I don't know that I am
representing every single, you know, every 1 million of our
members, but I think when I think about people who want to make
a difference and when I think about where they can do it, this
is one of those places. This is literally that happening right
now. You know, this is one more step in getting there. And I
think yes.
And I think talking about this current moment, it came up
sort of in the first part of the panel, but I think thinking
about what it means to be remote right now. And, again, if we
are talking about safety of any sort, I think it is a great
note to consider what it means to be remote.
And I share the sentiments that I heard before. I think
these learning experiences are much better in person, but I
think where they can be accommodated I think it is incredible
because, you know, we know what is going on, folks working
remotely. It is bringing up accessibility issues. Where folks
who maybe could not get to a physical office or could not work
in that space, couldn't afford, you know, to get to D.C., all
of a sudden, that is changing. And so I think this ability to
have remote opportunities, where possible, as much as possible,
I think can be really powerful.
I do think it is hard, of course, and I think it takes a
lot more--I think it takes a lot more process ahead of time and
much more codified to get there, but I think that there are
lots of different ways to do it. So I think, again, that can
make these opportunities more accessible.
And I hope that there is still glamour for people. I know
young Emily, there sure was. I didn't actually intern on the
Hill, but interning in D.C. was definitely a dream. So just to
say I think for all the Emilies out there, I think there is
probably still some shine if I had to guess.
Mr. Cleaver. I am interested, Ms. Matsumoto.
Ms. Matsumoto. Thank you. It is a great question, and I
think it is something that is true for many of our
institutions. There is kind of what we think of an institution
or what we think of, in this case, a specific Member of
Congress. I think there are a number of ways people want to
make a difference. There are a number of ways people believe
that change is possible, and they want to be a part of that
change.
So I think there is a sense of to what extent can, as you
recruit, be intentional in helping people understand the
difference that they can make individually and as part of this
institution. I think there is genuine hope out there. And
people have tremendous skills and talent, and they want to use
that to drive change. And there are few places where people can
make national-scale type of change, and Congress is one of
them.
So there may be some challenges certainly in the different
types of perspectives that someone may have, but I think there
is a genuine belief that this is a place to go if you want to
be able to make a difference on such a grand scale. So I do
think there are many people who still think this is something
they want to do.
And I think to the point of equity and other things that
happened earlier, you spoke of earlier, there are a lot of
people who do want to serve. And for them to be able to have a
way to do that, be able to do so, financially to be able to do
so because they can navigate the system and figure out how to
apply, I think all those things certainly come into play. But I
do believe--and I don't think it is just a hope--that people
really do want to serve, and that that is something that has
been true for generations and certainly true for the current
one as well.
Mr. Cleaver. I think my time is up, but I wanted to get to
Mr. Adams at some point. I can talk to him maybe offline. Thank
you very much. That is very helpful to me and not as painful as
I thought, but I appreciate your candor.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Cleaver.
Mr. Phillips.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The first question is for you, Mr. Adams. Intrigued by how
you create different internship programs for different
constituencies. I am curious about any key learnings that you
might share with us about the--I can't remember the name, but
for the underserved communities internship program you have.
You referenced that 70 percent of your new associates come
from the other program. Do some of those from the underserved
program make it to associates? What have you learned? What are
some of the challenges? What might we take from that
experience?
Mr. Adams. Yes. Thanks.
The Chairman. I am sorry, Mr. Cleaver, you got to mute.
There we go.
Mr. Phillips. He didn't know his time was expired.
Mr. Adams. The mute button gets someone on every call,
right?
So thank you for asking that question. So absolutely. Our
internship programs are all built to kind of build on each
other and ultimately end up at full time. So that program, the
Start program for the underrepresented exists because we are
looking to--at the heart of it, we want to get more students
interested in what we do. So we built that program as a means
to introduce them to the profession.
So we are pretty open with the majors because, you know,
they are young in their college careers at that point, that we
look for, because we want--you know, we want to build interest
in what we do, hopefully change people to choose computer
science or accounting or one of the things that we are
interested in or that we are hiring. So that is what it is all
about. We look at it to be a feeder.
So, to specifically answer your question, about 60 percent
of the individuals that participate in our Start program end up
staying with us for multiple summers and starting with us full
time after they graduate. And so it is a very important program
for us. We had 700 interns in it last year. We are going to
have 1,000 this summer. And so that is the ultimate goal, for
us to retain them and move them forward.
Mr. Phillips. Thank you.
This next proposition is a little bit out of left field,
but I would love your reaction.
And, Ms. Matsumoto, maybe starting with you.
But my office takes advantage of a lot of fellowship
programs. Wounded Warriors and Rangel Fellowships. We have a
Pearson Fellow soon to start. And they have been extraordinary
blessings to me, to our team, and I think it goes both ways. It
makes me wonder, though, why doesn't Congress have an
opportunity for congressional staffers to have fellowships in
the executive branch, work in an embassy for 6 months, work in
one of the agencies, so that we can actually have some cross-
fertilization of those experiences too instead of just having
talent from the administration or executive branch go back to
the executive branch.
Any thoughts on that, if you think it would be smart, if it
could even work? I would love your thoughts on that, Ms.
Matsumoto.
Ms. Matsumoto. Thank you. It is a great question. I do
think there are a lot of ways we benefit from talent exchanges
and from being able to learn how different things work, being
able to form relationships with folks in different parts of
different organizations.
So I think there are opportunities out there. I think there
are examples. Perhaps not an exact one that you mentioned, but
there are several different types of fellowship programs where
there are talent exchanges. That occurs both public and private
sector. I think it occurs in the public sector different ways.
You have the IPA program. There are just so many different
things that happen.
So it is a great idea. I think it is something that we
certainly would be happy to talk to you about further in ways
that we could see that working or how that has transpired in
other ways and we could take some of the best practices in
other situations to bring it there. But the talent exchange
concept is really important and one that allows for people to
really develop better understanding and further skills as well.
Mr. Phillips. Any other comments, Ms. Hashimoto or Mr.
Adams?
You know, Mr. Adams, just to go back to you quickly, back
to the internship program that I referred to, I really want
to--is there anything that you learned that surprised you or
that PwC has been surprised by, in terms of relative to the
recruitment, what the difference makers are between those that
succeed and those that don't? Anything, any nuggets that you
might share with us that have been either pleasant surprises or
unanticipated challenges?
Mr. Adams. Specifically the early internship program or
just in general?
Mr. Phillips. Yes, the early. My focus is to track more
economic and racial diversity. We are fine with geography and
politics. And I know how tough that is. You know, just the
notion of coming to Washington, even if there is support and
money and a place to live. But what do you see as kind of the
deal-makers and the deal-breakers, in terms of the success?
Mr. Adams. So, for us, I could give you my lens. Again, a
lot of what we do is accounting. For us, awareness of what we
do and why we do it, just like what the profession is.
We have to spend a lot of time on the education early in
college career. We start with minority offices on campus as
early as freshmen to really introduce them to what we do
because there is a lack of understanding and awareness. So that
has been--you know, it is not a surprise anymore. It has been
that way since I have been here, but it has been an obstacle
that we have had to overcome.
So getting to students early, selling them early on before
they are locked in on a major on, you know, what it is that we
do so they start to think about our profession, has been
something we have had to put a lot of effort and energy in at a
level and a level depth and deliberateness with
underrepresented minorities that we don't have to do with the
majority.
We don't require that with the majority. There is just more
of awareness of what we do. So that has probably been our
biggest obstacle to overcome.
Mr. Phillips. I appreciate it. My time has well expired.
Thank you all very much. Great conversation and appreciate
your insights. Thank you.
The Chairman. I want to make sure that we give folks an
opportunity if they have questions that weren't asked of this
panel. I know, Mr. Timmons, Vice Chair Timmons, you had one. Go
ahead.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. Currently, there is a lot of debate over
what the actual data is. I mean, the best data that we have
had, the methodology to obtain that data is painstakingly
difficult, and it essentially involves interns using social
media and/or Google to try to figure out the socioeconomic and/
or, you know, gender, race of a person.
So I guess my question is, does anyone think that we
shouldn't be tracking this stuff? Like, I don't understand. Let
me start here: Do all of you track this as a part of due course
of your businesses, and what are your thoughts on whether
Congress should also track it?
Anybody that wants to jump in, but I would like to hear
from each of you briefly.
Ms. Hashimoto. I will jump in briefly just to say at
Idealist with our hiring, we are not tracking that information.
We are tracking it other ways. And I will say we are slow to
it. I think we have had some reticence--perhaps that is a
shared thing--of feeling like we don't want to ask. We want to
make it really candidate forward.
But I think that this data matters. And so we are actually
doing things. As we build products, we are asking for that
information. Obviously, anonymized, private, you know, shipped
to a different database. I mean, we are being really careful
about our management of this data.
But I will just say one thing that comes to mind. I think
about the ways that some of our nonprofits are starting to
track data with applicants. So that is when they track it. They
track it right then. They take it. Again, it is anonymized.
It is not connected to the candidate profile, but it is a
way to get whatever you are looking for. So this way--and, of
course, it is optional. I guess that is also important to say.
But when you are asking for race and ethnicity, you are asking
for gender, gender expression, you know, whatever sort of feels
right. Veteran status, people with disabilities.
So I think it can really be whatever it needs to be. And
hopefully some of that data, again, not attached to the
candidate, but hopefully even just having that in aggregate
could probably be pretty powerful.
Ms. Matsumoto. We do track applicant data as well. To Ms.
Hashimoto's point, we don't connect that to a specific
candidate. So hiring managers don't see that, for example. But
from an HR perspective, we do have that.
And we do look at our data over time to understand, you
know, are people making it through the process? Are we losing
certain demographics in certain ways, and what might be causing
that and if that is the case? So we do look at data. It does
help inform our process to make sure we are equitable. You
know, are we thinking about inclusion in different ways? You
know, it has been very helpful.
It is a challenge, I think, to track data. Our software
allows us from an applicant tracking system to be able to track
that. It is not something that everybody may have, so it does
certainly provide some challenges to somebody who doesn't have
access to that. And we have been really intentional in how we
use it, where we disclose it, how we use it to drive
decisionmaking throughout.
So it is something that I think is valuable, but I think
there has got to be really clear understanding of how that data
is used and, you know, to do something that can improve a
process and not necessarily be tied to a specific candidate
that might have an impact that way.
Mr. Adams. I don't think I can say it any better than she
just did. Our approach is exactly the same. We do have the
data. We track it to improve decisionmaking, but it is not
aligned to a candidate in any way, shape or form. It is
totally--Emily said it--it is totally optional on whether, you
know, an applicant decides to give it to us.
But we do have the data, and it helps so we can look at it
in the aggregate to help us make decisions on where, you know,
we need to intervene, where we need to have training, and
things of the like. So yeah.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I would love to ask Ms. Matsumoto, you know,
we have folks managing interns who were interns not too long
ago, and a lot of folks in that role don't have management
experience. So any advice as to what our committee could
recommend with regard to training the trainers. What does the
curriculum look like for managers of interns?
Ms. Matsumoto. That is a great question, and it is
something that we have thought a lot about. I am in a similar
situation. Many of our entry level staff also supervise
interns. It is a great opportunity for them to develop
leadership skills and management skills, and I think there is
additional focus on the fact that they are also learning and
experiencing the workplace themselves.
So we have done a couple different things to help train and
equip our supervisors. We do have a session before they start,
before the interns start where the supervisors will meet. They
learn about things, some things kind of operational, how to
approve timesheets and approve leave and things like that, but
also things like how to provide productive feedback, how to
effectively delegate.
So we do gather them, have a chance for them to talk and
learn with and from one another in advance. And then we have
them meet kind of throughout the intern term to be able to
discuss that with their peers, exchange ideas. Hey, I am having
a hard time with my intern speaking up in meetings. You know,
what else have people done to help encourage their intern to be
more participatory? So those sorts of questions we can get at
and provide a space for them to really explore. So that is
something that we have done.
We have, and a little bit to your question earlier as far
as how to start this, we looked across the organization to find
out what teams were doing and what was working well and how we
could replicate that.
So there were some things where we didn't have to
completely start something all over again. It was, hey, this is
working really well; how do we replicate that? How do we expand
that so that other teams might have that same sort of
opportunity?
And that has been true for our supervisors as well. We do
have folks who are happy to talk with them, help them
troubleshoot or, you know, kind of explore different topics as
they are kind of coming into their own in supervision.
But we have been incredibly intentional to work with our
supervisors so that they are prepared. It is something that it
takes a little bit of time on the front end, but on the back
end, there are all kinds of ways in which that pays off. So it
is something that we certainly recommend.
The Chairman. I am just looking to see if any of my
colleagues have any further questions. Mr. Phillips, do you
have anything? Okay.
Well, I want to thank our witnesses for their testimony
today. I also want to thank our very talented staff of this
committee.
This hearing was put together quickly, and it is a
testament to their hard work that it went so smoothly, and we
had so many talented witnesses.
I would also like to thank Mr. Phillips for sharing his
intern ID badge, which was certainly one of the highlights of
my day. Just out of solidarity, I will share my internship
photo from 1993. I am not sure what is more embarrassing, how
large my trousers are in that photo or how large my hair is.
But I want to thank all of you for your participation.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
within which to submit additional written questions for the
witnesses to the chair, which we will forward to the witnesses
for their response. And I would certainly ask our witnesses to
please respond as promptly as you are able.
Without objection, all members will have 5 legislative days
within which to submit extraneous materials to the chair for
inclusion in the record.
And, with that, we are adjourned. Thanks again, everybody.
[Whereupon, at 3:52 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
