- U.S. INTERNATIONAL FOOD AID PROGRAMS: TRANSPORTATION PERSPECTIVES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. INTERNATIONAL FOOD AID PROGRAMS: TRANSPORTATION PERSPECTIVES

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
LIVESTOCK AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-34

(Committee on Agriculture)
Serial No. 114-31

(Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure)

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee
on Transportation and Infrastructure
agriculture.house.gov

______________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
97-713 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2016
_________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JEFF DENHAM, California              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETE AGUILAR, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MIKE BOST, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

______

Scott C. Graves, Staff Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture

DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              JIM COSTA, California, Ranking
STEVE KING, Iowa                     Minority Member
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             FILEMON VELA, Texas
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

(ii)

COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE

BILL SHUSTER, Pennsylvania, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    PETER A. DeFAZIO, Oregon, Ranking
JOHN J. DUNCAN, Jr., Tennessee,      Minority Member
Vice Chair                         ELEANOR HOLMES NORTON, District of
JOHN L. MICA, Florida                Columbia
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        JERROLD NADLER, New York
SAM GRAVES, Missouri                 CORRINE BROWN, Florida
CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan          EDDIE BERNICE JOHNSON, Texas
DUNCAN HUNTER, California            ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  RICK LARSEN, Washington
LOU BARLETTA, Pennsylvania           MICHAEL E. CAPUANO, Massachusetts
BLAKE FARENTHOLD, Texas              GRACE F. NAPOLITANO, California
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      DANIEL LIPINSKI, Illinois
RICHARD L. HANNA, New York           STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
DANIEL WEBSTER, Florida              ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey
JEFF DENHAM, California              DONNA F. EDWARDS, Maryland
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin            JOHN GARAMENDI, California
THOMAS MASSIE, Kentucky              ANDRE CARSON, Indiana
MARK MEADOWS, North Carolina         JANICE HAHN, California
SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania            RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         DINA TITUS, Nevada
ROB WOODALL, Georgia                 SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
TODD ROKITA, Indiana                 ELIZABETH H. ESTY, Connecticut
JOHN KATKO, New York                 LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
BRIAN BABIN, Texas                   CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
CRESENT HARDY, Nevada                JARED HUFFMAN, California
RYAN A. COSTELLO, Pennsylvania       JULIA BROWNLEY, California
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana
MIMI WALTERS, California
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

______

Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation

DUNCAN HUNTER, California, Chairman

DON YOUNG, Alaska                    JOHN GARAMENDI, California,
FRANK A. LoBIONDO, New Jersey        Ranking Minority Member
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      ELIJAH E. CUMMINGS, Maryland
MARK SANFORD, South Carolina         CORRINE BROWN, Florida
GARRET GRAVES, Louisiana             JANICE HAHN, California
CARLOS CURBELO, Florida              LOIS FRANKEL, Florida
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina         JULIA BROWNLEY, California
LEE M. ZELDIN, New York

(iii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     3
Garamendi, Hon. John, a Representative in Congress from
California, opening statement..................................     5
Hunter, Hon. Duncan, a Representative in Congress from
California, opening statement..................................     4
Rouzer, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from North
Carolina, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2

Witnesses

Berteau, Hon. David J., Assistant Secretary of Defense, Logistics
and Materiel Readiness, U.S. Department of Defense, Washington,
D.C............................................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Supplementary material.......................................    67
Jaenichen, Sr., Hon. Paul N. ``Chip'', Administrator, U.S.
Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation,
Washington, D.C................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Submitted question...........................................    68
Caponiti, James E., President, American Maritime Congress,
Washington, D.C.; on behalf of USA Maritime....................    26
Prepared statement...........................................    28
Shapiro, J.D., Philip J., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Liberty Maritime Corporation, New Hyde Park, NY................    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36
Murray, CAPT John W., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC, Piscataway, NJ...........................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Schoeneman, Brian W., Political and Legislative Director,
Seafarers International Union, Washington, D.C.................    46
Prepared statement...........................................    48

U.S. INTERNATIONAL FOOD AID PROGRAMS: TRANSPORTATION PERSPECTIVES

----------

TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture;
joint with
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. David
Rouzer [Chairman of the Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture] presiding.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture: Representatives Rouzer, Hartzler,
Newhouse, Kelly, Conaway (ex officio), Costa, Vela, Nolan, and
Bustos.
Members present from the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and
Maritime Transportation: Representatives Hunter, Gibbs, Graves,
Curbelo, Garamendi, Cummings, and Hahn.
Staff present: Bart Fischer, Caleb Crosswhite, Haley
Graves, Mollie Wilken, Stephanie Addison, Faisal Siddiqui, John
Konya, Andy Baker, and Nicole Scott.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID ROUZER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM NORTH CAROLINA

Mr. Rouzer. This joint hearing of the Subcommittee on
Livestock and Foreign Agriculture, of the Committee on
Agriculture, and the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation, of the Committee on Transportation and
Infrastructure, on U.S. international food aid programs will
come to order. I want to thank each of you for joining us this
morning. We are going to have two panels, and it is very
important that we continue our review of international food aid
programs.
To date, we have heard from USDA and USAID officials
charged with implementing these vital programs. We have heard
from those tasked with program oversight and accountability
about what is working, and what could be improved. We have
heard from those producing and processing the food used in our
food aid programs, and we have heard from on the ground
implementers. Today we will hear from those who are tasked with
shipping that aid to those in need around the globe. To that
end, we are holding this hearing in collaboration with our
colleagues from the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee. I want to thank my friend, Chairman Duncan Hunter,
along with our other colleagues on the Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation Subcommittee, for their willingness to examine
these issues with us.
While the agriculture and maritime communities have worked
hand in hand for the past 60 years to deliver food to hungry
people around the world, the vast majority of government-
impelled cargo is military hardware. However, with the volume
of military cargo declining, the availability of other
government-impelled cargo, like food aid, has assumed greater
significance in sustaining a viable U.S. merchant marine
industry. Given this reality, I personally remain perplexed at
USAID's continued push to move away from in-kind donations in
exchange for more cash-based assistance. I am particularly
concerned by the fact that they attempted to achieve this by
driving a wedge between the agriculture and maritime
communities, while using scarce food aid funding to do it. I
look forward to exploring this, and confirming where things
currently stand with our witnesses today.
Given the interconnectedness of our maritime security and
food aid programs, undermining one ultimately jeopardizes both.
As we move forward, we must work to maximize cooperation and
program efficiency throughout all sectors to reach the maximum
number of people in need, but we must do so in a way that does
not jeopardize the long-term support and accomplishments these
programs have achieved.
Again, thank you all for being here today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rouzer follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David Rouzer, a Representative in Congress
from North Carolina
I want to thank each of you for joining us this morning as we
continue our review of international food aid programs. To date, we
have heard from USDA and USAID officials charged with implementing
these vital programs; we have heard from those tasked with program
oversight and accountability about what is working and what could be
improved; we have heard from those producing and processing the food
used in our food aid programs; and we have heard from on-the-ground
implementers. Today, we will hear from those who are tasked with
shipping that aid to those in need around the globe.
To that end, we are holding this hearing today in collaboration
with our colleagues from the Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee. I want to thank my friend Chairman Duncan Hunter along with
our colleagues on the Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
Subcommittee, for their willingness to examine these issues with us
today.
While the agriculture and maritime communities have worked hand-in-
hand for the past 60 years to deliver food to hungry people around the
world, the vast majority of government-impelled cargo is military
hardware. However, with the volume of military cargo declining, the
availability of other government-impelled cargo--like food aid--has
assumed greater significance in sustaining a viable U.S. merchant
marine.
Given this reality, I remain perplexed at USAID's continued push to
move away from in-kind donations in exchange for more cash-based
assistance. I'm particularly frustrated by the fact that they attempted
to achieve this by driving a wedge between the agriculture and maritime
communities, while using scarce food aid funding to do it. I look
forward to exploring this and confirming where things currently stand
with our witnesses today. Given the interconnectedness of our maritime
security and food aid programs, undermining one ultimately jeopardizes
both.
As we move forward, we must work to maximize cooperation and
program efficiency throughout all sectors to reach the maximum number
of people in need, but we must do so in a way that does not jeopardize
the long-term support and accomplishments these programs have achieved.
Again, thank you all for being here today. I now yield to Ranking
Member Costa for any remarks he would like to make.

Mr. Rouzer. I now yield to Ranking Member Costa for any
remarks he would like to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Chairman Rouzer, and I want
to also welcome Chairman Hunter, when he gets here, and Ranking
Member John Garamendi, who I have worked with for years, not
only in Congress, but in the California State Legislature, as
we share a lot of common interests as it relates to California
issues. It is, I believe, important that the House Committee on
Transportation and Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Coast Guard
and Maritime Transportation meet with our Subcommittee on this
important issue. This hearing is the next part of the
Committee's review of the international food aid programs that
I have always taken an interest in, and I am glad that we have
representatives from the maritime industry on the other panel
that can also testify to the important role they play in
transportation of food to countries and regions that are in
need.
The United States established itself as one of the global
leaders, and we have led for decades, in international food
aid. My constituents in California's great Central Valley, the
San Joaquin Valley, are proud that the fruits, vegetables, and
dairy products that they produce are used by numerous agencies,
and for food aid programs, such as U.S. Agency for
International Development, USAID. It is food that is not only
used for my constituencies, throughout California, it is used
throughout the country, because we do have the ability to
produce an abundance of food, and this is an area where we can
be helpful. These programs, which operate throughout the world,
in some of the most dangerous regions in the world, such as
Syria and the South Sudan, perform incredible services to bring
food to those most in need living in those areas. You have
abject poverty, you have conflict, and it seems like constant
conflict, civil wars, in which man's inhumanity to mankind is
being exhibited. And this food, therefore, provides the sort of
humanitarian support that our nation must, and can, provide.
The efforts also support countless jobs here in America,
especially in the transportation and logistic side of these
programs. That is why the reforms that have been made to our
international food aid programs, for me, are troubling in some
areas. It is clear that we need to have flexibility, and I
don't think anybody argues against that, within programs on how
the aid is delivered to these countries, and to the regions.
However, let me be clear, the emphasis must remain on providing
in-kind donations, such as these food products, whether they be
fruits, vegetables, dairy products from my district, or other
parts of the country, because, again, it is important that we
provide the sustenance for these people most in need. I think
that is far better than providing cash-based assistance. Cash-
based assistance, in which we have, I believe, less control
over, it is akin to when sometimes we see a person asking for a
handout in our communities. I used to go into the store and buy
a sandwich and hand them something to eat, as opposed to giving
them cash. I don't know what they are going to do with that
cash.
So I understand there are challenges, but our mariners also
provide security, relative to the Maritime Security Program.
Military cargo accounts for the vast majority of the cargo
preferences tonnage, and it has been successful, but we have a
responsibility and the resources to do what we can for those
who are struggling to feed themselves. And that is why, again,
these international food aid programs are so important. In a
more perfect world, we would not have to struggle to find the
space on ships to transport food aid on military cargo, but
that is not the reality. Again, I welcome my colleagues from
the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, and I look
forward to hearing the testimony of these witnesses that we
have here today. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of
my time. Thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you very much, and I recognize Chairman
Hunter for a few remarks, if he has any to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DUNCAN HUNTER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. Hunter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a little
something to say, but let's focus on this right now. There is
no peace dividend in terms of not having to move stuff around
anymore. I think that we are seeing it is loud and clear, there
is not going to be a time where we don't have to move military
goods overseas somewhere. It is not going to happen. We are
going to have to do it over and over, and it seems like a year
or 2, or 3 years ago we reached a time where we thought it
would be okay to start losing U.S.-flag ships, not having them
ship the 75 percent cargo preference, moving that to 50.
I think it is clear now, at least with what happened in
Paris, and what a lot of us have been talking about non-stop,
things haven't gone away, the world is not a safer place. You
are going to need these ships to move gear to our troops on the
ground overseas. And that is it. I mean, that is what I am here
for. This is not about helping people. It is, in a way, about
helping people, and giving food to third world countries, but
in the end it is about national security. It is about
maintaining a U.S. fleet to serve our U.S. military. That is
what it is about. It is about national security. And this is a
way to subsidize the national security aspect of our maritime
fleet without having to spend tens of billions of dollars to
create a just sit there forever fleet in the Navy, just in case
we need it sometime. We are saving tens of billions of dollars
with MSP, with food aid, and we just need to figure out how we
make it clear to the government, the Executive Branch, that, as
long as they keep putting us into wars, because that is what
the Commander-in-Chief can do, you are going to need ships to
supply those wars.
So that is what I would like to get out of this today, is
that we talk about MSP, talk about food aid, and how you can
subsidize long-term the U.S.-flag cargo fleet to support our
troops. That is it. And with that, I yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now recognize
Ranking Member Garamendi, if he has any comments to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JOHN GARAMENDI, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. Garamendi. Thank you, Chairman Rouzer. I appreciate
your involvement in this. Mr. Hunter and I have been working on
this for some time, and I know my good friend Jim Costa also.
The international food aid program is perhaps mostly recognized
as the P.L. 83-480 program. It is an issue of mutual strong
interest between our two Committees. Regrettably, too much has
been said in recent years to mischaracterize the program's
multifaceted framework. I am pleased that we have this
opportunity today to set this straight.
First and foremost, I want to make it very clear that I am
not going to take a back seat to anybody when it comes to food
aid. My wife and I have been in the famine camps. We were there
in the 1980s, my wife in the 1990s, and we have seen what
happens when the lorry arrives with American food in that
lorry. We know that that is food. That is real food available.
We also know when cash arrives, it disappears. There is a very,
very real difference. And if you want to feed people, then you
bring food. If you want corruption and chaos, bring cash. It is
that simple.
Now, this is a multifaceted program. It is not just about
delivering food to those who need it around the world. By the
way, people say you can buy locally. That is where the famine
is, folks. We are going to buy regionally? Sure, we can buy
rice in Brazil, or grain in France. We could also buy it in
America. Now, multifaceted it is. Emergency food assistance,
yes, but it is also about the maritime industry, as our
Chairman, Mr. Hunter, said. It is about the maritime industry,
and the importance in the maritime industry being supported by
impelled cargo. That is cargo that is required to be carried on
American ships. It maintains our Merchant Marines. Lose that,
and we lose the ability to deal with our national security
issues around the world. We have a 60 year record of a
successful P.L. 83-480 program, which provides food. It also
provides the foundation for our Merchant Marines, for our ships
and our sailors. It has been durable, it has been effective,
and there are those who are determined in ways that lack
understanding to somehow destroy that long established and
successful program by cashing it out.
So, I want to commend you for these hearings. We are going
to learn today what this is all about. Mr. Jaenichen is here,
and also the Department of Defense is here. And I would like to
know from them what they think about maintaining our capability
to transport personnel and equipment around the world in times
of national security issues. You might also just think about
what happened with Operation Desert Storm back in the 1990s,
when we didn't have a viable shipping capability of our own
ships. And so I am going to ask that question as we get into
it. What happened in the 1990s, when we allowed our Merchant
Marine capabilities to atrophy? What was the result? It is a
question we will get to later. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. The chair would request that other Members
submit their opening statements for the record so the witnesses
may begin their testimony, and to ensure there is ample time
for questions. The chair would like to remind Members that they
will be recognized for questioning in order of seniority for
Members who were present at the start of the hearing. After
that, Members will be recognized in order of their arrival, and
I appreciate the Members' understanding. Witnesses are asked to
limit their oral presentations to 5 minutes. All written
statements will be included in the record.
I would like to welcome our first panel of witnesses to the
panel, Mr. David Berteau, Assistant Secretary of Defense,
Logistics, and Material Readiness, Department of Defense, and
the Honorable Paul Jaenichen, Administrator, Maritime
Administration here in Washington. Gentlemen, thank you both
for being here today. Mr. Berteau, we will begin with you.

STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID J. BERTEAU, ASSISTANT
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, LOGISTICS AND MATERIEL
READINESS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Berteau. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Hunter,
Ranking Member Garamendi, Ranking Member Costa, distinguished
Members of the Subcommittees, I appreciate the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the Defense Department on cargo
preference, the U.S. Merchant Marine, and it is importance to
us. My organization has the policy and oversight
responsibilities for logistics and materiel readiness, as you
noted, which includes sealift, air lift, transportation across
the board. I ask, as you suggested, that my written statement
in its entirety be included in the record, and I will summarize
a little bit in my oral statement.
I must start out by saying I was born on a farm in
Louisiana, and grew up picking strawberries, and later ran a
farm in Texas. I grew up in the auto parts business, and
married a car dealer's daughter, so the union of transportation
and agriculture makes perfect sense to me. It has been true for
my entire life. The success, however, of the Defense Department
is much more than just that union. Our success depends on
getting to the mission, and sustaining that mission, and that
means we have to be ready. We have to have the national
security readiness. Sealift capability is a major aspect of
that readiness. We meet those requirements in part by
maintaining our own surge sealift capacity, mostly roll-on,
roll-off ships, by pre-positioning military equipment and
supplies onboard ships located in key areas. But we also rely
on the ships and the mariners in the commercial U.S. Merchant
Marine as a contributor to our capacity to surge when needed.
We have a range of commercial sealift programs that we
participate in across the government to support that role. My
written statement covers some of those. I am sure we will
discuss them today. They are important for the overall health
of the Merchant Marine, as well as for providing the Defense
Department with assured access to the capacity we need when we
need it. The availability of mariners is at least as important
as the availability of the number of ships for crewing both
U.S.-flag commercial vessels, as well as for the Navy logistics
support vessels, and the surge capacity. And as U.S.-flag ships
decline in numbers, then the mariner jobs associated with those
potentially also declines, and that is something that we watch
carefully.
Ultimately, American depends on the Defense Department to
be ready to execute its national security missions. That is why
we are here. The availability of ships and mariners from the
U.S. Merchant Marine is an important element of that readiness.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I want to conclude my opening remarks.
I thank you for holding this hearing, and inviting us to
participate, and I look forward to answering any questions you
may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berteau follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David J. Berteau, Assistant Secretary of
Defense, Logistics and Materiel Readiness, U.S. Department of Defense,
Washington, D.C.
Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member Garamendi, Chairman Rouzer, Ranking
Member Costa, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittees, I am
David Berteau, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics and
Materiel Readiness, and I appreciate the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of the Defense Department on the importance of the U.S.
Merchant Marine and cargo preference.
National security readiness hinges on the success of the Department
of Defense (DOD) in getting to the mission and sustaining that mission.
Sealift capability is a major consideration. The Defense Department
maintains surge sealift vessels (mostly Roll-On/Roll-Off) in a high
state of readiness and maintains pre-positioning fleets with military
equipment and supplies aboard ships located in key ocean areas to
ensure rapid availability.
The commercial U.S. Merchant Marine, consisting of ships and
mariners, is equally important to the Department's organic sealift
surge capability. The Department relies on the U.S. Merchant Marine as
a key element of its readiness to perform all of its national security
missions, working through a wide range of DOD commercial sealift
programs that support deploying and sustaining military forces around
the world. One such program is the Voluntary Intermodal Sealift
Agreement program that provides assured access to U.S.-flag commercial
sealift capacity during contingency operations in exchange for priority
for DOD cargo. Another is the Maritime Security Program that provides a
Federal support stipend for up to 60 U.S.-flag commercial vessels in
exchange for military access to vessel capacity and global intermodal
networks. These programs are important for the overall health of the
U.S. Merchant Marine and for providing the Defense Department with
assured access to sealift capacity in time of national need.
U.S. Merchant Mariners are especially critical to the Department's
ability to surge and sustain the mission. In addition to crewing U.S.-
flag commercial vessels in support of DOD requirements, the Department
depends on U.S. Mariners to crew Navy logistics support vessels and
reserve (surge) sealift vessels. The Defense Department plans to use
the pool of actively sailing U.S. Mariners for the surge ships. To
mitigate the risk of insufficient numbers of licensed mariners for the
surge fleet, the U.S. Navy also maintains a Strategic Sealift Officer
program comprised of approximately 2,000 Naval Reservists who are
licensed mariners that could be activated, but only in the event that a
sufficient number of licensed civilian mariners did not volunteer to
crew the surge fleet.
As U.S.-flag ship numbers in international trade decline, the
number of U.S. Merchant Mariners employed in international trade also
declines. If there are fewer job opportunities, there may be fewer U.S.
mariners to crew the government-owned sealift ships if they are
activated for a major crisis.
There are many factors that affect the viability of the U.S.
Merchant Marine to keep the ships and mariners needed to meet Defense
Department needs. These include not only demand to transport DOD cargo
for day-to-day defense needs but also other potential options to
maintain mariner licenses. These factors combined may affect the
ability of the U.S. Merchant Marine to provide the required sealift
surge and sustainment needed for potential national security missions
worldwide.
The Administration continues to examine and propose policies to
improve the balance of costs and benefits. The Department supports the
reform of the P.L. 83-480 Title II food aid program and has assessed
that the proposal will not impact its ability to crew the surge fleet
and deploy forces and sustainment cargoes. The FY 2016 President's
Budget food aid reform proposal improves the U.S. Government's ability
to respond to humanitarian crises within current budget constraints.
Ultimately, America depends on the Defense Department to be ready
to execute all of its national security missions. The availability of
ships and mariners from the U.S. Merchant Marine is an important
element of that readiness. I thank you for holding this hearing and
inviting DOD to participate.

Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Jaenichen?

STATEMENT OF HON. PAUL N. ``CHIP'' JAENICHEN, Sr.,
ADMINISTRATOR, U.S. MARITIME ADMINISTRATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, good morning.
Chairman Hunter, Ranking Members Costa and Garamendi, and
Members of the Subcommittees, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to discuss the United States Merchant Marine and
its relationship to U.S. international food aid programs. I
would like to note that the U.S. Merchant Marine is one of the
safest fleets in the world, however, there is some risk
involved whenever you are exposed to the elements, as noted by
the tragic loss of the El Faro during Hurricane Joaquin. And as
I point that out, we commend the sacrifice of those mariners
who lost their lives.
The U.S. Merchant Marine Act of 1936 declared that
establishing an American Merchant Marine is a national
priority. Over the course of their storied history, our
nation's Merchant Mariners have made important contributions to
a wide range of U.S. defense activities, and have provided
critical support for both national emergencies and our economic
security. To maintain a maritime presence in global trade, and
assured ready access to ships and crews, to be able to move our
armed forces when and where they are needed, the United States
supports a fleet of privately owned and operated ships in
international trade. The sufficiency of the mariner pool to
support a large scale activation of the 61 ship government
reserve sealift fleet, and the two vessels we have that support
the Missile Defense Agency, directly depend upon the number of
commercial U.S.-flag vessels that are actively sailing.
A fleet that is sufficiently sized provides an adequate
pool of qualified Merchant Mariners to meet the crewing
requirements of both the commercial and the government sealift
fleets to meet national defense requirements, during both
national emergencies, and normal peacetime operations. To
encourage an active privately owned and operated U.S.-flag
fleet, Congress has enacted several measures, known as cargo
preference laws. These laws require that shippers use U.S.-flag
vessels to transport certain government-impelled cargoes,
meaning cargo that is funded or financed in any way by the
Federal Government. Congress has also passed the Maritime
Security Act, which established the Maritime Security Program,
or MSP, which provides direct annual stipends for a 60 ship,
active, commercially viable, militarily useful, privately owned
U.S.-flag vessels in exchange for assured access by the
Department of Defense. Of the 78 vessels that trade
internationally currently today, 57 participate in the MSP
program, although the authorized level is 60. This is the first
time that I know of that a Maritime Administrator has testified
before Congress where we had vacancies in this critical
program. The MSP provides critical employment for up to 2,400
U.S. Merchant Mariners, creating a reliable pool of mariners
ready to support the activation of the government's reserve
sealift fleets.
With respect to U.S. food aid programs, and like other
civilian cargoes under cargo preference, substantial food aid
is shipped on U.S.-flag vessels. In 2014 over 800,000 metric
tons of food aid were shipped on U.S.-flag vessels. The vast
majority of that tonnage, nearly 600,000 tons, consisted of
P.L. 83-480 Title II food aid. Further, over \1/2\ of the Title
II food aid cargo, 54 percent, is carried on dry bulk vessels,
which, unlike most of the liner vessels, are not part of the
MSP, and receive no active government support beyond cargo
preference. Based on the recent levels of P.L. 83-480 Title II
food aid shipments internationally, the Maritime Administration
estimates that the food aid cargo preference laws sustains
seven to ten liner-type ships and two dry bulk vessels in the
U.S.-flag fleet, along with approximately 360 to 480 mariner
jobs.
While the Fiscal Year 2016 President's budget includes the
Administration's food aid reform proposal, we have been
prepared to work with Members of Congress and other
stakeholders on alternate legislative approaches to achieve the
Administration's goal for food aid reform. These goals include
providing additional statutory flexibility that would allow
feeding more starving people for no additional cost, while
addressing the potential impact on food aid reform on maritime
capacity for national security, and the potential to ensure
minimal harm to domestic agricultural interests. The number of
vessels in the international trading fleet has declined from
106 vessels at the end of 2011 to 78 as of the 31st of October
of this year. This decline can be directly attributed and
related to the reductions in both DOD and agricultural cargoes,
including food aid, in recent years. Vessel owners have taken
into account a variety of factors before making a decision to
leave the U.S.-flag fleet.
However, we do know that the primary reason that privately
owned and operated ships remain in international trade under
U.S.-flag is to carry cargo. We also know that reduction in our
fleet of U.S.-flag vessels trading internationally means a
reduction in mariner jobs. MARAD closely tracks every billet
onboard active commercial ships and government U.S.-flag ships,
and we believe the current number of available mariners is only
sufficient to meet the initial sealift surge when government
reserve ships are activated. However, it will be extremely
challenging to sustain crewing requirements over an extended
period that requires a rotation of those crew members. Given
this assessment, I am working closely with the Department of
Defense, the U.S. Transportation Command, the U.S. Navy, and
commercial maritime industry to develop proposals to maintain
the adequate number of trained mariners. In addition, we are
currently developing a National Maritime Strategy that will
consider a comprehensive range of options to preserve and grow
the U.S. Merchant Marine. I am very glad to have the
opportunity to discuss the important issues with these
Committees, and I look forward to any questions that you might
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jaenichen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Paul N. ``Chip'' Jaenichen, Sr.,
Administrator, U.S. Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation,
Washington, D.C.
Good morning, Chairmen Rouzer and Hunter, Ranking Members Costa and
Garamendi, and Members of the Subcommittees. I want to thank you for
the opportunity to discuss the United States Merchant Marine and its
relationship to U.S. international food aid programs.
Overview of the Merchant Marine and its Relationship to Cargo
Preference Laws
The Merchant Marine Act of 1936 declared that establishing an
American Merchant Marine is a national priority. Over the course of
their storied history, our Merchant Mariners have made important
contributions to a wide range of U.S. defense activities and provided
critical support for national emergencies.
Under the Merchant Marine Act, it is U.S. policy that ``vessels of
the merchant marine should be operated by highly trained and efficient
citizens of the United States.'' The Jones Act requires the use of
privately owned and operated U.S.-flag vessels for U.S. coastwise and
non-contiguous commerce, including with Puerto Rico, Hawaii and
Alaska.\1\ In addition, to maintain a maritime presence in global trade
and ready access to ships and crews to move our Armed Forces when and
where they are needed, the United States supports a fleet of privately
owned and operated ships in international trades. The sufficiency of
this mariner pool to support a large-scale activation of the 63 ship
government reserve sealift fleet--measured by their U.S. Coast Guard
Merchant Mariner Credentials, availability, commitment and skills--
directly depends upon the number of commercial U.S.-flag merchant fleet
vessels actively sailing. A fleet that is sufficiently sized provides
an adequate pool of qualified Merchant Mariners to meet the crewing
requirements of both the commercial and government sealift fleets
during national emergencies and during normal peacetime operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ About 85 U.S.-flag self-propelled ocean-going vessels operate
in U.S. domestic commerce. Although this segment of the fleet does not
depend on government-impelled cargoes, the crews of these vessels are
qualified to operate sealift ships in the government reserve fleet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To encourage an active, privately owned and operated, U.S.-flag
fleet, Congress enacted several measures known as ``cargo preference''
laws between 1904 and 1954. These laws require shippers to use U.S.-
flag vessels to transport certain government-impelled ocean-borne
cargoes. Specifically, under the Military Cargo Preference Act of 1904
and the Cargo Preference Act of 1954, 100 percent of military cargo,
and at least 50 percent of non-military and agricultural cargoes, must
be carried on U.S.-flag vessels.
Congress provided additional support for sustaining a trained
mariner reserve through the Maritime Security Act of 1996 as modified
in 2003. This law established the Maritime Security Program (MSP),
which provides direct annual stipends for up to 60 active, commercially
viable, militarily useful, privately-owned U.S.-flag vessels. Under
this program, participating operators are required to make their ships
and commercial transportation resources available upon request by the
Secretary of Defense during times of war or national emergency. Of the
78 U.S.-flag vessels that trade internationally, currently 57
participate in the MSP program. The MSP fleet ensures military access
to a global fleet of ships in ocean-borne foreign commerce with the
necessary intermodal logistics capability to move military equipment
and supplies during armed conflict or national emergency. MSP vessels
have been key contributors to our nation's efforts in Afghanistan and
Iraq over the last decade, moving over 50 percent of all military
cargo--over 26 million tons--to the Middle East. Since 2009, MSP
carriers have moved over 90 percent of the ocean-borne cargo needed to
support U.S. military operations and rebuilding programs in both
countries. The MSP also provides critical employment for up to 2,400
U.S. merchant mariners, creating a reliable pool of mariners ready to
support the activation of the government's sealift fleets. The 2016
Budget request includes the MSP funding level necessary to enable DOT
to maintain a U.S.-flag merchant fleet operating in international
trade, crewed by U.S. mariners, and available to serve the nation's
homeland and national security needs.
With respect to the Ready Reserve Force (RRF) government sealift
reserve (the fleet of 46 former commercial vessels directly owned by
the Department of Transportation), while there has not been a wartime
activation of this reserve fleet in nearly a decade, U.S. merchant
mariners supported Operation Unified Assistance, as the U.S. response
to the Ebola crisis in West Africa, and a government reserve sealift
ship that was converted to an Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) approved destruction facility and subsequently
destroyed 600 tons of the Syrian Government's declared chemical
weapons.
U.S. Food Aid Shipments on U.S.-Flag Vessels
Under the food aid reform proposal in the FY 2016 Budget, the vast
majority of P.L. 83-480 Title II food aid would continue to be sourced
and shipped from the United States. The President's FY 2016 Budget
Request includes $25 million as a component of food aid reforms
proposed for P.L. 83-480 Title II food aid that would provide
flexibility to deliver emergency food where appropriate such as in
conflict situations and logistically difficult crises. The additional
funding would mitigate the impact that such reforms could have on
mariner jobs. Most of the request would be devoted to provide direct
stipend payments to operators of vessels in foreign trade, separate
from MSP payments. Additionally, some of the request would support
training programs to retain and educate U.S. mariners for critical
occupations to preserve mariner employment on U.S.-flag vessels.
With respect to U.S. food aid programs, in 2014, over 800,000
metric tons of food aid was shipped on U.S.-flag vessels. The vast
majority of this tonnage--nearly 600,000 tons--consists of food aid
provided under the program established under P.L. 83-480 Title II.\2\
Further, over \1/2\ of the Title II food aid cargo--54 percent--is
carried on dry bulk vessels, which, unlike most of the liner vessels,
are not part of the MSP and receive no government support beyond cargo
preference. The three internationally trading dry-bulk ships currently
in the fleet are primarily carrying food aid and operated by a single
carrier. Based on the recent levels of Title II U.S. food aid shipments
internationally, the Maritime Administration (MARAD) estimates that
food-aid cargo preference laws sustain seven to ten liner type ships
and two dry bulk vessels in the U.S.-flag fleet, and approximately 360
to 480 mariner jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ During FY 2014, a total of 815,604 metric tons of food aid was
shipped on U.S.-flag vessels as preference cargo. Of this, 592,549
metric tons were P.L. 83-480 Title II food aid (318,710 metric tons dry
bulk and 273,839 metric tons liner).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trends Concerning the U.S.-Flag Vessel Fleet Size
The total number of vessels in the internationally trading U.S.-
flag fleet has varied considerably over the years, rising from 92 in
2001 to 106 in 2011and declining to 78 vessels in October 2015,
continuing a long-term trend decline.
U.S.-Flag International Trading Fleet
2000-2015
Number of Ships
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The continuing winding down of military operations and the
decreasing number of U.S. bases in foreign countries and military
personnel and families assigned overseas has reduced the volume of
Department of Defense (DOD)-impelled cargoes. In addition, the Moving
Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century (MAP-21), which took effect on
July 6, 2012, returned the food aid preference threshold for U.S.-flag
vessels from 75 percent to its previous level of 50 percent, which is
the level for other civilian cargoes.
Vessel owners take into account a variety of factors before making
a decision to leave the fleet including government-impelled cargo as
well as foreign-flag trading options for their vessels. In individual
circumstances, particularly for operators that do not have the benefits
of participating in the MSP, loss of government-impelled cargo could
influence a vessel owner's decision to retire vessels from the fleet or
reflag. Unfortunately, detailed data that would allow the exact
calculation of when a vessel owner would make that decision are not
available and are difficult to obtain.
What we do know is that the reason that privately owned and
operated ships remain in international trade under the U.S.-flag is to
move cargo. We also know that a reduction to our fleet of U.S.-flag
vessels trading internationally means a reduction in mariner jobs in
international trade. While this does not preclude these mariners from
seeking jobs in the growing Jones Act trade, the number of ocean-going,
self-propelled vessels trading in the domestic coastwise trade has
stayed roughly the same.
Sealift Manpower Assessment
MARAD is currently working with DOD to address mariner requirements
and to assess the availability and capacity of sealift assets to
support national security. MARAD is responsible for determining whether
adequate manpower is available to support the operation of sealift
ships during a major crisis. Pursuant to this direction, while there
are important data difficulties in assessing the availability of
mariners, we continue to review the pool of civilian U.S. Merchant
Mariners in international trade available to crew government sealift
ships when activated and whether the current number of qualified and
experienced mariners available will be adequate in the future to
support a large scale activation that extends beyond 6 months in
duration. This assessment of the status of the civilian Merchant
Mariner pool includes close coordination with maritime labor and
consultation with other maritime industry stakeholders.
While domestic coastwise (Jones Act) trade has been growing in some
sectors, the reductions in the number of afloat jobs have decreased the
size of the blue water mariner pool. At the same time, the domestic and
international training requirements for mariners in domestic coastwise
and international trade are increasing due to Standards of Training,
Certification and Watchkeeping passed by the International Maritime
Organization that take effect in January 2017.
We closely track every billet onboard the active commercial and
government U.S.-flag fleet (commercial vessels average about 20 billets
or 40 mariners on an annualized basis), and within current
international trade there are approximately 11,300 readily available
mariners to sail on either commercial or government reserve sealift
ships. This revised analysis of the contract mariner pool, including
both union and non-union mariners has been shared with DOD. In contrast
to the past, the analysis assumes that any mariner, who has not sailed
in the last 18 months, rather than 24 months, will not be available at
a time of crisis. While this number of contract mariners is sufficient
to meet the initial sealift surge when government reserve sealift ships
are activated, it could severely challenge our ability to sustain
crewing requirements over an extended period that requires the rotation
of crew members on both government and commercial vessels. The initial
activation of the 63 MARAD and Military Sealift Command surge vessels
will require 1,255 mariners with an additional 1,910 mariners needed
for sustained operation.
Maritime labor unions have determined that mariners who remain out
of work or are not actively sailing for a period of more than 18 months
are unlikely to keep their mariner credential, training or other
requirements current. It takes an average of 10 years to produce a
Master (Ship's Captain) or a Chief Engineer, and current attrition
rates are projected to overtake the advancement rate of new management
level blue water mariners within the next 5 years.
Given this assessment, I am working closely with the U.S.
Transportation Command, the U.S. Navy, and the commercial maritime
industry to develop proposals to maintain an adequate number of trained
mariners. We are currently developing a National Maritime Strategy that
will consider a comprehensive range of actions to preserve and grow all
aspects of the U.S. Merchant Marine. We also look forward to continuing
to provide technical assistance to policymakers in Congress who are
working to address these important matters.
I am very glad to have the opportunity today to discuss these
important issues with the Committees at this critical juncture point
for the long-term health of the international trading U.S. Merchant
Marine. I welcome the input of the experts on this Committee along with
other interested stakeholders on our continued efforts to support food
aid initiatives and programs advancing our Merchant Marine and national
security. I look forward to any questions you may have.

Mr. Rouzer. Thank you both, gentlemen, for being here
today. Mr. Jaenichen, my question is for you. As I said in my
opening statement, I have serious concerns about USAID's back
door attempt to exclude agriculture from negotiations that
dramatically impact the delivery of in-kind food aid. I am
concerned about the fact that those meetings excluded
agriculture groups, a major food aid contributor, obviously.
Now, in previous hearings we learned that these deals would
have directed money from Title II food aid programs to MSP and
non-MSP shippers of food aid. Please explain MARAD's position
on this proposal, along with the agency's involvement in the
development of this proposal, if you don't mind.
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We support the
Fiscal Year 2016 President's budget, which proposed 25 percent
flexibility for local and regional purchase. You will note
that, as part of that Fiscal Year 2016 budgeting, it did
include $25 million to support and mitigate the impact on the
U.S. Merchant Marine. One million dollars of that would have
been used to support training and other efforts with regards to
the mariners, and then the other $24 million would have been
used as some kind of a stipend to support the ships most
affected by that flexibility, and those would be in the non-MSP
category.
With regard to the proposal, to which you referred, the
actual proposal, and MARAD became involved only after the
former Administrator for USAID, Dr. Raj Shah, approached both
Secretary Vilsack and Secretary Fox, and there was an agreement
in principle. And we were tasked, at that time, to work the
legislative language and the rulemaking that would invoke that
deal. And that was what we were working on. At no time was this
an attempt to be a back door, and we fully understood that it
would require a legislative proposal that would be presented to
Congress, as well as a rulemaking that would undergo public
comment.
Mr. Rouzer. To your knowledge, were the agriculture groups
consulted at all?
Mr. Jaenichen. I know that I personally talked with some
USDA representatives, especially the Associate Administrator
for Foreign Agricultural Service. I know that the Secretary was
consulted. I do not know if the commodity groups, or any of
those stakeholders, were consulted.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you. Mr. Costa, do you have any
questions?
Mr. Costa. Mr. Secretary, you mentioned that the
President's budget for food aid also improves our ability to
respond in these humanitarian situations. How do you think it
does that?
Mr. Berteau. How do I think what?
Mr. Costa. It improves our ability to provide that
humanitarian aid.
Mr. Berteau. I think that, in many cases in humanitarian
aid, the folks who are trying to figure out what to do, time is
of the essence.
Mr. Costa. But what is the measure, the criteria? I mean,
besides time, compared to----
Mr. Berteau. I think time----
Mr. Costa.--the last couple of what? Do you have----
Mr. Berteau. I think time is the critical measure there.
Mr. Costa. Do you have metrics, in terms of assistance that
is being provided in these----
Mr. Berteau. Not that the Defense Department tracks. I
suspect the Administration does, but I don't track those
metrics.
Mr. Costa. Do you track this? Do you provide the metrics to
measure this? I guess we will find out, do you care to comment?
Mr. Berteau. I would say that, for those areas where the
Defense Department is directly involved, for instance the
Defense Logistics Agency providing humanitarian assistance, and
we are doing this right now, to refugee camps in Jordan, in
Lebanon, in Turkey, in Iraq, we track very carefully the entire
requirements which we receive from the U.S. Agency for
International Development, or the State Department, through the
purchase, the transportation, and the ultimate delivery to the
endpoint. So we track that very carefully in----
Mr. Costa. So for----
Mr. Berteau.--but we don't set those requirements. Those
requirements are set by other agencies----
Mr. Costa. We have----
Mr. Berteau.--in the Federal Government, and we respond to
them.
Mr. Costa. Because we all know we have a tremendous refugee
problem in that part of the world, whether we are talking about
Jordan or Turkey. So, for example, how would that be delivered?
It would go through a U.S. carrier ship to Haifa, and then from
there to Jordan?
Mr. Berteau. For the most part it is going into ports in
the Persian Gulf coming in, into Turkey coming down, or into
Jordan directly. And it is both through ship and by air,
depending--medical supplies, for instance, are often brought by
air because of the perishability of them.
Mr. Costa. Well, obviously you have less tonnage. I mean,
it----
Mr. Berteau. Right.
Mr. Costa.--more cost-effective to bring----
Mr. Berteau. Right.
Mr. Costa.--it in by air----
Mr. Berteau. We work hard in those cases to minimize the
transportation costs, and maximize the amount of money
availability to deliver humanitarian services. That is one of
the trades that you have to make. But, again, time becomes a
critical element----
Mr. Costa. Yes.
Mr. Berteau.--there as well.
Mr. Costa. And you mentioned the assessment of the proposal
would not impact DOD's ability to crew the surge fleet and
deploy forces for sustainment of cargoes. Can you give an
overview of that assessment on how that works?
Mr. Berteau. If you look at the total amount of cargo
preference capacity that we use, the single biggest factor of
that, of course, is DOD's shipping of its own material and
equipment. That runs roughly \4/5\ of the total cargo
preference run across the board. Food aid ends up being about
another 15 percent of the total, and then other Federal cargo
preferences, Ex-Bank, et cetera, ends up making up the rest of
the difference. The DOD portion of that, of course, has been
declining, because we no longer have hundreds of thousands of
troops deployed in Iraq and Afghanistan. I think Chairman
Hunter mentioned that it is not going to zero. There is
probably a floor here that we are at right now. So if we look
at the modest impact of the----
Mr. Costa. What could likely increase here in the next
several years, with the whole issue with ISIL, and our efforts
to focus a much stronger effort there.
Mr. Berteau. I don't think I have a precise prediction of
tonnage and dates for ships, but the chances are that we are
going to be in that business for quite some time.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Jaenichen, is it? Your testimony, you talked
about examples of successful programs that have been
administered over the last 50 years or so, and the positive
impact of maintaining mariner jobs. My question to you is, why
would we want to consider food aid reforms that would threaten
those jobs?
Mr. Jaenichen. One of my focuses, as the Maritime
Administrator, is to minimize any impact on the U.S.-flag
fleet, which is the reason why I was involved in the
discussions with USAID for this. Going back to your previous
question, with regards to metrics for humanitarian assistance,
I would note that for the ready reserve fleet, we do track
that, in terms of their readiness to be able to be activated in
5 days to be able to support that. We most recently did that
with three ready reserve force ships that supported United
Assistance, which is the Ebola mission in West Africa, to be
able to get those supplies, to be able to support the medical
teams that were on the ground there almost immediately.
Mr. Costa. Before my time runs out, do you think the food
aid reform proposal in the President's budget would reduce the
amount of cargo moved by U.S.-flag ships?
Mr. Jaenichen. Yes. And that was the reason why there was a
proposal in the budget to include $24 million, to mitigate the
impact on the ships that we thought would most be affected,
which we estimated to be four to six ships.
Mr. Costa. All right, thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time has
expired.
Mr. Rouzer. I now recognize Chairman Hunter for any
questions he may have.
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I guess the first
question is why do we have 57 and not 60 MSP ships for the
first time ever?
Mr. Jaenichen. I believe the real issue there, Chairman
Hunter, is the lack of cargo. If you don't have cargo, you
don't have ships, and if you don't have ships, you don't have--
--
Mr. Hunter. But I thought, with the MSP, you are getting a
stipend so that you can run your own stuff until the U.S. needs
you, right?
Mr. Jaenichen. No. The actual MSP program, under the
Maritime Security Act, was based on three things. It was based
on the stipend payment, which was never fully intended to cover
the entire amount of the differential between operating under
U.S.-flag versus foreign flag, which we estimate to be $5 to $7
million. The other basis is you had to have access to
government-impelled cargo. As Assistant Secretary Berteau
indicated, those cargoes have declined. In fact, they have
declined 50 percent since 2010, as has the food aid cargo, and
other cargoes. I will note that, although the revenue base is
about 15 percent for food aid, in terms of tonnage, it is about
50 percent. It is tonnage that fills ships, not revenue. And
so, from that standpoint, it does have an impact.
Mr. Hunter. So you only have 57 because we only need----
Mr. Jaenichen. We only have 57, but the other part of that
is you have to have civilian cargoes. Today the global market
is depressed. In fact, I just saw yesterday where the container
rates are at the lowest level they have been since the
recession in 2009. And the Baltic Dry Index has indicated that,
for raw commodities, they are at the lowest level they have
been in 30 years. And so, to compete in those markets, where
you have a non-competitive advantage due to the financial
constraints that you have to be able to operate under U.S.-
flag, it makes it very difficult. Those declining cargoes have
put downward pressure on them, and they----
Mr. Hunter. Okay.
Mr. Jaenichen.--had to make decisions to be economically
viable.
Mr. Hunter. So when appropriators appropriate money,
though, they appropriate for 60 ships, right?
Mr. Jaenichen. They appropriate $186 million----
Mr. Hunter. So what happens to the $3.2 million times three
ships?
Mr. Jaenichen. What ends up happening, it becomes
carryover, and then we continue to carry that over through
the----
Mr. Hunter. So it stays in the MSP fund?
Mr. Jaenichen. It stays in the MSP as new year funding,
that is correct, sir.
Mr. Hunter. Okay.
Mr. Berteau. And, Mr. Chairman, for the record, we are
encouraging them to try to get back up from 57.
Mr. Hunter. Yes. So, Mr. Berteau, let me ask you, DOD was
doing a study under General Paul J. Selva, before he moved on,
USTRANSCOM, and I know MARAD did two strategic symposiums last
year. What were your findings, number one, and have you shared
with each other, number two, and I guess three, when do you go
about implementing all of the things that you found in your
review?
Mr. Berteau. Let me start with the third of those, on the
implementation end. We have a number of additional questions
that have come up from the reviews that are put in place there,
and chief among them is the constancy, and consistency, and
reliability of the data that are generated underneath that.
What we found is there are a number of disconnects in the
information, and we have to resolve that. For example, the
actual demand generated by the requirements that we have laid
out can be interpreted in a variety of different ways, square
footage, tonnage, or a specific capacity for cargo, and we have
to reconcile those.
Mr. Hunter. So by doing the study, you realized that you
need to do a better study?
Mr. Berteau. I arrived while--in my----
Mr. Hunter. Okay.
Mr. Berteau.--current job while that was underway, and that
is exactly the first conclusion that I have come to.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. So there are no real conclusions, then,
from what the DOD has seen?
Mr. Berteau. I think there are some, but not a sufficient
number.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. What about you guys? I went to one
strategy meeting last year, I remember that, but you guys did
these symposiums, right?
Mr. Jaenichen. That is correct. In fact, we have a draft
maritime strategy. It has been informally reviewed by the
majority of our stakeholders. We have incorporated those
comments. We intend to put that into formal interagency
concurrents within the coming days, and our intention is to
have a draft maritime strategy published by spring for public
comment.
Mr. Hunter. How was MARAD able to do it, and not DOD? I
mean, you are going to ask the same questions.
Mr. Jaenichen. Well, I would also tell you that we started
that in 2013. The first National Maritime Strategy symposium
you referred to was in January of 2014. We have spent some time
to ensure that we got it right. Now, we have done some
additional studies, including the availability of mariners----
Mr. Hunter. What I am asking, though, is why doesn't DOD
jump on that bandwagon? If you guys know how to ask the
questions, and know----
Mr. Jaenichen. They actually certainly have, sir. In fact,
the Secretary's staff, and the Secretary himself, have provided
direct comments back to that National Maritime Strategy, and we
have incorporated those comments.
Mr. Hunter. And does that help you, Mr. Berteau, on your--
--
Mr. Berteau. We are looking forward to that. I have
reviewed that draft strategy, and I did provide some comments
back to them, and we are looking forward to the next round with
them. I think that it gives a basis for us to work more closely
together to make sure we are making the same decisions from
common data.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. I guess my last point is, and this will
be fun for you to answer. Why is it so difficult to get the
point across to all the stakeholders on how important it is to
have a fleet on standby for the United States to use for any
purpose that it sees fit, national security or otherwise? Why
is it so difficult to get across to--I mean, you have folks
like the Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Ed Royce,
wants to get rid of food aid. So you would think that all the
stakeholders in Congress, and in the Executive Branch, and the
regulatory branches, would realize the impact of not having
enough U.S.-flag ships, U.S. mariners, to crew those ships, and
what it would do to the country if we really needed this
capability. Why is it so hard, do you think, to get this point
across?
Mr. Berteau. I actually wish I knew the answer to that
question, of why it is so hard. It is pretty obvious to me.
Now, we are not using a lot of our capacity to support the
kinds of long-term, high-sustained combat operations that we
are actually designed to mobilize for. We are not doing them
because that is not the war we are in right now. However, to
say that we don't want to have the capability to do that would
almost guarantee that the opposite outcome would occur. I
literally don't know why this is so hard to understand.
Mr. Hunter. Mr. Chairman, I have one last question. What
would it cost to not have MSP, and to simply have enough ships
on hand, let us say that the Navy did it, just sitting there?
Kind of like the ready reserve fleet, but actually moving
around every day. What would it cost to have that capability on
standby 24/7 with the number of ships that we would need to
surge into a part of the world?
Mr. Jaenichen. Chairman Hunter, I can give you an example.
Currently today the MSP program, assuming it is all 60 ships in
the program, that costs us $186 million. The ready reserve
force fleet, which is approximately 46 ships, It takes
approximately $300 million a year to keep them in 5 day
readiness status, with partial crews, to be able to be
activated in 5 days. If I extrapolate that out to cover the
cost to do that for 60, it comes up to about $390 million on an
annual basis, and so that is nearly $200 million more than what
it would take to operate the MSP, and that does not include
recapitalization costs. The MSP, those recapitalization costs,
are borne by the private operators who are part of the MSP.
That cost would be in the billions. And so the program itself
provides us that readiness. You could not afford to do that if
the government had to pay for it on its own, without cargo
preference.
Mr. Hunter. Thank you. Thank you for your indulgence, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Rouzer. I kept my questions short so you could go long,
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Garamendi.
Mr. Garamendi. I will try to stay within my 5 minutes. The
testimony you gave just a moment ago, Mr. Jaenichen, is
extremely important, and apparently that information is lost on
the Administration, as it continues to push the USAID notion of
cashing out, which would inevitably result in less cargo, and
less ships, and more expense to the total taxpayer. Is that
correct? Is that the formula? Is that the equation? You reduce
the cargo, you increase the cost of readiness to the U.S.
military. And it is some $200 million additional money. Is that
correct?
Mr. Jaenichen. If you were to do it all in a reserve fleet,
where you have a stationary fleet, and you did not have the
MSP, that would be an accurate assessment. However, that is one
of the reasons why, in the Administration's proposal for Fiscal
Year 2016, it did include additional funding to offset the
impact we believed it would have on the U.S.-flag fleet.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, why don't we just ship more cargo,
rather than more cash subsidy?
Mr. Jaenichen. As I indicated in my testimony, Ranking
Member Garamendi, it is cargo that is the reason why you have
ships, and if there were cargo, the ships that either retired,
scrapped, or re-flagged would have remained under U.S.-flag, in
my opinion.
Mr. Garamendi. Well, let us go to why there may not be as
much cargo. Talk to me about your enforcement powers to enforce
the current laws on impelled cargo. Mr. Hunter and I have put
together, in the last two Coast Guard reauthorizations,
specific language that you will be given the power to enforce
the impelled cargo. What is your position with regard to that
requirement, that is currently being discussed as we try to
move towards a compromise with our Senate colleagues?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for the question, Congressman. I
would note that we have a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that is
undergoing interagency review, and has been since March of this
year. That Notice of Proposed Rulemaking would address many of
the issues of which you are referring to, with regard to
enforcement of cargo preference.
Mr. Garamendi. It has been underway since March? Why hasn't
it been completed, and where is it stuck?
Mr. Jaenichen. It is in the interagency review process,
sir.
Mr. Garamendi. Meaning OMB?
Mr. Jaenichen. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. So it is stuck in OMB?
Mr. Jaenichen. I won't say that it is stuck in OMB. It is
still undergoing interagency review.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. What is a sufficiently sized
fleet? Mr. Berteau, what is a sufficiently sized fleet, and
then what is the sufficient mariners to man that fleet.
Mr. Berteau. So we create our requirements not in terms of
number of ships, but in terms of the requirements of what goes
on those ships. So it is square footage, it is tonnage, it is
container capacity, it is roll-on/roll-off capacity across the
entire fleet. Translating that into ship by ship numbers ends
up with a range, if you will, of ships available to us. We
haven't fully tested the limits of our current capacity and
capability for quite a number of decades. I mean, the closest
we have come was Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm,
which was mentioned earlier as a high demand test for our
overall capacity. We used a lot, again, at the beginning----
Mr. Garamendi. Were we able to meet the demand with
domestic ships?
Mr. Berteau. Today we can probably meet the demand. We have
not done a capability requirements study in about 6 years now.
I think it is about time for us to undertake another one. A lot
of the world has changed since 2009, the last time we did it. I
think it is time for us to update those requirements.
Mr. Garamendi. I would say it is high time.
Mr. Berteau. I would agree with----
Mr. Garamendi. It could be tomorrow that we need those
ships.
Mr. Berteau. It could well be.
Mr. Garamendi. And I just heard you say you don't know if
you have sufficient ships.
Mr. Berteau. I am insufficiently comfortable with the
notion----
Mr. Garamendi. So you are----
Mr. Berteau. I am insufficiently comfortable with the
statement that we have enough.
Mr. Garamendi. Insufficiently comfortable?
Mr. Berteau. Yes.
Mr. Garamendi. Meaning you are uncomfortable?
Mr. Berteau. It means I am uncomfortable, yes.
Mr. Garamendi. In other words, you are not sure that you
have sufficient ships to meet the demand that might occur?
Mr. Berteau. I cannot sit here and tell you that we can
meet the demand that might occur.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Jaenichen, would you like to comment on
that?
Mr. Jaenichen. I can certainly give you some specific
examples. With regard to Desert Storm and Desert Shield, about
23 percent of the actual cargo that DOD actually moved, it was
forced to go on U.S.-flag due to lack of availability. We also
activated 76 out of the 96 ships that were in the ready reserve
fleet at the time. I would note that that 76, although it was
not a full activation, that is 30 more ships than I currently
have in my ready reserve force fleet today of 46. Additionally,
at that time, I had 199 ships under U.S.-flag in the 1990-91
timeframe. Today that is 78. General McDew, who is the current
Commander of the U.S. Transportation Command, is on record
saying that if we were required to do the same amount of
movement to be able to support Desert Shield and Desert Storm,
we do not have the sealift capacity today.
Mr. Berteau. And that is why I am uncomfortable.
Mr. Garamendi. Does that also mean the mariners, as well as
the ships?
Mr. Jaenichen. It does. In fact, our mariner pool today
stands at about 11,300, and I believe that we are on the very
hairy edge of being able--we can certainly man all of the ships
that we have currently in the reserve sealift fleet, however,
we would not be able to support a rotation of those crew
members at the 3 to 4 month point.
Mr. Berteau. And I would note that the two examples we use
here, Persian Gulf I in the early 1990s, Persian Gulf II in the
early 2000s, neither one extended over a period of time longer
than 6 months. So the real problem could become with a second
rotation beyond a 6 month period.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, just for the record, could you
provide the specifics in this discussion for both of you? Thank
you. I yield back.
[The information referred to is located on p. 67.]
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member, and
I thank the witnesses for being here. I have been on the
receiving end of getting those goods on ships into theaters,
and I understand having the capacity when we need it in a full
spell, and there is a whole lot of difference between a Desert
Storm and the type of wars that we are in right now, as far as
what kind of material you have to ship. Your capacity needs to
be built so that we can send the right amount of tanks, Brads,
self-propelled Howitzers, all those very heavy things that take
up a lot of space also.
But as a theater matures, the need for that fleet goes
down. No matter how long you stay in theater, you don't have to
keep re-supplying. Your supplies change, and the types. So do
you feel like, on a surge capacity, like Desert Storm, for a
high-intensity conflict, as we say in the military, do you feel
like we have sufficient ships now that could get us to where we
need to be so that soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines have
the right equipment when they arrive in theater?
Mr. Berteau. The answer to that question is probably yes,
but that is a scenario that actually doesn't reflect the full
spectrum of the scenarios we have to prepare for. For instance,
in that scenario there is zero attrition of those ships as they
are on the way there. We have to be prepared for the potential
scenario in which, in fact, there is an adversary out there who
doesn't admit to zero attrition as their objective.
Mr. Kelly. And having participated in the War on Terror
since 2003, my first deployment was five, when we actually had
goods shipped on ships over there, and filled up the CONEXes,
and containers, and had equipment going. That has very much
gone down over the last 14 years, so that we are not shipping
near as much. So, that being said, do we not have room now for
foreign food on those ships that are not currently shipping the
same amount of quantities of supplies that they were in 2005
and 2006, at the surge in Iraq? The amount of equipment and the
amount of mobilizations has definitely gone down. Has not the
amount of space required because of military shipments gone
down since 2005 until the present?
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you for the question. What I would
tell you is there is available capacity to ship U.S. food aid
cargoes, however, the commodity prices are up high enough that
there is less being shipped today. In Fiscal Year 2014 we
shipped about 815,000 metric tons of food aid on U.S.-flag
ships out of about 1.4 million, so we still met the cargo
preference requirement. But I do know that today some of the
ships principally involved in carrying food aid cargoes are
actually sitting in lay-up, meaning that they are alongside the
pier with no mariners assigned. So there is capacity, if there
were additional cargoes to carry. As we pointed out before, it
is the decline in cargoes which is having the most dramatic
effect on the U.S.-flag fleet, because it is just a lack of
cargo that is out there, both on the DOD side, and on the
civilian cargo side as well.
Mr. Kelly. And going to Ranking Member Costa's comment, and
there was another comment, lack of food, or famine, is national
security. The regions where they can't be fed, and they are too
poor, and they don't have that, that causes instability in the
regions. The places where our terrorists are being trained that
are attacking this nation are places where they don't have
food, they don't have jobs, they have nothing else, so these
are training hotbeds for terrorists that want to attack and
kill citizens of this nation. Would you agree that cash money,
as opposed to food that has a U.S. flag on it, is much less
effective in feeding that population? It is much more easily
corrupted, or to spend money on weapons and those things, as
opposed to food with a U.S. flag on the back on a U.S.-flag
ship that delivers it.
Mr. Jaenichen. I believe that the GAO report that was out
in August of 2015 had comments about that. I don't have an
opinion.
Mr. Berteau. Yes, certainly from a Defense Department point
of view, we would love to know the answer to that question, but
it is not something we track.
Mr. Kelly. But you would agree that money is much easier to
spend on weapons, and to spend on things that are not good for
the United States than bags of food with a U.S. flag on them
that also shows our interest in those countries? And I am very
pro-defense, but I am also very pro-agriculture.
Mr. Berteau. The economic reality of what you said is
indisputable.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rouzer. The gentlelady from California, Ms. Hahn.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and our Ranking Members
here today for this joint hearing. While USDA and USAID
currently provide lifesaving support to people around the world
in a manner that ensures minimal fraud, they are not perfect.
But what we are hearing, of course, is these food aid programs
support our maritime industry, an industry that is crucial for
our U.S. national security. And what we have heard is a strong
U.S. maritime industry prepares our nation not only for the
threats today, but the threats that we can't even comprehend
tomorrow. And I just want to urge these Committees to consider
the impacts of food aid reform that are being discussed. I
certainly want to make our aid more efficient and accountable,
but not if it means compromising a critical industry for our
national security.
So we have heard how more cargo supports our maritime
industry, and our U.S.-flag ships, and we sort of touched on it
a little bit, but the actual delivery of aid and food is
compromised if we are just talking about cash, not just because
of the fraud issue, but let us remember some of the emergencies
that we have had recently. The Philippines, that was ravaged by
a typhoon, and we fed millions in the months that followed. But
if we had relied just on developing farms, or cash to buy
locally grown food, where was the capacity to purchase that
food?
I really want to talk about the actual delivering of the
aid. Whether it be natural disasters, or climate change, it
seems to me that we are having more drought. We are having more
natural disasters. So if we switched to buying locally, and I
am going to ask this to Mr. Berteau, what happens if that is
where our focus is? If we are focused on buying locally, and
cash instead of delivering food, how is this impacted by these
natural disasters in the areas where we are attempting to
deliver aid?
Mr. Berteau. Congresswoman, I would refer back to a little
bit of what Congressman Kelly said, that the national security
implications of this are much broader than just the Defense
Department point of view. And one of the realities that we face
today is there is actually no part of the world that doesn't
matter anymore. Everything matters. It used to be there were
places we could ignore, and no bad consequences would come from
it.
When it comes to our ability to respond to major natural
disasters, obviously Defense plays a critical role in both
providing the capability to respond and the capacity to respond
at the level we need to. But we do that in response, really, to
the requirements that come from the broader national security
community, interagency process and the White House. We don't
generate those requirements. So I can't really analyze the
specifics of the food aid impact of cash versus food in a
generic sense there.
I know that when we are responding to a particular crisis,
what we bring is the capacity to deliver. We don't have the
stocks of food ourselves, but we bring the capacity to both
create not only the carrying capacity, but the infrastructure
at the receiving end to be able to offload and distribute in-
country, and we have that capability inherent in our military
today. And it is one of the key elements of shaping and
engaging in nations all around the world that create the kind
of bonds that we need to have with those nations in order to
foster the kind of future we need to have.
Ms. Hahn. But, again, could you specifically talk about how
the attempt to reform this, by buying locally, or using cash,
would be impacted in a region that was destroyed, where there
is no food, where there is a drought, where there is a natural
disaster? I think we would be very shortsighted to not realize
that we could be reforming this to an extent that would be
impractical in the very regions that we are asked to help and
deliver aid.
Mr. Jaenichen. Congresswoman, I would point out that
typically the U.S. response in a humanitarian crisis is to
match the response to what the need is. And I am sure, in the
case what you are referring to, we would have to supply the
right food versus a local regional purchase if there is not the
infrastructure to be able to support that. So typically our
response is in a nature that is tailored to the humanitarian
crisis.
Ms. Hahn. So you would think it would be shortsighted for
us to move away from delivering food, or having the
agricultural capacity, or the maritime industry capacity to do
that, as opposed to just a move towards cash and buying
locally?
Mr. Jaenichen. I would point out that the Fiscal Year 2016
budget is to provide the flexibility for up to 25 percent. It
is not that it is going to be 25 percent, and that has been the
Administration position.
Ms. Hahn. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rouzer. I see the Chairman of the full Committee has
arrived. All right. Mrs. Hartzler?
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
gentlemen, for being here, and please walk us through the
number of mariners that would be available during times of war,
and how that number is calculated.
Mr. Jaenichen. Thank you, Congresswoman. Currently today we
estimate that there are 11,300 who are actively sailing to be
able to support our international fleet, and also our reserve
fleet. These are typically the officers who have unlimited
ocean endorsements, for our deck officers, and unlimited
horsepower, for our engineers. We also have what are called the
unlicensed portion, which makes up about 60 percent of any crew
on any one ship.
We have actually done it three ways. We used the Coast
Guard database for the Merchant Mariner credentials that have
those endorsements on them. We also use our own calculation,
based on the number of billets on each of the vessels, both on
our government reserve sealift fleet and our commercial fleet.
We multiply that by two because of the rotational nature of the
billets themselves, so every billet typically has to have two
seafarers to be able to support rotation. And then finally we
engage the third way, with our maritime labor unions, to be
able to get a number. And I will tell you that the numbers from
each of those three different methods is within about 200, and
so that is why we are pretty confident in the number that we
have. So it is somewhere between about 11,200 to 11,400. So we
are right in the middle of the band, at 11,300 as our best
estimate.
Mrs. Hartzler. Do you think that is the adequate to meet
the defense strategy, or potential threats out there, or that
we need more? How comfortable and confident do you feel that
that is----
Mr. Jaenichen. As I pointed out in both my written
statement and in my oral statement, I believe that we are right
on the border of not being able to provide sufficient--and as
Secretary Berteau pointed out, typically our operations have
not required in excess of 6 months to have a full activation. I
would tell you that, with a full activation of the ready
reserve force of the 46 ships, plus the ships in the military
sealift command, a surge fleet, in addition to the 655 mariners
that are on them today, they would require 1,200 more. I would
need 1,900 at about the 4 month point to go in, and actively
sailing I have about 7,100. So I actually have a shortfall at
that point, at about the 4 to 5 month point, where the rotation
would have to occur.
If we have to go longer than that, I am concerned that we
do not have the ability to do that, unless the mariners who are
currently serving onboard agree to go longer. Now,
historically, our mariners and our U.S. Merchant Marine has
done whatever it takes to meet the mission, and so we
anticipate that they would do that, but it is an all volunteer
force. They are not required to, and we have no way to enforce
them to do so.
Mrs. Hartzler. Are you trying to recruit, and to increase
that number? How are you trying to address what you think might
be a shortfall?
Mr. Jaenichen. We are currently working several different
methods. With regards to the officer side, we do that through
our state maritime academies, the six state maritime academies,
and also the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy. And I know for the
unlicensed side, that are unlicensed seafarers, they have an
active recruitment process where they bring them in, they train
them. It takes about a year to be able to get them out to sea.
So we have an active ongoing process.
The challenge is, if you do not have jobs, it is hard to
entice people to come into an industry where there are no jobs,
or they can't get full time employment. So the challenge is
with a declining fleet size, it is hard to get folks to come
into the industry. So we have to fix and stabilize and grow the
fleet in order to improve those job opportunities.
Mrs. Hartzler. Very good. Who picks the ships for the
Maritime Security Program, and how are they selected?
Mr. Jaenichen. Typically the manner in which we do it is if
we have an opening, such as we have today, where we have 57
ships currently in the program, the companies that are out
there, if they have an operating agreement, they can submit a
request for a replacement vessel. That replacement vessel would
go through a review by USTRANSCOM to determine military
usefulness, and then the Maritime Administration would do a
review of the economic viability. We would take a look at the
structure to make sure that it meets all the requirements to be
able to be U.S. controlled, U.S. operated, so that we have
direct assured access to be able to support that.
When we have open solicitations that would come in, and we
would do the same thing in a different manner, but we do have
ability to transfer and substitute, and we will be coming out
with a solicitation here within the next week or so, indicating
that we have one or more slots to fill in the MSP program, and
we would invite anybody who has a ship they would like to bring
in, and we will do a review of that.
Mrs. Hartzler. Okay. One other quick question. We hear
that, to be in the Maritime Security Program, a ship must be
American owned. So how, then, does Maersk, a Danish owned
company, have 20 ships in MSP?
Mr. Jaenichen. A Danish company is the parent. The actual
company that actually has the operating agreement, and operates
the U.S.-flag, is a U.S. company. It is, in this case, Maersk
Maritime Limited. It actually has its headquarters in Norfolk,
Virginia. All of the leadership of that company meets the
requirement of a documented citizen, that they are U.S.
citizens, and it is U.S. controlled, and that is part of the
operating agreement, that we have direct control. The Danish
company does not.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Newhouse?
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary and Mr. Administrator, for being here with us this
morning. I just have one question in this area to ask you
about. And following up a little bit on Mrs. Hartzler's line of
questioning. Being from the State of Washington, we have a
significant, I guess you could say, access to the Pacific Rim,
but also that means access to areas of potential conflict, also
areas of regular food need. So just some questions about how
flagships are selected. Does geographical distribution play
into that equation? And how much does proximity to potential
conflict areas play into that? And how much deals with where
food aid is being sent and distributed?
Mr. Jaenichen. With regard to the actual selection of the
ships that are in the MSP, or actually under the U.S. flag, we
don't necessarily look at proximity. What we look at in the MSP
program is whether they are commercially viable. Typically a
company who is in the program, and has several operating
agreements, they will be operating in some kind of a liner
string, meaning that they are servicing Europe to the United
States, for example, and we take a look at that viability. We
do have vessels. Obviously, from a standpoint of being able to
surge assets, we have them located around the country to be
able to support DOD's operational requirements. The U.S.-flag
typically comes in, and they provide the sustainment option.
That is what the MSP does, for example, once we got into Iraq
and Afghanistan, the MSP fleet and the U.S.-flag carried over
90 percent of all the cargo that went in to support those
troops, and it went into a line or service: 99 percent of that
was actually on MSP participants.
Mr. Berteau. But if I could add a little bit to that? The
initial capacity is largely generated by our internal
capability that we already have. We have pre-positioned ships
in place both ashore and afloat. That is very geographically
determined, and it ties to the operational plans that are the
foundation of those requirements. The longer term surge
capacity is built in both for the organic capacity the Defense
Department owns, and for the capacity that we looked at the
commercial, is much less dependent on the geography because it
has the lead time.
It also depends more on the geography of where the point of
origin is for demarcation. Those are known quantities to us.
Our ports where we are going to be shipping out of are known
quantities to us, so we can align with that for planning
purposes, because we have enough time, generally----
Mr. Newhouse. Yes.
Mr. Berteau.--in our war plan and our war games to exercise
that.
Mr. Newhouse. Okay. Yes. Well, there again, thank you very
much for your contribution this morning. It is a very
interesting subject, and I appreciate the joint committee
hearing. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Rouzer. I would like to thank our witnesses on this
first panel. I appreciate you being here today. I would like to
go ahead and call forward our second panel at this time.
We have with us on our second panel Mr. James Caponiti,
President of the American Maritime Congress, Mr. Philip
Shapiro, President and CEO of Liberty Maritime Corporation,
Captain John Murray, President and CEO of Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC,
and Mr. Brian Schoeneman, Political and Legislative Director,
Seafarer's International Union. I would like to thank each of
you gentlemen for being here today, and, Mr. Caponiti, we will
begin with you. And, if you can, try to keep your comments to 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JAMES E. CAPONITI, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN MARITIME
CONGRESS, WASHINGTON, D.C.; ON BEHALF OF USA MARITIME

Mr. Caponiti. I am sorry, I haven't done this in a while.
Good morning, Chairman Rouzer, Chairman Hunter, Ranking Member
Costa, Ranking Member Garamendi, and Members. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify on behalf of USA Maritime on the
importance of the Maritime Security Program and food aid cargo
preference to international trade and U.S.-flag fleet. USA
Maritime is a coalition of ship owning companies, maritime
labor organizations, and maritime trade associations which
directly or indirectly represent the vast majority of privately
owned U.S.-flag oceangoing commercial vessels operating
regularly in U.S. foreign trade. For the record, I have
submitted a list of members of the coalition. USA Maritime
strongly supports the Maritime Security Program, and existing
cargo preference laws applicable to military and civilian
government-impelled cargoes. Taken together, MSP and cargo
preference programs are the principal means by which our
national interests are served by maintaining a U.S.-flag
presence in international water-borne trade.
Though it is fundamentally a commercial enterprise, the
U.S. Merchant Marine has proven throughout history its
capability to serve as an auxiliary force to the Navy. The
often overlooked fourth arm of defense, as referenced by
President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the U.S. Merchant Marine
and American seafarers have been called upon repeatedly to
deliver U.S. military personnel and material to areas of
conflict or emergency, no matter where they occur. The
maintenance of a strong privately owned U.S.-flag Merchant
Marine has remained an essential part of our nation's official
national security strategy.
According to National Security Directive 28, signed by
President Bush in 1989, ``Sealift is essential both to
executing this country's forward defense strategy and to
maintaining a wartime economy. The United States' national
sealift objective is to ensure that sufficient military and
civil maritime resources will be available to meet defense
deployment, and essential economic requirements in support of
our national security strategy.'' This policy remains intact,
and equally relevant, today. The U.S. Merchant Marine has
continued to demonstrate its value as a strategic resource in
the 21st century, providing worldwide shipping facilities in
support to the Department of Defense, and to essential foreign
assistance programs, as well as to provide water-borne response
for domestic and international disaster recovery operations.
MSP is a government-private partnership between the U.S.
Government and the U.S.-flagged shipping industry, whereby DOD
has provided assured access to privately owned commercial
shipping assets, related global intermodal systems, and the
active pool of U.S. citizen mariners necessary to deploy and
sustain ground forces and related equipment during overseas
combat operations. The development and implementation of MSP
during the 1990s grew from an effort to re-engineer sealift
capability as a consequence of lessons learned from the first
Gulf War in 1990 and 1991. Less than a decade later, with
respect to Afghanistan and Iraq, the effectiveness of MSP and
its companion sealift readiness program were well proven during
the sealift campaigns to support U.S. military operations and
rebuilding programs.
The U.S. Government also administers a framework of cargo
preference statutes designed to promote and sustain the U.S.-
flagged fleet by prescribing a level of access to military and
civilian government-impelled cargoes. It is important that
these statutes, and the related programs, are adhered to by
Federal agencies to ensure that taxpayer dollars are spent, at
least in part, to promote U.S.-flagged shipping, thereby
preserving national security as an alternative to the
employment of foreign flag shipping and foreign crews.
Cargo preference laws remain essential to maintaining a
robust commercial U.S. Merchant Marine. Virtually every
privately owned U.S.-flagged vessel engaged in foreign trade
depends, to some degree, on cargo preference to remain
economically viable. Indeed, without cargo preference, it is no
exaggeration to say that the U.S.-flagged international trade
fleet would continue to diminish to a level approaching MSP
enrollment, currently at 60 vessels. As Administrator Jaenichen
commented earlier, we have 78 currently in international trade.
Nevertheless, the history of cargo preference
administration indicates that cargo reservation requirements
are often not self-enforcing, and strict Maritime
Administration oversight is necessary to ensure that the law is
followed, and its purposes fulfilled, across the U.S.
Government. A new regulatory mandate to strengthen MARAD's
oversight and enforcement authority has been under
consideration for 7 years. USA Maritime remains disappointed
that the Administration has thus far failed to formally propose
an effective enforcement mechanism.
It is important to note that U.S.-flag capability brought
to bear in wartime and emergency missions often includes both
U.S. Government owned sealift vessels and privately owned
commercial vessels. In those instances, a single pool of
trained, qualified mariners is called upon to crew government
ships, the majority of which are idle, but maintained in
readiness for activation, while simultaneously meeting the
requirement to continue crewing commercial vessels.
Accordingly, the availability of an adequate cadre of civilian
mariners to support the activation and operation of the U.S.
Government reserve fleet remains a key element of U.S. strategy
and planning. I just need a moment more.
Military planners understand that America's security is
best protected when our country relies on a commercial shipping
industry domiciled in the United States, employing U.S.
citizens both at sea and ashore, and subject to U.S. laws and
regulations. Historically, the United States has been able to
respond to crises and support military engagements when its
U.S.-flagged fleet has been sized to do so. The critical
challenge of this strategy has been the availability of an
adequate pool of oceangoing citizen mariners to crew the
government's reserve ships to meet surge and sustainment
requirements. However, an ongoing decline in the number of
U.S.-flagged ships operating internationally is negatively
impacting the mariner pool, a trend that is raising concern
among military planners and industry officials alike.
As MARAD's recent report on cargo preference reduction
surmised, continued declines in cargo volumes could erode even
the ability to maintain the 60 vessel fleet. In closing, we ask
that U.S. cargo preference statutes be supported and upheld by
Congress, and that the programs be fully implemented and
enforced throughout the Federal Government. Again, thank you
for this opportunity. I look forward to your questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Caponiti follows:]

Prepared Statement of James E. Caponiti, President, American Maritime
Congress, Washington, D.C.; on Behalf of USA Maritime
Introduction
Good morning, Chairman Rouzer and Chairman Hunter. I appreciate the
opportunity to testify today on behalf of USA Maritime on the
importance of the Maritime Security Program and food aid cargo
preference to the international trading U.S.-flag fleet. USA Maritime
is a coalition of ship owning companies, maritime labor organizations
and maritime trade associations which directly or indirectly represent
the vast majority of the privately owned U.S.-flag oceangoing
commercial vessels operating regularly in the U.S. foreign trade. For
the record, I have submitted a list of members of the Coalition.
Summary
USA Maritime strongly supports the Maritime Security Program (MSP)
and existing cargo preference laws applicable to military and civilian
government-impelled cargoes. Taken together, MSP and cargo preference
programs are the principal means by which our national interests are
served by maintaining a U.S.-flag presence in international waterborne
trade.
MSP is a government-private partnership between the U.S. Government
and the U.S.-flag shipping industry whereby the Department of Defense
(DOD) is provided assured access to privately-owned commercial shipping
assets, related global intermodal systems, and the active pool of U.S.
citizen mariners necessary to deploy and sustain ground forces and
related equipment during overseas combat operations. The development
and implementation of MSP during the 1990s grew from an effort to re-
engineer sealift capability as a consequence of ``lessons learned''
from the First Gulf War in 1990-1991. Less than a decade later in
Afghanistan and Iraq, the effectiveness of MSP and its companion
sealift readiness program were unmistakenly proven during the sealift
campaigns to support U.S. military operations and rebuilding programs.
The U.S. Government also administers a framework of cargo
preference statutes designed to promote and sustain a U.S.-flag fleet
by prescribing a level of access to military and civilian government-
impelled cargoes. It is important that these statutes and the related
programs are adhered to by Federal agencies to ensure that taxpayer
dollars are spent, at least in part, to promote U.S.-flag shipping and
preserve national security as an alternative to the employment of
foreign-flag shipping and foreign crews. Cargo preference laws remain
essential to maintaining a robust commercial U.S.-flag merchant marine.
Virtually every privately owned U.S.-flag vessel engaged in the foreign
trade depends to some degree on cargo preference to remain economically
viable.\1\ Indeed, absent cargo preference, it is no exaggeration to
say that the U.S.-flag international trade fleet would continue to
diminish to a level approaching MSP enrollment, currently at 60
vessels. Nevertheless, the history of cargo preference administration
indicates that cargo reservation requirements are often not self-
enforcing and strict Maritime Administration (MARAD) oversight is
necessary to ensure that the law is followed and its purposes fulfilled
across the U.S. Government. A new regulatory mandate to strengthen
MARAD's oversight and enforcement authority has been under
consideration for 7 years, and USA Maritime urges the Administration to
renew its efforts to implement an effective regulatory enforcement
mechanism.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ E.g., Econometrica, Inc., ``Maritime Security Program Impact
Evaluation,'' Submitted to the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Maritime Administration (July 2009) at 26-27, 45.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S.-Flag Commercial Industry is Critical to National Defense
Throughout its history, the United States has depended upon a
viable U.S.-flag merchant marine for its economic and military national
security. In his second annual address to Congress on December 8, 1790,
President George Washington encouraged Congress to ``render our
commerce and agriculture less dependent on foreign bottoms.'' \2\ This
proscription remains just as relevant 225 years later.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Second Annual Address of George Washington (Dec. 8, 1790), in
Edwin Williams, The Statesman's Manual 37 (1854).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The United States benefits economically and strategically from an
abundance of ocean coastline and internal rivers and lakes, and U.S.
citizen merchant mariners who navigate, maintain, and work on the
ships, tugboats, towboats, ferries, dredges, and other vessels that
provide service in associated waterborne trades. U.S. mariners are
expertly trained and perform their respective shipboard tasks to the
highest of standards anywhere in the world. The importance and
viability of a qualified pool of citizen mariners is distinguishable
from many other civilian occupations since it is critical to U.S.
national security and to America's ability to project power.
Though it is fundamentally a commercial enterprise, the U.S.
Merchant Marine has proven throughout history its capability to serve
as an auxiliary force to the Navy. The often overlooked ``fourth arm of
defense,'' as referenced by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the
U.S. Merchant Marine and American seafarers have been called upon
repeatedly throughout history to deliver U.S. military personnel and
materiel to areas of conflict or emergency no matter where they
occurred. Perhaps most notably, the U.S. Merchant Marine and civilian
merchant mariners were integral to the Allied Forces' victory in World
War II, delivering nearly 270 million long tons of cargo in support of
the war while risking their lives in the treacherous waters of the
North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. All told, 733 American cargo ships
were lost during World War II. Though U.S. Government records
management for merchant mariners failed to match the precision applied
to the other services, it is widely held that proportionately, the U.S.
Merchant Marine suffered a higher death rate during World War II than
any of the Armed Forces. In fact, according to the 1946 Report of the
War Shipping Administration ``Up to V-J Day, 5,638 merchant seamen and
officers are dead and missing; 581 were made prisoners of war.''
The maintenance of a strong privately-owned U.S.-flag merchant
marine has remained an essential part of our nation's official national
security strategy. According to National Security Directive 28, which
was signed by President Bush in 1989, and which still governs sealift
policy:

Sealift is essential both to executing this country's forward
defense strategy and to maintaining a wartime economy. The
United States' national sealift objective is to ensure that
sufficient military and civil maritime resources will be
available to meet defense deployment, and essential economic
requirements in support of our national security strategy.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ National Security Directive 28 (Oct. 5, 1989).

This policy is reflected in more current pronouncements. For example,
the Department of the Navy's Fiscal Year 2012 budget request provided
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
that:

This budget supports maintaining a robust strategic sealift
capability to rapidly concentrate and sustain forces and to
enable joint and/or combined campaigns. This capability relies
on maintaining a strong U.S. commercial maritime transportation
industry and its critical intermodal assets.

As stated succinctly by General John W. Handy (then Commander, U.S.
Transportation Command) in 2002--``We simply cannot, as a nation fight
the fight without the partnership of the commercial maritime
industry.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Statement of General John W. Handy, Commander, U.S.
Transportation Command before the House Armed Services Committee,
Merchant Marine Panel on the Maritime Security Program (MSP) (Oct. 8,
2002). Similarly, the Navy League of the United States has recently
indicated that ``[t]he ability to access this maritime capability of
ships [the U.S.-flag commercial fleet] and seafarers is essential to
our national and economic security.'' Navy League of the United States,
Maritime Policy 2011-12 at 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As General Duncan J. McNabb (then Commander, U.S. Transportation
Command) in 2011 informed the U.S. Congress--``USTRANSCOM's partnership
with the U.S. commercial sealift industry and the Department of
Transportation has been vitally important in developing new routes for
conveying cargo around the globe--particularly to regions with
undeveloped infrastructure.'' \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id. at 15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. Merchant Marine has continued to demonstrate its value as
a strategic resource into the 21st Century providing worldwide shipping
facilities and support to the DOD and to essential foreign assistance
programs, as well as waterborne response related to domestic and
international disaster recovery operations. The U.S.-flag industry's
sealift mission in support of U.S. military operations throughout the
past decade was historically efficient, delivering more than 90 percent
of all cargoes bound to and from Afghanistan and Iraq during Operations
Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom (OEF/OIF). U.S.-flag ships also
supported months-long recovery efforts in the U.S. Gulf of Mexico in
the aftermath of Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005; in response to
devastating earthquake destruction in Haiti in 2010; and to bolster
Federal and state recovery efforts in the New York/New Jersey area that
followed destruction to that region as a consequence of Hurricane
Sandy. Few Americans will forget the evacuation of New York City on 9/
11 and the selfless acts of U.S. mariners and private sector companies
to evacuate citizens from Lower Manhattan--the largest and safest
evacuation of citizens in U.S. history.
It is important to note that U.S.-flag capability brought to bear
in the wartime and emergency missions noted above included both U.S.
Government-owned sealift vessels and privately-owned commercial
vessels. However, it is this same single pool of trained and qualified
civilian mariners who are called upon during emergencies to crew
government ships, the majority of which are idle but maintained in
readiness for activation, while simultaneously meeting the requirement
to continue crewing commercial vessels and maintaining services in the
U.S.-flag commercial trades.
Origins of MSP
The First Gulf War in 1990-1991 had highlighted a need for more
effective and dependable sealift assets from the U.S.-flag commercial
fleet, as well as upgraded reserve capacity in the government-owned
surge fleet. An inadequate number of commercial vessels available to
meet lift requirements together with readiness deficiencies encountered
during the activation of numerous government reserve vessels had forced
the DOD to charter foreign-flag vessels to meet 23 percent of its dry
cargo lift requirement.
During the effort to revitalize U.S.-flag sealift, special
attention was directed to gaining assured access to militarily useful
U.S.-flag commercial vessels. To achieve that outcome, MARAD
collaborated with DOD's U.S. Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) to
develop and implement MSP and its statutorily required sealift
readiness program, the Voluntary Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA).
Insofar as national security and sealift readiness during
emergencies are the underlying purposes for maintaining the program,
MSP sustains civilian mariner jobs to retain an active mariner pool and
provides a multiplier effect of economic benefits that accrue from
promoting a U.S.-flag international trade fleet. Nevertheless, MSP's
value to the government is underscored in many ways. MSP provides
national control of sealift resources and capabilities during peacetime
and in emergencies. The level of contingency readiness that carriers
agree to in their VISA contracts, dictates the amount of preferred
access to military cargoes that the carrier enjoys during peacetime. In
this way, the transition to a wartime logistical footing is made easier
by retaining the same partnerships and processes utilized and ongoing
with commercial providers. Together with the annual retainer payment,
the expectation of peacetime cargo revenues has been expected to
provide a portion of the overall MSP enrollment compensation.
The timing of MSP implementation in 1996 was fortuitous given the
tragic events less than 5 years later on 9/11 and during the years that
followed. As implied earlier, sealift support for the military
campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq was notably superior to what the
government and the maritime industry were able to accomplish during the
First Gulf War. In the early stages of simultaneous military
operations, the government-controlled surge sealift components were
timely activated and efficiently operated, and cargo volumes were large
enough that it was necessary to involve MSP vessels in liner services
from the outset. As the years of fighting wore on, the value and
effectiveness of MSP was manifested with the liner service delivery of
military cargoes to distribution points at or near the theatre. As the
reliance on government-owned surge assets diminished after the earliest
years of OEF/OIF, DOD's reliance on MSP grew to a degree that since
2009 privately-owned U.S.-flag commercial vessels and their citizen
crews have transported more than 90 percent of sustainment cargo needed
to support U.S. military operations. Significantly, vessels enrolled in
MSP carried 99 percent of those cargoes. Only three percent of OEF/OIF
cargo moved on foreign-flag charters compared to 23 percent during the
1990-1991 sealift mission. U.S. citizen merchant mariners crewed all of
the U.S.-flag vessels--government surge and commercial alike--engaged
in the sealift mission.
The government relies on a partnership with U.S.-flag operators and
maritime labor organizations to obtain the assured access to the
commercial sealift capability and civilian merchant mariners. MSP/VISA
are administered jointly by MARAD and DOD's USTRANSCOM. With MSP
funding, the government leverages a relatively small investment,
currently $186 million annually for 60 ships of diverse capability, to
gain assured access to military useful ships and related intermodal
transportation networks. The investment also works to ensure the
continued viability of both a U.S.-flag fleet engaged in international
trade and the pool of seafarers to crew those vessels. Without a viable
U.S.-flag commercial fleet and the American merchant mariners this
fleet supports, the United States would be unable to deploy and
effectively sustain its military forces on a global basis.
The government-private industry partnership itself is unique, and
it entails peacetime planning and an operational relationship through
peacetime service contracts. The U.S. companies enrolled in MSP/VISA
agreements are required to be managed by U.S. citizens, and those
companies having a foreign parent are required to execute security
agreements that protect the rights and interests of the United States.
The companies have the equivalent of a ``secret'' clearance enabling
participation in joint planning and operational exercises with U.S.
military commands in a secure environment at regular intervals.
Effective October 1, 2015, the MSP authorization period was
extended for 10 years through Fiscal Year 2025. Given the austere
fiscal environment facing DOD and every other executive agency for the
foreseeable future, it is important to note from a budgetary standpoint
that the fleet of vessels and infrastructure available for military
missions through the MSP is capitalized and recapitalized solely
through the private investment of the owners and operators of enrolled
vessels.
The availability of a trained and qualified mariner pool sufficient
to support the activation and operation of the U.S. Government's surge
sealift assets remains a key element of U.S. strategy and planning.
This organic lift includes MARAD's Ready Reserve Force (RRF) which
currently numbers 46 ships and the Military Sealift Command's (MSC) ten
Large Medium-Speed Roll-on Roll-off ships (LMSRs). These vessels are
maintained by commercial ship managers in prescribed levels of
readiness and outported in reduced operating status (ROS) in commercial
berths or in government facilities, available to be activated when
crises arise. To promote readiness and to enable rapid transition to
operational capability, ROS vessels are partially crewed while idle.
Once activated and fully crewed, all of these assets, RRF and LMSR
alike, fall under MSC's operational control. The surge sealift
capability comprised from these vessels enables the deployment of
combat forces in the early stages of a conflict. Of course, the vessels
themselves are essentially useless without trained civilian crews to
operate them.
The current taxpayer investment in MSP of $186 million annually is
modest when compared to the alternative scenario that would call for
the government to acquire, operate, and maintain equivalent sealift
capabilities on its own. When assessing the cost effectiveness of the
MSP, it is important to understand this huge cost avoidance at the same
time one evaluates the cost of government programs and policies that
support the U.S. Merchant Marine to achieve national sealift
objectives. For example during the first 15 years that MSP has impacted
American sealift policy, the U.S. Government benefited nearly $70
billion in equivalent capitalization cost avoidance as a result of the
vessel and intermodal infrastructure capabilities guaranteed through
MSP/VISA and provided by the private companies participating in these
programs. In comparison, outlays necessary to fund MSP operating
agreements during the same period were less than $1.9 billion.
Accordingly, a further testament to MSP's cost effectiveness lies with
what the government does not spend.
The Need for a Robust U.S.-Flag Fleet
Perhaps the largest bargain gained from the government's maritime
investment lies in sustaining jobs on U.S.-flag ships which benefits
America economically as a large international trading power while also
ensuring our country has the readily available pool of trained and
qualified citizen seafarers on which the nation relies to provide
sealift during emergencies. A fundamental element of U.S. maritime
legislative policy is--and has been--that ``vessels of the merchant
marine should be operated by highly trained and efficient citizens of
the United States'' (46 U.S.C. 51101). Of course, the application of
this principle is especially true with respect to developing and
maintaining the nation's military sealift capability. Military planners
understand that America's security is best protected when our country
relies on a commercial shipping industry domiciled in the United
States, employing U.S. citizens both at sea and ashore, and subject to
U.S. laws and regulations.
The United States has been able to respond to crises and support
military operations in recent decades because its U.S.-flag maritime
industry was sufficiently sized to do so. Likewise, U.S. sealift
strategy calling first for the deployment of government-owned surge
assets followed by the use of commercially sourced ships for the longer
sustainment phase of missions has been very effective. The critical
component of this strategy has been maintaining a pool of qualified
oceangoing U.S. mariners adequate enough to crew the government's surge
ships when necessary without disrupting commercial crewing
requirements. However, recent trends are causing concern among military
planners and industry officials with respect to the availability of
U.S. mariners to meet surge and sustainment requirements for the
duration of a conflict in the future.
The pool of U.S. mariners available to crew government ships when
activated has been declining over the last decade, creating the
distinct likelihood that America's national security will be adversely
impacted in the near future if the trend continues. Much of this
decline stems from the fact that it is increasingly difficult for U.S.-
flag ships to compete in international commerce against heavily
subsidized foreign flag vessels, many of which operate in a tax-free
environment.
Competition in global shipping is fierce and survival depends on
many factors. Quality of service can trump cost to a degree, but much
of the market is driven by carriers adhering to a minimum level of
compliance with international safety and environmental standards while
employing mariners from under developed countries, all to minimize
cost. Much of this occurs within open registries which account for more
than \1/2\ the ships in the world's commercial trading fleet.
Competitive pressures have been magnified in recent years by the
economic crisis worldwide and by an oversupply of shipping tonnage. The
result has been a loss of U.S.-flag oceangoing tonnage and related
afloat jobs. This is occurring partly due to the framework reduction of
Federal programs designed to support the maritime industry while other
programs have failed to keep pace with rapidly changing national and
international factors affecting shipping conditions and global
economics. For example, DOD peacetime cargoes that were expected to be
a principal source of compensation for MSP operators have declined due
to the reduction in personnel and military bases overseas since 1990.
The mariner pool has been further impacted by other issues. The
loss of shipboard billets when U.S.-flag ships leave commercial service
has a compounding effect on the mariner pool since each billet supports
roughly two individuals when vacations, training, and other time spent
on shore are taken into account. The loss of billets also negatively
affects the ability to recruit and develop new mariners to grow the
mariner pool. International and domestic regulatory rules limit the
ability of mariners to maintain and upgrade their seafaring credentials
without meeting required sea time and recency service requirements. For
example, a mariner could be required to take specified training to
update practical experience in technical skills before being allowed to
volunteer for an emergency sealift billet during a contingency.
Notwithstanding the willingness of U.S. mariners to maintain their
qualifications and stand ready to sail--for any reason--into harm's
way, the retention of mariners in the workforce is a growing and
serious problem. This problem exists not only in the United States but
globally, especially among mariners in developed economies. For more
than a decade, there have been concerns about a global shortage of
qualified seafarers and the reasons are numerous and varied. It is a
difficult and often dangerous occupation that, for many, is arduous to
endure long-term. Time away from family is probably the most prominent
downside for individuals sailing far from home. In the modern age of
containerization, expedited cargo handling, and sophisticated shipboard
technology the job is more complex than ever. The sense of adventure
once associated with going to sea has eroded significantly. A mariner
today gets only a limited dose of ``seeing the world''. Turnaround
intervals in ports today are usually numbered by hours--not days--and
access to the cities attached to ports of call has realistically been
eliminated, or at best minimized. Security issues, together with strict
limitations on the granting of port states' entry visas also impact
prominently in limiting port access. These and other issues cause some
mariners entering the workforce to view it as a short-term opportunity
to make some money rather than view the profession as a career. This is
especially true in the United States where competition from onshore job
opportunities is a significant factor that draws mariners away from
sailing.
Due in no small measure to America's standard of living and the
reasonable expectations among all American workers for a living wage,
health and pension benefits, a safe workplace environment, and other
employment-related terms and conditions, it is difficult for the U.S.-
flag maritime industry to compete in the international cargo markets
against foreign flag of convenience vessels and crews from under-
developed countries. This is why the Federal Government has implemented
and must continue to oversee programs to support the industry.
There are far fewer opportunities in recent years for MSP carriers
to benefit from peacetime military cargoes due to the substantial
reduction in DOD's peacetime footprint in Europe and Asia. The
expectation that MSP carriers could rely on and benefit from DOD
peacetime cargo revenues to supplement monthly MSP retainer payments
was always intended as an economic incentive to enroll in the program.
The combination of a flat annual stipend level until FY 2019 and an
expectation that peacetime cargo levels will remain modest into the
future is an issue of significant concern to MSP carriers that could
soon jeopardize the program and existing levels of enrolled sealift
capability.
All of this points to a continued need to maintain and enforce
cargo preference regimes. The nation's strategic sealift posture is
directly dependent on an active pool of qualified U.S. citizen
mariners. The OEF/OIF sealift missions clearly illustrated the demand
for mariners during emergency scenarios. In an age when military
conflicts do not impact significantly on sea-borne commerce, the sizing
of the U.S. citizen mariner pool must be robust enough to provide for
the activation of otherwise idle surge sealift for an indefinite period
to meet wartime demands at a time when commercial activity continues
unabated.
It has been said that ocean-borne transport is taken for granted by
the American public. It's predominantly about freight, and therefore
essentially invisible to most citizens who view the television in their
living room as having come from Wal-Mart instead of from Asia. Until
this past year (apparently), the United States had remained the largest
trading nation in the world. Yet less than four percent of U.S. foreign
trade is carried on U.S.-flag ships. The benefits of maintaining a
strong maritime industry does not naturally resonate with many
citizens, and our industry remains challenged to raise awareness about
its strategic value. Thank you for the opportunity provided to us
through this hearing.
Conclusion
Throughout U.S. history, the one constant has been that a strong
commercial maritime capability enhances national security. This is as
true today as ever. The Maritime Security Program remains the most
important of the Federal programs that assist U.S.-flag ships in
international trade, and it should be supported, fully funded, and
modified to meet today's economic challenges affecting U.S.-flag
shipping. The government also administers a framework of cargo
preference programs designed to provide access to military and civilian
government-impelled cargoes. These statutes and programs should
similarly be support by all Federal agencies to ensure that taxpayer
dollars are spent at least in part to support U.S.-flag shipping and
not spent in their entirety to support foreign-flag shipping and
foreign crews. Finally, the domestic shipping statutes commonly
referred to as the Jones Act should be retained to sustain the
commercial shipping base that helps support the civilian manpower pool
needed to meet defense requirements.
Members of USA Maritime:

American Maritime Congress.

American Maritime Officers (AMO).

American Maritime Officers Service (AMOS).

American Roll-on Roll-off Carrier LLC.

APL Ltd.

Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC.

Intermarine LLC.

International Organization of Masters, Mates & Pilots.

International Shipholding Corporation.

Liberty Maritime Corporation.

Maersk Line Limited.

Marine Engineers Beneficial Association (MEBA).

Maritime Institute for Research and Industrial Development
(MIRAID).

Sailors' Union of the Pacific.

Seafarers International Union (SIU).

Transportation Institute.

Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Shapiro?

STATEMENT OF PHILIP J. SHAPIRO, J.D., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, LIBERTY MARITIME
CORPORATION, NEW HYDE PARK, NY

Mr. Shapiro. Good morning, Chairman Rouzer, Chairman
Hunter, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Members Costa and Garamendi,
and Members of the Subcommittees. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify on the important issue of international food aid and
the U.S. Merchant Marine. Let me add that your leadership on
these issues is to be applauded.
Liberty Maritime has been active in the carriage of P.L.
83-480 cargoes since 1988, and has successfully delivered
almost 30 million tons on over 500 voyages to needy people all
over the world during the last 27 years. We are proud of the
historic accomplishments of the P.L. 83-480 program, and of the
critical role of the U.S. Merchant Marine, and the role it has
played since 1954 in delivering food and supporting this
important program.
You have already heard from other witnesses about how
important the carriage of food aid is to the Merchant Marine,
as it comprises an essential cargo source for U.S.-flag
vessels. I would like to add, from my long experience in this
industry, that the current situation is unprecedented in its
level of devastation to the U.S.-flag Merchant Marine. The
U.S.-flag fleet is suffering economically from an enormous
decline in available cargoes, not to mention the MAP-21
reduction from 75 percent to 50 percent carriage. And many
ships, including several of our own, have had to re-flag, with
the resulting substantial loss of sealift capacity and maritime
jobs. So I can say without reservation that the current food
aid preference cargo base is already inadequate to support the
existing fleet, and that new and substantial support is needed
to prevent further deterioration in the fleet size and loss of
sealift capabilities needed for the future.
Let me add something about U.S.-flag rates, which have been
criticized by out of touch academics. What these critics
forget, first and foremost, is U.S.-flag carriers are rate
capped by the U.S. Government in its determination of what is a
fair and reasonable rate. So we cannot charge more than an
average of our cost, plus a modest regulated profit on any
particular voyage. And because of a lack of cargoes, and
vigorous competition amongst U.S.-flag ocean carriers, we never
come close to hitting the regulated profit amount or ceiling.
I would like to say a few words about the Obama
Administration proposals to dismantle P.L. 83-480 in the name
of reform. As well intended as these proposals may be, they
have already done substantial harm to P.L. 83-480, and will do
irreversible damage if adopted by Congress. The proposals have
put the public narrative on P.L. 83-480's imperfections, rather
than recognizing the program's enormously impressive track
record, and seeking to improve on it. In fact, it is hard to
find another U.S. Government program that has achieved so much
for so long with so little. I dare say that if other foreign
assistance programs were anything like the P.L. 83-480 program,
the American people would actually like foreign aid.
Much of the funding is spent in the U.S. to buy U.S.
agricultural products, to mill them here, send them to ports
via rails, barges, and trucks, and ship them on U.S.-flag
vessels, which are then delivered by U.S.-based private
voluntary organizations. And most importantly, the program
delivers assistance to persons who need it in a transparent,
accountable, and efficient way. I would ask the Members of the
two Committees represented here today whether we will be able
to say that if P.L. 83-480 becomes a cash giveaway program.
Will the American people support a giveaway program of cash
that inevitably will be neither transparent nor accountable? I
don't think we need any polling done to know the answer to that
question.
We strongly urge caution and prudence before dismantling a
program that has worked so well for so long, and won't be easy
to reconstitute if it turns out that cash and vouchers are the
wrong way to go. We already are the leading provider of cash
aid in the world. We need do no more. Indeed, we believe the
evidence is already accumulating that shows that cash and
vouchers lead, as one would expect intuitively, to enormous
diversions of funds, fraud, waste, and abuse. I commend the
Subcommittees to the November 2014 United Nations Inspector
General report, and to the 2015 GAO reports, both of which
indicate that cash voucher programs are rife with fraud and
abuse, and lack transparency and accountability. One of my
favorite vignettes from those reports is the admission by GAO
that the only verification that vouchers are ending up in the
right hands to be used for the right purposes has been by
satellite surveillance. I urge the Subcommittees to contemplate
how likely is it that sporadic satellite surveillance can
prevent voucher fraud and abuse in Africa.
From my own company's long experience, I can tell you that
when we are hired to deliver food, not only to a foreign
country, but also directly to a refugee camp, that food gets
there every time. We take that obligation seriously, and
shipping contracts make it our responsibility. The food gets
delivered to the dock, or to the inland refugee camp, whatever
is called for in the contract. Let me add that the President's
proposal to transfer 25 percent more of P.L. 83-480 funding to
be used for further cash giveaways tied to a one-time payment
to carriers is unacceptable. It would hasten the dismantling of
the P.L. 83-480 program in exchange for a token gesture. The
U.S. Merchant Marine needs sustained support, not a severance
payment.
I respectfully urge that, instead of destroying P.L. 83-
480, Congress should consider ways to improve the purchasing,
transportation, and distribution of in-kind food aid. We would
be pleased to offer suggestions, as I am sure other carriers
and program participants would as well. Most of the available
ideas are not new. They have been proposed by GAO and others
over the years, and ignored by shipper agencies, especially
USAID. For example, the way shipper agencies contract for
transportation services unnecessarily costs the U.S. Government
money. In the commercial sector, contracts tend to apportion
risk and responsibility to the person in the transportation
chain that has the most control, and can mitigate the risk.
So, for example, where the ocean carrier does not control
the ocean terminal, the terminal is responsible for loading or
discharge delays caused by its employees or actions, not the
ocean carrier. Yet, ironically, the U.S. Government ignores
this commercial sensibility in favor of putting all the risk
and responsibility on the ocean carrier, even for things
totally out of its control. The inevitable result is the ocean
carrier rates are higher than they have to be to account for
this risk.
From the adoption of commercial terms, to incorporating
priority berthing on load and discharge ports, these are just
two of many contracting practices that would increase
efficiency and lower costs. There are other--many other
examples of ideas that can improve efficiency. We hope that we
can continue to work with the Agriculture and Transportation
and Infrastructure Committees to have those ideas reviewed and
vetted for possible changes to the law. First and foremost, we
need to reinstate the 75 percent carriage requirement that was
in effect for the last 25 years, until the MAP-21 legislation 3
years ago.
Thank you again for inviting me to appear here, and I would
be pleased to answer any questions you or your colleagues may
have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shapiro follows:]

Prepared Statement of Philip J. Shapiro, J.D., President and Chief
Executive Officer, Liberty Maritime Corporation, New Hyde Park, NY
The Role of the U.S.-Flag Merchant Fleet in the Transportation of U.S.
International Food Aid
Background
Formed in 1988, Liberty Maritime Corporation is the proud operator
of five U.S.-flag vessels. Over the last fifteen years, the Liberty
Shipping Group has invested almost $250 million in private capital to
construct new vessels for the U.S.-flag fleet. Liberty Maritime and its
affiliates are 100 percent U.S. citizen-owned and 100 percent U.S.
citizen-controlled.
Three of Liberty's vessels are modern dry bulk vessels primarily
engaged in the carriage of U.S. Government international food-aid
cargoes. Through its 25+ years of operating history, Liberty Maritime
has successfully delivered almost 30 million tons of U.S. food aid to
over 30 countries around the world on over 500 voyages.
In the last few years, Liberty has had to reflag U.S.-flag vessels
foreign that were purpose-built to carry U.S. Government food aid and
which predominantly carried such aid since their delivery. The reason
such vessels have had to leave the U.S.-flag is primarily because of
the decline in international in-kind food aid. That decline in turn has
been the result of a decrease in program funding during the Obama
Administration, the diversion of international food-aid funds to
expenditures other than delivering in-kind food aid and the reduction
in the reservation of cargoes to U.S.-flag vessels in 2012 from 75
percent to 50 percent.
The other two vessels Liberty operates are roll-on/roll-off (Ro/Ro)
vessels configured as Pure Car Truck Carriers or PCTC's. Those vessels
are among the most modern vessels in the U.S.-flag fleet and are
regularly engaged in both the carriage of U.S. Government military
cargoes as well as a variety of commercial vehicles. The M/V Liberty
Promise and M/V Liberty Pride, delivered in August 2009 and April 2010,
respectively, can each carry about 6,500 cars and have a high degree of
military utility because of their flexible deck configuration, ultra
strong ramps and other factors.
Liberty also participates in the Maritime Security Program. Both
the Liberty Promise and the Liberty Pride are covered by Maritime
Security Program Operating Agreements with the U.S. Maritime
Administration (MARAD). All of Liberty's vessels are enrolled in the
Voluntary Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA) Program and therefore the
capacity of those vessels is fully committed to the U.S. Government in
the event of national need.
Liberty is no stranger to the tribulations of the international
market. On April 14, 2009, Liberty's vessel the M/V Liberty Sun was
attacked by pirates off the coast of Kenya while en route to deliver a
U.S. Government food-aid cargo to Mombassa. [That] occurred shortly
after the attack on the M/V Maersk Alabama. Both vessels were engaged
in the carriage of U.S. Government international food aid. Liberty's
crew performed admirably in implementing the company's security plan
and in warding off the attack without a boarding. Fortunately, no one
on the crew was hurt although the vessel was hit by rocket propelled
grenades and automatic weapons fire.
Importance of the Privately Owned U.S.-Flag Commercial Fleet
U.S. Government vessel promotional programs have long recognized an
enduring truth about strategic sealift. That truth is that it is far
more efficient and economical over the long-term to support a privately
owned commercial fleet during peacetime to have available in times of
war or national emergency than it is either to rely on the vicissitudes
of the international market or to maintain on stand-by status a fleet
of inactive government-owned ships.
This axiom is reflected both in law and official national security
policy.
Section 50101 of Title 46 of the U.S. Code (going back to the
Merchant Marine Act, 1920 and amended and affirmed over time) provides
in part that: ``It is necessary for the national defense and the
development of the domestic and foreign commerce of the United States
that the United States have a merchant marine . . . capable of serving
as a naval and military auxiliary in time of war or national
emergency.''
The official national security policy is reflected in National
Security Directive 28 issued on October 5, 1989 which provides, in
part, that ``[s]ealift is essential both to executing this country's
forward defense strategy and to maintaining a wartime economy'' and
that the ``U.S.-owned commercial ocean carrier industry, to the extent
it is capable, will be relied upon to provide sealift in peace, crisis,
and war.''
These bedrock policies reject the alternatives of relying on the
foreign market and U.S. Government vessel ownership and belie much of
the criticisms of the U.S. maritime industry offered by uninformed
observers.
In the case of dependence on the international market, the U.S.
Government has seen through its own experience as well as that of other
governments (such as that of the United Kingdom in the Falklands War or
Canada in Operations Desert Storm/Desert Shield) that foreign vessels
are not always available when needed or reliable when chartered.
Moreover, as the U.S. Government found when it needed Ro/Ro's in
Operations Desert Storm/Desert Shield, foreign flag Ro/Ro's, when
available, were only available at very high (some would say exorbitant)
charter rates.
In the case of dependence on inactive government-owned vessels, the
cost of maintaining such vessels is often much higher than the cost to
keep available a privately owned U.S.-flag commercial vessel. The
reasons for this are obvious--the private operator has a high incentive
to operate efficiently to maximize earnings and the U.S. Government is
able to leverage the owner's receipts from the ongoing carriage of
commercial cargoes to pay for maintenance, a well trained, loyal and
motivated crew and other aspects of vessel operation.
Military Utility of Vessels Carrying Food Aid
It has been wrongly suggested that U.S.-flag vessels transporting
international food aid assistance are not ``militarily useful.'' The
usual basis of this fallacious argument is the simplistic and wrong
assertion that only vessels enrolled in the Military Sealift Program or
MSP are ``militarily useful.''
This approach is wrong on many levels.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For further information see USA Maritime, ``A Critical Analysis
of `Food Aid And Agricultural Cargo Preference' '' (Dec. 2010)
available at www.usamaritime.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
First, all vessels under the U.S.-flag are militarily useful and
for that reason are subject to requisition by the U.S. Government for
any declared national emergency.\2\ This is the case because vessels
can be put to varied uses with or without modification. Moreover, every
U.S.-flag vessel employs experienced and licensed U.S. citizen mariners
who take years to train and are needed to man both privately and U.S.
Government owned vessels committed to national defense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 46 U.S.C.  56301.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, most every U.S.-flag vessel in the foreign trade is
enrolled in the Voluntary Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA) program
that provides for sealift readiness. VISA was established pursuant to
section 708 of the Defense Production Act of 1950, as amended, which
authorizes voluntary emergency preparedness programs. The VISA program
is only ``open to U.S.-flag vessel owners of oceangoing militarily
useful vessels, to include tugs and barges.'' \3\ Indeed, VISA defines
``military planning capacity'' for bulk and breakbulk vessels based on
deadweight measured in metric tons. The U.S. Government relies on VISA
for sealift capacity and participation in that Program is a much more
valid measure of ``military usefulness'' than participation in MSP. As
of July 2015, there were 58 VISA participating companies of which only
11 were MSP participants. Obviously, MSP participation is an
insufficient measure of military utility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 79 Fed. Reg. 64462 (Oct. 29, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Liberty vessel M/V Liberty Eagle is a perfect example of a
VISA-enrolled (but not subject to an MSP agreement) vessel carrying
food aid on a regular basis that has substantial military utility. The
Liberty Eagle is a 2004 built dry-bulk carrier capable of transporting
51,812 metric tons of food aid or ammunition or other similar hazardous
cargo and can also carry approximately 600 containers. In fact, we
believe that the Liberty Eagle may be the largest [of the] U.S.-flag
vessels specially configured to carry ammunition.
Third, every U.S.-flag vessel of which we are aware which was built
abroad and registered under U.S.-flag since the inception of MSP has
accomplished its reflagging by first applying to MARAD for confirmation
that the vessel would be eligible for MSP if an MSP agreement would be
available. The reason this is done is that MSP-eligible vessels receive
expedited reflagging processing by the U.S. Coast Guard. Therefore, all
of these vessels meet the MSP standard of military utility.
State of the Privately Owned U.S.-Flag Commercial Fleet
The privately owned U.S.-flag commercial fleet engaged in the
foreign trade, so necessary to national defense, is in a state of
crisis. A combination of the creation of the MSP in 1996 and its
expansion in 2005 from 47 to 60 vessels, relatively robust levels of
U.S. Government cargo reserved to U.S.-flag vessels by Federal cargo
preference laws and international shipping conditions sustained a
stable fleet from roughly the year 2000 to 2012. During that period of
time, there were an average of 105 privately owned U.S.-flag vessels
engaged in the foreign trade. However, since 2012 the fleet has been
declining precipitously as vessels leave the U.S. registry. According
to MARAD, that number of vessels as of October 30, 2015 was 77. With
this trend, it is no exaggeration at all to say that the future of the
privately owned U.S.-flag fleet hangs in the balance.
The reason for this decline, we believe, is readily apparent--the
number of cargoes reserved to U.S.-flag vessels by U.S. cargo
preference laws has decreased substantially in the last few years. This
has occurred both with international food aid (P.L. 83-480) and
Department of Defense cargoes--which are the two main sources of U.S.-
flag U.S. Government freight revenue.
With respect to the food aid, that program has been under siege by
the Obama Administration which has decreased overall funding for the
program while simultaneously diverting more and more of the program to
agency overhead, ancillary expenses, vouchers and cash payments. And
the reservation to U.S.-flag vessels--long a matter of bipartisan
consensus--was decreased from 75 percent to 50 percent as a ``pay for''
expedient in the 2012 Federal highway legislation. According to a
recent MARAD report, this led to a decline of about 40 percent in a
single year in U.S.-flag freight revenue from Fiscal Year 2012 to
Fiscal Year 2013.\4\ Overall, dry bulk food aid cargo volumes have
declined 56 percent since 2010.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of
Transportation, ``A Report to Congress--Impacts of Reductions in
Government Impelled Cargo on the U.S. Merchant Marine'' (April 21,
2015) at 12.
\5\ Id. at 5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While food aid cargoes for the U.S.-flag have fallen precipitously
in the last few years, nothing has taken their place. In March 2015,
General Paul Selva, Commander, United States Transportation Command,
stated--``The reduction in government-impelled cargoes due to the
drawdown in Afghanistan and reductions in food aid . . . are driving
vessel owners to reflag to non-U.S.-flag out of economic necessity . .
. With recent reductions, the mariner base is at the point where future
reductions in U.S.-flag capacity puts our ability to fully activate,
deploy, and sustain forces at increased risk.'' According to an August
2015 Government Accountability Office report,\6\ the United States is
already short 1,400 mariners needed to meet DOD readiness requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``International Food
Assistance--Cargo Preference Increases Food Aid Shipping Costs, and
Benefits Are Unclear'' (August 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With respect to Department of Defense cargoes, from Fiscal Year
2012 to Fiscal Year 2014 the volume of such cargoes declined almost 25
percent as measured by tons.\7\ The carriers who have reflagged or
retired vessels in the last few years have all stated ``that the
predominate driver in their decision to remove vessels has been the
loss of preference cargoes.'' \8\ This has occurred for the readily
apparent reasons that the U.S. Government has reduced its overseas
bases and installations and because of the decreased military
operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. In fact, DOD has indicated that
``the American military presence in Europe as of 2014 is 86 percent
smaller than it was in 1989, with the closing of over 700 sites
including hundreds of bases and radio and radar positions.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id. at 3.
\8\ Id. at 4.
\9\ Id. at 16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regrettably, these trends are likely to continue which will have a
devastating effect on the privately owned U.S.-flag merchant marine. As
the Members of the two Subcommittees are well aware, there are
proposals pending in both Chambers to gut the in-kind international
food aid program and essentially convert it into a cash and voucher
program. And the critics of in-kind food aid--a program which has
served the United States well since 1954 and has saved millions and
millions of people around the world--are unceasing and shrill. In fact,
even without a fundamental change to the U.S. food aid program,
``overall cargo preference volumes will likely decrease over the next 2
to 3 years . . . ''.\10\ The privately owned U.S.-flag fleet, already
struggling financially, is not likely to survive such a further decline
without direct, immediate and substantial U.S. Government support.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Id. at 48.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Importance of Keeping a Viable In-Kind Food Aid Program
Although P.L. 83-480 and related programs have historically been
in-kind food aid programs where U.S. grown agricultural commodities are
shipped abroad to needy people, there has been increasing pressure from
the Obama Administration and certain academics to send cash or vouchers
abroad instead and permit such cash or vouchers to purchase foreign-
sourced agricultural commodities. We believe that such a shift would be
a tragic mistake on many levels and, as well intentioned as the
pressure to shift to cash/vouchers may be, ultimately it will result in
reducing U.S. aid to vulnerable populations or, in other words, the
exact opposite of what is intended.
There are those who say that cash/voucher aid is ``faster'' and
more ``efficient'' than in-kind food--we would not agree. And there is
no doubt that wiring money to a foreign account or printing vouchers in
a foreign country can be done quickly and that cash can be handed out
``efficiently''. But at what cost to accountability, efficacy and
transparency and to the reputation of the program with the American
people?
The ``faster'' and more ``efficient'' theories, in any event, don't
square with reality. In-kind food aid is usually delivered to places
where there is known recurring food insecurity and therefore speed of
delivery is not an issue. The U.S. Government already has other
substantial programs, like the Foreign Disaster Assistance program and
the Emergency Food Security Program, which are intended for
unanticipated emergencies (where cash and vouchers can be used)--if
those programs are under-funded, why has the Obama Administration not
asked for substantial increases? Moreover, shipments can be diverted at
sea and frequently are to meet present needs, and U.S. food can be
stockpiled abroad to meet unanticipated needs and has in fact been so
stockpiled.
But these are issues for another hearing focused on the supposed
benefits and downsides of sending cash and vouchers instead of U.S.
food. We only would point out for the present that early returns on the
extensive use of cash and vouchers are negative. Such use has led to
fraud, abuse and a lack of transparency and accountability exactly as
common sense would indicate when cash or vouchers are used in countries
where there is war, violence and weak social, legal and political
systems.
For example, in March 2015 GAO released a report exposing numerous
cash giveaway issues,\11\ including:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ U.S. Government Accountability Office, ``International Cash-
Based Food Assistance--USAID Has Developed Processes for Initial
Project Approval but Should Strengthen Financial Oversight'' (March
2015).

There is little to no oversight of these cash programs, and
as a consequence there is widespread pilfering, corruption,
graft and diversion of funds. For example: USAID had only two
people in Syria to oversee $\1/2\ billion program; USAID let
contractors use overhead satellite imagery to monitor ``food
for work'' programs in Somalia; when GAO visited a food for
work program in Kenya, nobody from USAID had been there for
over a year to check on the program; and USAID is actually
handing out envelopes of cash to crowds in developing
countries, particularly Syria, without any accountability or
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
record of how that cash gets spent.

The Report also indicated that USAID lacks guidance on
program award modifications which took awards from $91 million
to $626 million, or $535 million in program expenditures, and
that absent such guidance ``USAID cannot hold its staff and
partners accountable.'' The GAO report also found that handing
out cash in areas where people lack access to food caused local
food price spikes of 20-25 percent in numerous instances, and
that neither USAID nor its partners put in place protections to
prevent counterfeiting, diversions, and other misuse of funds
leading to fraud and theft problems.

In November 2014 the UN World Food Programme's Inspector General
also issued a report which made ``two high-risk and nine medium-risk
observations.'' \12\ The high risk observations were that there is a
persistent diversion of vouchers for non-food procurement purposes and
that the WFP persons in charge of the program could only meet 25
percent of their verification targets. Part of the problem was
attempting to solve a humanitarian crisis in a war zone (Syria), but
the problem of ``persistent encashment of vouchers'' was also prevalent
in Jordan and Lebanon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ United Nations World Food Programme Office of the Inspector
General, ``Internal Audit of WFP Operations in Syria and Neighbouring
Countries'' (November 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recommendations
Liberty strongly recommends that the U.S. Congress consider making
improvements in the way that U.S. in-kind food aid is contracted for
and transported to increase transportation and other efficiencies with
the use of privately owned U.S.-flag commercial vessels. Among the
potential possibilities that should be considered are: (1) modifying
contracting for transportation services so that it is based on
established commercial practices which place the risk of loss on the
person in the transportation chain most able to control and mitigate
that risk; (2) moving the transportation function for P.L. 83-480 from
the U.S. Agency for International Development back to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, as it used to be, to more closely align
commodity purchasing decisions and practices with transportation
purchases thereby making the program more cost efficient and reducing
agency coordination delays; (3) requiring foreign ocean carriers to
comply with the same tender and contractual terms and conditions as
U.S.-flag carriers; and (4) requiring shipper agencies to comply with
customary U.S. Government procurement integrity laws, such as the
Competition in Contracting Act and the Federal Acquisition Regulation,
to prevent non-competitive practices such as permitting foreign
speculators to make offers to carry cargoes that they have no ships
for.
Finally, and most importantly, we believe that it is essential that
Congress reverse the reduction in the percentage of international food
assistance cargoes reserved to U.S.-flag vessels that occurred in 2012
and resume the 75 percent reservation. Certain officials have grossly
overestimated the cost of such a resumption using old, outmoded data
not taking into account the current size of the food aid program and
current freight costs. When the U.S. House of Representatives passed
the 75 percent resumption in the 2014 Coast Guard authorization, CBO
estimated the annual cost of the increase to be an average of $8.8
million over 5 years in increased outlays.\13\ We respectfully submit
that this is a very small price to pay to support the sealift
capabilities provided by U.S.-flag vessels carrying food aid and other
U.S. Government cargoes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ H.R. Rep. No. 113-384, 113th Cong., 2d Sess. at 30 (March 25,
2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
Liberty Maritime supports a strong and vibrant privately owned
U.S.-flag commercial fleet and has proven that it is willing to invest
significant capital to achieve that objective. The current fleet is in
mortal danger because of declining cargo preference volumes and
significant action is needed to prevent a precipitous decrease in the
number of privately owned U.S.-flag vessels available for national
defense.

Mr. Shapiro. I apologize for being over the 5 minutes, but
none of our testimonies were vetted by OMB, so we are going to
say what we need to say.
Mr. Rouzer. Point made. Try to keep your comments to 5
minutes, and there will be plenty of opportunity to expound
during the question and answer session.

STATEMENT OF CAPT JOHN W. MURRAY, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, HAPAG-LLOYD USA, LLC, PISCATAWAY, NJ

Mr. Murray. Good morning, Chairman Rouzer, Chairman Hunter,
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Members Garamendi and Costa, and the
Members of both of these important Subcommittees. I appreciate
the opportunity to testify today on the subject of food aid,
cargo preference, and the importance of the Maritime Security
Program to the United States. As President and CEO of Hapag-
Lloyd USA, I deal with these subjects every day in the ordinary
course of business. My testimony today aims to highlight the
importance of these programs to maintaining a viable U.S.
merchant fleet that is so essential to the national security of
our country.
Hapag-Lloyd USA is an American subsidiary of the global
container carrier Hapag-Lloyd AG. We operate five container
ships in a weekly liner service between the United States and
North Europe. All five ships are crewed by American mariners,
and fly the American flag. They carry cargo that sustains the
U.S. military mission, and its service members, based in Europe
and beyond, as well as other preference cargo, including
American food aid that is delivered to destinations well beyond
Europe. Our company has operated American ships in the foreign
commerce of the United States since the early 1900s. Known then
as Lykes Lines, the company supported our nation's sealift
requirements for more than 90 years, including two World Wars,
and numerous other humanitarian and military missions. When
Congress enacted the Maritime Security Program in 1996, our
company was one of the first to enroll. To this day, we have
maintained continuous commitment to both MSP and the Voluntary
Intermodal Sealift Agreement.
Mr. Chairman, today's hearing also allows me the
opportunity to speak personally about my experience as a U.S.
Merchant Mariner, where I began my career. I graduated from
Maine Maritime Academy in 1979, and sailed as a deck officer in
the Lykes fleet. Our company then operated more than 40 U.S.-
flag ships alone, greater than \1/2\ of our nation's entire
U.S.-flag fleet today. Preference cargoes were abundant then,
and for our company, the most significant was the U.S. food aid
that we carried to distressed nations throughout the world. To
this day I remain proud to have sailed as an American Merchant
Mariner, to have been part of the transportation link that
delivered American produced food to desperate people in their
time of need.
Throughout our nation's history, the U.S. merchant fleet of
privately owned U.S.-flag commercial ships, and their U.S.
citizen crews, have always met our nation's call. We have
consistently, efficiently, and effectively provided the
commercial sealift capacity and the civilian mariners needed to
meet our nation's worldwide military and political objectives.
For example, the recent conflict in Afghanistan presented
unique logistical challenges for U.S. military planners due to
the country's landlocked borders. With an urgent need for new
assured gateways, the Department of Defense turned to the MSP
carriers to develop alternative routes. By leveraging existing
intermodal networks, the MSP carriers were able to develop and
expand new northern gateways into Afghanistan, and thus provide
the DOD with continuous seamless distribution of supplies to
our war fighters when other gateways were closed. It is not
well known that certain U.S.-flag carriers had long been using
this route, which gained fame as the Northern Distribution
Network, to deliver U.S. food aid to counties in Central Asia.
This is an excellent example of the partnership and
interdependency that exists between DOD and the MSP operators.
A strong Maritime Security Program is necessary to ensure
the long-term success of the U.S.-flag fleet. American ships
are simply more expensive to operate than their international
counterparts. They are crewed by Americans, registered in the
United States, and subject to U.S. laws, taxes, and
regulations, all of which are greater than international flag
options. The MSP stipend partially compensates for this cost
difference, but the remaining cost delta must be achieved
through access to our nation's cargo preference programs that
reserve cargo specifically for U.S.-flag ships. There are three
U.S. cargo preference laws that are vital to the U.S. maritime
industry, and must be preserved, namely the Cargo Preference
Act of 1904, Public Resolution 17, which governs the Export-
Import Bank, and the Cargo Preference Act of 1954. Congress
enacted these laws to ensure that U.S. operators have a
sufficient U.S. cargo base for their ships operating in foreign
commerce. Strict enforcement of these laws is fundamental to
our business success, and our survival as U.S.-flag carriers.
It is worth noting that the volume of cargo moving under these
programs for our company is the lowest I have seen in the last
20 years, with a significant reduction just in the last 12
months.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to summarize my testimony as an
MSP operator and a businessman. U.S. companies own all of the
ships in the U.S.-flag privately owned fleet. As executives for
these companies, we must routinely address the operational and
political realities of our U.S.-flag businesses with our boards
and shareholders. We frequently are asked to explain the
implications of newswire political issues, such as the MAP-21
food aid reduction, the expiration of the Ex-Im Bank charter,
the future of MSP funding levels, and the overall degradation
of U.S.-flag cargo, all of which are the result of budget cuts
and reallocation of government priorities. To be blunt, our
business model has become a tough sell with our shareholders,
who, coincidentally, are the same folks that approve capital
investments for the future of the U.S.-flag fleet. Given the
precipitous decline in preference cargoes, combined with
current MSP levels, I now believe it unlikely that we could
retain the 60 ship MSP fleet if a comparable MSP shortfall were
to occur today, such as the one that occurred in 2013.
Likewise, a failure to realistically adjust the funding levels
for MSP may yield a similar result.
As a former Merchant Mariner, and a lifelong advocate of a
strong U.S.-flag Merchant Marine, I know how urgent it is that
we stabilize our few remaining U.S.-flag ships through the
programs that exist today. The unfortunate reality of the
business world is that if a service, product, or business unit
does not perform, it is eliminated. Our nation's remaining
U.S.-flag fleet is dangerously close to this reality.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the time and the opportunity to
testify before the joint Committees.
[The prepared statement of CAPT Murray follows:]

Prepared Statement of CAPT John W. Murray, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC, Piscataway, NJ
Introduction
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the
subject of food aid, cargo preference and the importance of the
Maritime Security Program (MSP) to the United States. As the President
and CEO of Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC, I deal with each of these subjects
every day in the ordinary course of business. My testimony will
highlight the importance of these programs to maintaining a viable U.S.
merchant fleet that is so essential to the national security of our
country.
Hapag-Lloyd USA, LLC (HLUSA) is an American subsidiary of the
global container carrier Hapag-Lloyd AG. We operate five geared
container ships in a weekly liner service between the U.S. Gulf and
East Coast to North Europe. All five ships are crewed by American
mariners and fly the American flag. Our ships carry cargo that sustains
the United States military mission and its service members based in
Europe and beyond. Additionally, our ships are carrying other non-
military cargo including delivering American food aid to destinations
well beyond Europe.
HLUSA has a long and proud history of participating in our nation's
global food aid efforts. By virtue of predecessor entities, our company
has operated American ships in U.S. commerce since World War I. Known
then as Lykes Lines and for more than ninety years, the Lykes fleet
supported our nation through two World Wars and numerous other
conflicts. In 1996, when Congress enacted the Maritime Security
Program, our company was one of the first MSP participants. To this
day, we have maintained continuous participation in both the MSP and
the Voluntary Intermodal Sealift Agreement, which as defined by the
U.S. Maritime Administration, ``provides commercial sealift for a
seamless, time-phased transition from peacetime to wartime operations .
. . [an] activation of state-of-the-art commercial intermodal equipment
to coincide with DOD requirements while minimizing disruption to U.S.
commercial operations.'' \1\ In 2006, during a turbulent period of
consolidation among ocean carriers, the Lykes Lines name changed to
Hapag-Lloyd following the purchase of its parent company.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.marad.dot.gov/ships-and-shipping/strategic-sealift/
voluntary-intermodal-sealift-agreement-visa/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Chairman, today's hearing also gives me the opportunity to
speak on a personal note. The success of the U.S. Merchant Marine has
been a primary focus of my entire career.
I graduated from Maine Maritime Academy in 1979 and began sailing
as a ship's deck officer in the Lykes fleet. At that time, the company
operated more than forty U.S.-flag oceangoing ships in foreign
commerce. That is more than \1/2\ the size of the entire U.S.-flag
fleet today. Preference cargo was abundant at the time, the most
significant of which for our company being the American humanitarian
aid distributed to distressed nations throughout the world. It was
always personally gratifying to see first-hand the result of delivering
American produced food aid to those most in need.
Today the shipping world is much different. Our company now
operates in an extremely competitive global trade environment dominated
by international carriers with very low cost operating structures, and
government-supported operating environments, including tax and
regulatory structures to favor investment in growth and profitability.
The Merchant Fleet Is Critical to Our National Defense
Throughout our nation's history, the U.S. merchant fleet has
provided sealift capability to our military in support of its global
military operations. Each conflict has shown that the U.S. requires a
strong and active fleet of vessels to support the Department of Defense
(DOD) mission. Privately owned U.S.-flagged commercial ships and their
U.S. citizen crews have always met our nation's call. We have
consistently provided the commercial sealift capacity and the civilian
mariners needed to meet our nation's worldwide military and political
objectives.
The U.S.-flag fleet provides daily support to DOD to sustain its
global peacetime mission. Cargoes can include anything from subsistence
supplies to personal household goods for military personnel based
abroad. It is these same ships that also support DOD during contingency
operations. The most recent examples include the sealift provided by
U.S.-flag carriers during Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation
Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. U.S.-flag ships moved more than 90
percent of DOD's requirement.
The conflict in Afghanistan provided unique logistical challenges
for military planners due to the country's landlocked borders. Until
2009, the only line of communication into the country was via Pakistan,
which limited the United States to one supply gateway into Afghanistan.
With an urgent need for assured gateways, DOD turned to the MSP
carriers to develop alternative routes. By leveraging their existing
intermodal networks, the MSP carriers were able to expand the ground
lines of communication and provide DOD new gateways into Afghanistan
from the north. Following the closure of the southern gateways, this
Northern Distribution Network (NDN), as it became known, provided the
United States' military effort with continuous seamless distribution of
supplies to our warfighters.
It is not well known that U.S.-flag carriers had long been using
this commercially operated and maintained intermodal network, which
ultimately gained fame as the NDN, to deliver U.S. food aid to
countries in Central Asia. Expanding the network to include Afghanistan
was an efficient and effective solution the MSP carriers provided to
the U.S. military and is an excellent example of the partnership and
interdependency that exists between DOD and the MSP operators.
The Maritime Security Program
A strong Maritime Security Program is necessary to assure the long-
term success of the U.S. fleet. The MSP provides a significant national
security benefit through a cost effective vehicle that provides DOD
with assured access to ships and intermodal capacity in order to
support and sustain our armed forces in a contingency. The program also
ensures that we as a nation maintain a sufficient pool of U.S. citizen
merchant mariners to crew all U.S.-flag tonnage at the time of need,
including the U.S. Government's Ready Reserve Force that relies on
commercial mariners.
The MSP, established by the Maritime Security Act of 1996,
originally provided for the participation of 47 United States flag
commercial vessels. The success of the initial program led Congress to
reauthorize and expand the fleet to 60 ships in 2005. In 2012, Congress
reaffirmed its strong support for the program by reauthorizing and
extending the 60 ship program through 2025. All existing MSP operators
elected to extend their individual contracts through 2025.
Under the MSP, participating U.S.-flag carriers commit their ships,
as well as their global logistics networks that may include ports,
rail, trucking and other infrastructure to support DOD in maintaining
our nation's readiness. In exchange, each ship is paid a stipend that
is intended to partially offset the higher costs to fly the U.S.-flag.
By their very nature, U.S.-flagged ships are more expensive than
their international counterparts. They are crewed by Americans,
registered in the U.S. and subject to U.S. laws, taxes and regulations,
all of which are greater than internationally flagged ships. The
significant cost differences between U.S.-flag and non-U.S.-flag vessel
operations are well researched and documented by the U.S. Maritime
Administration, the Department of Defense and independent analysts.
While the MSP stipend assists with this cost hurdle, it does not come
close to equalizing the cost difference. This delta must be achieved
elsewhere, which is why our nation's cargo preference programs are so
critical to the survival of the U.S.-flag fleet.
The Cargo Preference Programs
The MSP is a critical component to ensure the continued existence
of a U.S.-flag fleet into the future. However, it is only one element
required for the long-term viability of the fleet. American ships must
have access to cargoes reserved for U.S. ships in order to be
commercially successful in the modern competitive world. The MSP has
always meant to be a partial offset to the additional cost of U.S.-flag
ship operation while the balance was to come from the U.S. Government
cargo preference programs.
There are three U.S. cargo preference laws that are vital to the
U.S. maritime industry and must be preserved:

The Cargo Preference Act of 1904 requires all U.S. military
cargo be transported on U.S.-flag ships.

Public Resolution 17 requires cargoes guaranteed by the
Export-Import Bank be transported on U.S.-flag ships.

The Cargo Preference Act of 1954 required at least 50
percent of U.S. Government generated cargoes be shipped on
privately owned U.S.-flag commercial ships, if available, at
fair and reasonable rates. The Food Security Act of 1985
increased that percentage to 75 percent for certain foreign
assistance programs. Unfortunately, in 2012 the percentage was
reduced back to 50 percent and is partially responsible for the
current demise of U.S.-flag fleet size.

As privately owned, commercially operated U.S.-flag ocean carriers,
we live and survive by these U.S. laws. Congress enacted these laws to
ensure that U.S.-flag operators have a U.S. cargo base to ensure
successful commercial operations in foreign commerce. Enforcement of
these laws is necessary, and remains the critical basis for maintaining
a U.S.-flag fleet into the future.
Unfortunately, the amount of cargoes moving under these programs is
at the lowest point that I have seen in the last twenty years. The
reduced cargo base places even more pressure on MSP carriers and unless
rectified in some manner will lead to additional loss of U.S.-flag
ships.
Current Realities and Conclusion
The erosion of the U.S.-flag fleet is indisputable. The size of the
U.S.-flag international trading fleet of privately owned ships has
decreased by nearly 25 percent just in the past 5 years.
The U.S. oceangoing merchant marine fleet has declined by 82
percent since 1951, when the fleet peaked at 1,268 vessels.\2\ As of
year-end 2010, the U.S.-flag fleet in foreign commerce was comprised of
60 ships participating in the Maritime Security Program (MSP), and
roughly 50 other ships carrying commercial and preference cargo on
various routes.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ ``Study of the Impediments to U.S.-Flag Registry Final
Report,'' Price Waterhouse Coopers. September 20, 2011.
\3\ ``Comparison of U.S. and Foreign-Flag Operating Costs,'' U.S.
Department of Transportation Maritime Administration. September 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This reduction is the result of a combined precipitous decline in
military, food aid and other government-impelled cargoes that are
required by law to move on American ships with American citizen crews.
U.S.-flag carriers are no longer able to operate competitively without
adjustments to the MSP as well as the full support of the remaining
cargo preference programs. Absent financial relief in the form of
increased MSP stipends or additional U.S.-flag access to preference
cargoes, carriers will have no economically feasible option but to
continue removing ships from the U.S. registry.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to summarize the current situation as an
MSP ship operator and a businessperson. U.S. companies, each governed
by a boards of directors and shareholders, own all of the ships in the
MSP fleet. We, the senior management for these companies, must
routinely address the operational realities of our U.S.-flag services
with our boards and shareholders. We are frequently called upon to
explain the implications of newswire political issues such as the MAP-
21 food aid reduction, the expiration of the Ex-Im Bank charter and the
overall degradation of U.S.-flag cargo resulting from budget cuts and
reallocation of government priorities. To be blunt, it is not easy to
portray an optimistic view of our U.S.-flag industry's long-term
prospects given the challenges before us today.
As a former U.S. merchant mariner and a lifelong supporter of a
strong U.S.-flag Merchant Marine, I have fought many battles over the
years in support of our U.S.-flag industry. I fear that we are not just
losing the battle, but now the war itself if we fail to stabilize the
existing U.S.-flag fleet through the programs that exist today. The
unfortunate reality of today's business world is that if a service or
business unit does not perform, it is eliminated. The U.S.-flag fleet
is getting dangerously close to this reality.
I would like to close with a final comment that I believe
illustrates the mixed messages sent to our boards regarding our U.S.-
flag services.
In June of 2013 all existing MSP carriers extended their MSP
contracts for 10 more years, affirming their commitment of ships to our
nation until 2025. Despite the gloomy future commercial outlook for
these businesses at that time, each carrier was able to obtain board
and shareholder approval for their contract extension. Yet, within 2
months of executing agreements, budget sequestration was enforced and
the Maritime Security Program was one of the casualties. Each carrier
lost 6 weeks of stipend per ship as a result. Fortunately, no ship left
the program at that time. However, given the precipitous decline in
preference cargoes combined with current MSP levels, I fear that it is
unlikely that we would retain the 60 ship MSP fleet if a similar
shortfall were to occur today. Likewise, a failure to realistically
adjust funding levels for this program may yield the same result.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for time and the opportunity to testify
before the joint Committees today.

Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Schoeneman?

STATEMENT OF BRIAN W. SCHOENEMAN, POLITICAL AND
LEGISLATIVE DIRECTOR, SEAFARERS INTERNATIONAL UNION,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Schoeneman. Thank you, Chairman Rouzer, Chairman
Hunter, Chairman Conaway, and Ranking Members Costa and
Garamendi for the invitation to testify here today. My name is
Brian Schoeneman, and I serve as the Legislative Director for
the Seafarers International Union. I am here today representing
all of seagoing labor, which includes the seafarers, the marine
engineers, the masters, mates, and pilots, and the American
maritime officers. Together, our four unions and our affiliates
represent the bulk of America's internationally sailing
civilian mariners. Before I begin, I would like to thank
personally Chairman Hunter, on behalf of maritime labor, for
his remarks on the floor of the House regarding the loss of the
S.S. El Faro last month. It is hard to understate how difficult
this has been to our union families, and it was a tremendous
blow to the American Merchant Marine, and your heartfelt
remarks meant a lot to the families of the crew, and all of us
in the industry, so thank you, sir.
I want to thank all the Members of both Subcommittees for
holding this hearing today. All too often, when it comes to our
international food aid program, the maritime industry is
largely ignored. When we aren't ignored, we are vilified and
lied about, accused of starving children and being greedy
shills for foreign fat cats lining their pockets with taxpayer
dollars. That is a fantasy. The reality is that the men and
women of the American Merchant Marine have been a critical part
of America's food aid program since their inception. As they
have since the earliest days of our republic, our mariners put
their lives on the line every time they leave the dock. Whether
it is braving pirate infested waters, like the crew of the
Maersk Alabama did to deliver food aid to Africa, the emergency
deliveries of critical supplies to Haiti in the aftermath of
the 2010 earthquake, or simply the daily dangers of the sea, as
we have recently seen, the men and women of the Merchant Marine
have helped make this program the undoubted success that it is.
Food aid is, and remains, a critical part of the cargo base
that ensures the existence, not the success, merely the
existence, of our Merchant Marine. Our fleet employs thousands
of Americans in shipboard jobs alone, and tens of thousands
more in maritime and agriculture. If food aid cargo preference
were to disappear, those jobs would disappear with it, and they
won't come back. And with those jobs goes America's ability to
project power and defend our allies and interests abroad.
When it comes to food aid, the anti-maritime special
interests have one goal, and that is to undermine the
traditional relationship between agriculture, maritime, and the
private voluntary organizations who have made our program so
successful. We refuse to let them succeed. The arguments they
make, essentially that food aid isn't an important source of
cargo for the industry, that it isn't important to our farmers,
and that ending in-kind food aid wouldn't cost a single job,
are ludicrous on their face. Despite these recklessly false
claims often made by hack academics who wouldn't know a bow
from a stern, you all heard what the Maritime Administrator
testified to earlier. There is no denying that the loss of food
aid cargo resulting from reductions in appropriations, and the
cuts to cargo preference in MAP-21, has cost this industry
ships and jobs.
Over the last 10 years food aid has made up a considerable
portion of the preference cargo carried by American carriers,
if not the majority. From 2000 to 2013 cargo volumes in the
food aid program have dropped 77 percent. In 1999 there were
106 American ships carrying approximately 6 million tons of
food aid. In 2013 the fleet had dropped in size to 75 ships,
carrying slightly more than 1 million tons of food aid.
According to MARAD, since 2010 the size of the U.S.-flag fleet
has dropped 23 percent, from 99 ships to the 78 ships mentioned
today. And that has resulted in the loss of nearly 1,000
mariner jobs. This loss is not a coincidence. It is the
logical, expected result of a continued vicious, well-funded,
and relentless assault against America's Merchant Marine and
our military readiness. America's Merchant Mariners are a vital
national security asset. We cannot allow the bad ideas of a few
misguided academics who have forgotten that this program was
always more than just a foreign aid program to destroy the jobs
of tens of thousands of people, and cripple our ability to
defend ourselves and respond to crises around the globe.
I strongly urge you to reject these dangerous arguments. Do
not allow the critics of in-kind food aid and the American
Merchant Marine to accomplish what the Royal Navy could not do
during the Revolution, what German submarines could not do
during World War II, and what pirates could not do in 2009. I
urge you to continue to support in-kind food aid, cargo
preference, and Congress' steadfast support for the United
States Merchant Marine. Thank you all, and I will be happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schoeneman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Brian W. Schoeneman, Political and Legislative
Director, Seafarers International Union, Washington, D.C.
Good morning, Chairmen Hunter and Rouzer, Ranking Members Garamendi
and Costa, and Members of both Subcommittees.
On behalf of the Seafarers International Union, the Marine
Engineers Beneficial Association, the International Organization of
Masters, Mates and Pilots and the American Maritime Officers, I thank
you for conducting this hearing and for giving me the opportunity to
testify. I would also be remiss if I did not thank all of you for your
continued support of the U.S. Merchant Marine and our international
food aid programs.
That we are here today to discuss these issues is a testament to
your willingness to include all the relevant stakeholders in America's
food aid programs. That alone is a heartening step as all too often,
discussions regarding our international foreign assistance and food aid
programs find the maritime industry largely ignored. When we are not
ignored, we often find our contributions and concerns discussed by and
trivialized by the legions of academics and lobbyists who know little
and understand less about the maritime industry, and have made ending
in-kind food aid and cargo preference their top legislative priority.
This would be a disastrous mistake, not only for our industry and
the men and women who put themselves in harm's way as members of the
American Merchant Marine, but for the United States and the American
taxpayer collectively.
The Merchant Marine Act of 1936 codified what was long-standing
American policy--that it was necessary for the national defense and the
development of domestic and foreign commerce for the United States to
maintain a merchant marine.\1\ For a variety of reasons, Congress has
made the determination that an American merchant marine, crewed by
American civilian mariners, made up of American-flag ships, is critical
to our nation. The issue that Congress has been confronting since our
independence--how best to foster our internationally sailing deep water
merchant marine--is not a new one. During the debate on a number of
merchant marine related bills in 1904, Congressman Edward De V. Morrell
of Pennsylvania said,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Merchant Marine Act of 1946, 46 U.S.C.  50101 (2015).

``It is admitted on all sides that our merchant marine in the
foreign trade is languishing. It is admitted that unless some
remedy for present conditions is devised before long it will
practically be swept from the seas. It is admitted that we are
confronted with a great national calamity, threatened by an
irreparable loss; but we stand here, year after year, disputing
about methods . . . [l]ike the ass in the old fable, we are
standing between two bundles of hay and yet perishing of hunger
by reason of our inability to decide which bundle we shall
choose; undecided because one bundle might possibly be better
than the other, and because we are too mulish to investigate
both before selecting either.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 38 Cong. Rec. 6131 (daily ed. Apr. 30, 1904) (statement of Rep.
Morrell).

The debate Congress had in 1904 over how best to protect and
preserve our merchant marine could be the same debate we are having
today. Fortunately, Congress in 1904 began the process of developing
Federal programs to preserve, protect and expand our merchant marine.
Since 1904, Congress has developed a number of programs that provide
the necessary economic base to support a U.S.-flag merchant fleet in
the foreign trades. Today, those laws include the Maritime Security
Fleet Program (MSP) \3\ and the various cargo preference laws that, all
working together, support the U.S.-flag international fleet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ 46 U.S.C.  53101-53111 (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 1904, Congress passed the first cargo preference statute, the
Military Cargo Preference Act of 1904.\4\ Future Congresses would pass
the Cargo Preference Act of 1954,\5\ and a variety of other legislation
that ensured that U.S.-flag ships with American crews would carry a
substantial portion of all the cargo bought and shipped using taxpayer
dollars. This government-impelled cargo is critical to ensuring the
continued existence--not success, but simply the continued existence--
of a U.S.-flag fleet sailing in the international trades.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 10 U.S.C.  2631 (2015).
\5\ 46 U.S.C.  55305 (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 1996, Congress passed the Maritime Security Act of 1996, which
created the MSP Fleet. The MSP Fleet is a privately owned,
internationally trading fleet of U.S.-flag vessels, that are both
militarily useful and commercially viable. MSP represents the backbone
of the U.S.-flag international fleet, and the readiness stipend
provided to vessel owners and operators helps to off-set the higher
costs required to keep a ship under the U.S.-flag. MSP eligible ships
must meet Department of Defense requirements for military usefulness,
must be commercial viable as determined by the Department of
Transportation's Maritime Administration (MARAD), must be American
owned, American crewed and American flagged.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See generally, U.S. Dept. of Transp., Mar. Admin., The Maritime
Security Program: Meeting National Sealift Needs, (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Together, MSP and cargo preference work to ensure the continued
existence of the United States Merchant Marine. MSP provides the ships,
and cargo preference provides the cargo necessary to keep those ships
economically viable. A ship without cargo is like a car without an
engine--not moving.
Amidst all of the discussion about ships and cargo, it is easy to
forget (and those who are most critical of cargo preference always do)
the most important aspect of the American Merchant Marine--what makes
the merchant marine fundamentally American--the men and women who crew
these vessels.
These men and women, some of the most highly trained and skilled
mariners in the world, are the heart of our merchant marine. They are
the one irreplaceable asset in any discussion of maritime policy. These
are the same men and women who willingly brave the dangers of the sea,
who sail into combat zones with military cargo, or pirate infested
waters with critical, life-saving food aid, who helped evacuate
Manhattan Island on September 11, 2001, and who provided the critical
sealift necessary to support our warfighters in every American conflict
from the earliest days of the Revolution to Operations Enduring Freedom
and Iraqi Freedom.
Supporting the military has been fundamental to the American
Merchant Marine for its entire existence. For example, since 2009,
privately-owned U.S.-flag commercial vessels and their civilian U.S.
citizen crews have transported more than 90% of the sustainment cargo
needed to support U.S. military operations and rebuilding programs in
Iraq and Afghanistan.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Hearing on the Maritime Administration's Fiscal Year 2016
Budget Request Before the Subcomm. On Coast Guard and Maritime
Transportation of the H. Comm. on Transportation and Infrastructure,
114th Cong. 2 (2015) (statement of Paul N. Jaenichen, Administrator,
Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ensuring that we have an adequate mariner pool to crew the
privately-owned U.S.-flag international fleet (both MSP and non-MSP
vessels), our government fleets (including the civilians who crew
vessels of the Military Sealift Command), and our reserve fleets
(including the Ready Reserve Force and the National Defense Reserve
Force) has been the fundamental purpose of Federal maritime policy in
modern times.
Today, that mariner pool is at risk. Our U.S.-flag international
fleet faces one of the toughest economic environments in recent memory,
as even now the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) is warning of a potential global recession.\8\ Anemic trade
growth has placed a significant burden on the maritime industry, and
that, coupled with significant reductions in government-impelled cargo,
has put increased pressure on the U.S.-flag international fleet.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Szu Ping Chan, World Flirts With Global Recession as Trade
Growth Slows, Warns OCD. The Telegraph, Nov. 9, 2015, http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/economics/11983690/global-recession-trade-
growth-warns-oecd.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If American ships and the companies that operate them cannot
continue to compete internationally, those vessels will leave the U.S.-
flag and the mariners who crew them will be thrown out of work. If too
many mariners cannot find steady employment at sea, not only will they
leave the industry, they will lose the critical licenses and
credentials they must maintain to crew these ships under existing
Federal and international law.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See generally 46 CFR 11.102 (2015) (incorporating by reference
the International Convention on Standards, Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Seafarers of 1978 as amended 1995, and the Standards,
Training, Certification, and Watchkeeping Code).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If we lose these jobs, these mariners will go away, and they are
not easily replaceable in the event of a national emergency or major
conflict. For example, under the International Convention on Standards,
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping (STCW), the primary regulation
for international and U.S.-flag mariners, to receive a ship's master
endorsement for operating vessels of more than 3,000 gross tons, at a
minimum, the applicant must have 1,080 days of service as the officer
in charge of the navigational watch (OICNW) on the oceans or Great
Lakes.\10\ That represents the equivalent of almost 3 years of twenty-
four hour days at sea. It could take a mariner close to a decade to
accrue that much sea time in order to qualify. Even entry level
mariners require significant training in order to become qualified and
competent at sea. The Seafarers International Union's entry-level
unlicensed apprentice program is a year-long program designed to take
those unfamiliar with the maritime industry and prepare them for a
career at sea.\11\ These are difficult, demanding jobs, but they are
jobs that are critical to the national security of the United States.
Without American civilian mariners, the United States cannot project
power overseas and it cannot go to war. It is the American civilian
mariners of the U.S. Merchant Marine who crew all of the vessels--
whether privately-owned or government-owned--available to our country
in time of crisis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See id.
\11\ The Seafarers Harry Lundeberg School of Seamanship, http://
www.seafarers.org/jobs/ua.html (last visited November 12, 2015). As
noted on the website, entry level mariners are sent through five phases
of training, each phase taking between 2 to 3 months, with the final
phase requiring an unspecified amount of time to upgrade skills
consistent with the needs of SIU contracted employers. At a minimum,
each entry level mariner will spend at least thirteen months in
training to successfully complete the unlicensed apprenticeship
program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is that simple. Our mariners need good, steady jobs in the
industry during peacetime in order to ensure that they are available
and ready to serve America in wartime. As Rear Admiral Thomas Shannon,
the commander of the Military Sealift Command said during this year's
National Maritime Day commemoration, ``[i]t is our U.S.-flagged
merchant fleet and our mariners that ensure that our Soldiers, Sailors,
Airmen and Marines are supplied. From Inchon to Iraq, our mariners and
our maritime industry delivered . . . Let us not, as a nation, sign
away our remaining sealift capacity to non-U.S.-flagged fleets sailed
by non-U.S. mariners.''\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Marshall Ainley, et al., Maritime Labor Supports Maritime
Security Program and Crude Export Legislation, The Hill, Oct. 8, 2015,
http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/labor/256420-maritime-labor-
supports-maritime-security-program-and-crude-export.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted before, under the Cargo Preference Act of 1954, at least
50% of all cargoes shipped by U.S. Government agencies outside the
Department of Defense, including foreign food aid cargoes, must be
carried by U.S.-flag ships. Since 1954, the men and women of the U.S.
Merchant Marine have been in a partnership with the American farmer
community in ensuring the success of America's premiere international
food assistance program,\13\ the P.L. 83-480 Title II Food for Peace
program.\14\ Food aid has long accounted for the largest source of non-
defense preference cargo available to the U.S.-flag international
fleet.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ David Rogers, A Food Fight Over Aid Program, Politco, Apr. 24,
2013, http://www.politico.com/story/2013/04/a-food-fight-over-aid-
program-090607.
\14\ Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954,
Pub. L. No. 83-480 (1954) amended by Food for Peace Act of 1966, Pub.
L. No. 89-808 (1966).
\15\ See U.S. Mar. Admin., Report for Congress on the Impacts of
Reductions in Government Impelled Cargo on the U.S. Merchant Marine
(2015) 2-3. [hereinafter MARAD Impacts Report].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Food aid is a critical component to America's strategic sealift
program. It is vital that Congress continue its steadfast support for
in-kind food aid as part of our Federal support for the Merchant
Marine.
Despite the oftentimes absurd and patently offensive claims of the
opponents of the Merchant Marine regarding the importance of food aid
to the sustainment of the U.S.-flag fleet,\16\ there is ample evidence
that recent reductions in food aid cargoes has harmed the maritime
industry.\17\ These reductions, caused both by declining appropriations
for the P.L. 83-480 Program as well as the statutory reduction in the
percentage of cargo reserved to American ships from 75% to 50% in the
Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act of 2013 (MAP-21),\18\
and other changes wrought by USAID which reduce food aid cargoes, have
had a significant adverse impact on the America's Merchant Marine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See, e.g., Reforming Food Aid: Desperate Need to Do Better:
Hearing Before the H. Comm. on Foreign Affairs, 114th Cong. 5-6 (2015)
(statement of Christopher B. Barrett, Cornell University). [hereinafter
Barrett Testimony].
\17\ See generally MARAD Impacts Report, supra note 15.
\18\ Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act, Pub. L. No.
112-141  100124, 126 Stat. 915 (2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014 \19\ required MARAD to
prepare a report to Congress on the current and future impacts of
reductions in government-impelled cargo on the U.S. Merchant Marine as
a result of changes to cargo preference requirements, including those
made as part of MAP-21 and reductions to P.L. 83-480. The report, which
was transmitted to Congress on April 21, 2015 paints a clear picture--
without cargo preference, most of the U.S.-flag fleet would disappear
and the reductions in food aid cargoes have had a real, meaningful
impact on the decline of the merchant marine.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2014, Pub. L. No. 113-76, 
169, 128 Stat. 598 (2014).
\20\ See generally MARAD Impacts Report, supra note 15.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the last 10 years, food aid has made up more than \1/2\ of the
preference cargo carried by U.S.-flag carriers--more than even
Department of Defense cargoes.\21\ We have seen a major drop in the
amount of food aid cargo carried by the U.S.-fleet, with total cargo
amounts dropping 77% from 2000 to 2013. In 1999, 103 American ships
carried 6,361,000 gross tons of food aid cargo, both pre-packaged and
bulk. In 2013, the fleet had dropped to 76 ships, carrying only
1,070,000 tons of food aid.\22\ Although some critics have wheeled
forward various theories questioning the role of food aid cargoes in
sustaining the merchant marine,\23\ the correlation between the decline
of food aid tonnage and our fleet is undeniable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Id.
\22\ Id.
\23\ See, e.g., Barrett Testimony at 5-6, supra note 16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since 2010, the size of the U.S.-flag fleet has dropped by 23%,
from 99 vessels to 76, and that number is expected to continue to
drop.\24\ The resulting loss of ships represents the loss of
approximately 1,000 mariner jobs since 2010 alone.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Id. at 7. MARAD projected that, based on their analysis of
trends in cargo preference from 1990 through 2013, the U.S.-flag liner
(non-dry bulk and non-tanker) fleet would decline to 76 ships by 2023.
MARAD noted in the same report, however, that the liner fleet is
currently at 73 vessels as of April 2015, indicating their projections
may have been optimistic. With all vessel types included, the U.S.-flag
privately-owned self-propelled fleet in the international trade is 81
ships as of April 2015. Id.
\25\ Id. at 8. Generally speaking, each ship represents two crews
of approximately 20 crew members, officers and engineers, thus each
ship lost represents the loss of approximately 40 jobs. MARAD notes in
their report that the ``number of mariner jobs associated with the loss
of three ships is approximately 120 mariners.'' Id. at 8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As MARAD noted in their report, food aid quantities are affected by
a variety of factors, including appropriations levels, food prices,
emergencies and where they are located, and the differing kinds of
commodities carried.\26\ This makes it exceedingly difficult to
predict, with any reliability, what future impacts will be on cargo
volumes. That being said, however, it is clear that the current trend
of reductions is likely to continue barring some significant natural or
man-made disaster that would likely result in an increase in
appropriations for food aid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Id. at 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Critics of the merchant marine contend that the cuts in food aid
over the last few years, coupled with the MAP-21 cuts have not had a
significant impact on our maritime industry.\27\ MARAD has determined
the opposite, finding that ``carriers who have reflagged or retired
ships out of the U.S.-flag fleet during the last 3 years have stated
that the predominate driver in their decision to remove vessels has
been the loss of preference cargoes.'' While the largest reductions
have been in DOD cargoes,\28\ it is clear that the reductions in food
aid have made matters worse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ See generally Barrett Testimony, supra note 16.
\28\ MARAD Impacts Report at 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That is why the on-going attacks on the merchant marine by those in
the so-called ``Food Aid Reform'' community are so unfortunate. By
willfully distorting the role the maritime and agriculture industries
play in the continued success of these programs, opponents of maritime
and agriculture have damaged the overall credibility of P.L. 83-480. Of
particular note are the writings and public statements of Cornell
University's Dr. Christopher Barrett. Dr. Barrett recently testified
before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on food aid reform issues--a
hearing that the maritime industry was specifically excluded from. Dr.
Barrett's testimony at that hearing is representative of the kind of
flawed scholarship and willful distortion of facts common amongst those
seeking to end cargo preference and in-kind food aid. Given his lack of
experience with the maritime industry, he made a common mistake and
focused almost all of his attention on the ships and virtually ignored
the importance of trained, reliable and trustworthy American crews in
his criticisms. Where he did mention the mariners, he still got it
wrong, even going so far as to claim that reductions in food aid
cargoes have not resulted in the loss of any vessels or jobs \29\--
facts that are easily disproven by the MARAD study referenced
above.\30\ His cherry picking of facts and data, and his reprehensible,
ridiculous claim that Congress' support of food aid cargo preference
represents the ``trade [of] 11 or 12 children's lives for a single
job[,]'' demonstrates the depths to which the opponents of cargo
preference will go in their efforts to destroy America's military
readiness. He does a discredit to himself, his university and those he
represents with his misguided and appalling rhetoric.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Barrett Testimony at 6 (stating ``[y]et, the 2012 reforms that
reduced cargo preference coverage from 75% to 50% do not appear to have
led to a single vessel ceasing ocean freight service nor to the loss of
any mariner jobs.'').
\30\ MARAD Impacts Report at 47 (stating ``[t]he number of vessels
in the total U.S.-flag international trading fleet has fallen from 106
at the beginning of 2011 to 81 at the end of 2014, representing a loss
of 25 vessels and up to 1,000 mariner jobs.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This type of internecine warfare between stakeholders in our
international food aid programs is counterproductive. Instead of
working with us to find meaningful ways to make the process more
efficient without sacrificing the domestic benefits, or working to help
increase annual appropriations to help feed more people, we are instead
attacked and vilified. Rather than acknowledging us as crucial
partners, we are treated like robber-barons. That is unfair. The men
and women of the merchant marine, including the members maritime labor
represents, are committed, patriotic Americans who go to work every
day, work hard every day, and take risks most Americans never face on
the job, often while delivering food aid. Whether it is bad weather,
pirates or terrorists, the men and women who crew the vessels carrying
food aid have done so gladly, with honor and courage, and they deserve
more respect than the Food Aid Reform community has given them.
The Food Aid Reform community also refuses to acknowledge the
legitimate concerns those of us in the maritime and agriculture
communities have about the potential for fraud and abuse that would
come with shifting the basis of our food aid programs from in-kind aid
to one that is primarily cash based. Despite on-going press reports
about concerns with USAID administration of foreign aid programs \31\
and an internal World Food Programme audit indicating that USAID cash
vouchers for food have been diverted away from the hungry to middlemen
profiteers,\32\ the Food Aid Reform community continues to insist that
cash is as safe from diversion and theft as in-kind food aid.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Saba Imtiaz, U.S. Aid Agency's Efforts Are Yielding Dubious
Results, N.Y. Times, Sept. 13, 2015, at A8.
\32\ George Russell, U.N. Agency Food Aid Vouchers In Syrian Crisis
Diverted And Sold For Cash, Fox News, April 15, 2015, http://
www.foxnews.com/world/2015/04/17/un-agency-food-aid-vouchers-in-syrian-
crisis-diverted-and-sold-for-cash/?intcmp=latestnews [hereinafter WFP
Audit Article].
\33\ See, e.g., Barrett Testimony at 7. Dr. Barrett goes so far as
to claim that ``[a]nother myth is that cash-based food aid programs are
somehow more vulnerable to theft and corruption, although not a shred
of serious evidence exists to support this claim,'' despite the World
Food Programme's audit finding diversion of vouchers in Syria, which
was published months before his testimony. See WFP Audit Article, supra
note 31.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
That argument strains credulity. The Government Accountability
Office has called for increased internal controls over cash-based
programs, noting that ``USAID relies on implementing partners for
financial oversight of [its Emergency Food Security Program] projects
but does not require them to conduct comprehensive risk assessments to
plan financial oversight activities, and it provides little related
procedural guidance to partners and its own staff[,]'' and that ``[a]s
a result, partners may neglect to implement appropriate financial
controls in areas that are most vulnerable to fraud, diversion, and
misuse of EFSP funding.'' \34\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ U.S. Gov. Accountability Office, International Cash-Based Food
Assistance: USAID HasDeveloped Processes for Initial Project Approval
But Should Strengthen Financial Oversight 1 (2015). The GAO report is
scathing in its criticism of some of USAID's practices. It notes that
USAID had only two people on the ground in Syria to oversee $\1/2\
billion program. Id. at 29. USAID let contractors use overhead
satellite imagery to monitor ``food for work'' programs in Kenya. Id.
at 43. When GAO visited a food for work program in Somalia, they noted
that no one from USAID had been there for over a year to check on the
program. Id. at 43. USAID is actually handing out envelopes of cash to
crowds in developing countries, particularly Syria, without any
accountability or record of how that cash gets spent. Id. at 10.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, there is an elephant in the room that few in the Food Aid
Reform community seem willing to accept or acknowledge. Despite the
great work that food aid has done over the years feeding billions of
hungry people across the world, there is no denying that foreign aid
remains unpopular with the American people. A 2013 Pew Poll found that,
in response to the sequester, 48% of Americans--the largest percentage
for of any of the 19 categories of spending tested--supported cuts to
foreign assistance programs.\35\ The same poll indicated that of all
the categories tested, only foreign aid failed to muster a majority of
Americans supporting increased or sustained funding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ Michael Dimock, et al., Pew Research Ctr. for the People & the
Press, As Sequester Deadline Looms, Little Support for Cutting Most
Programs 1 (Feb. 22, 2013), http://www.peoplepress.org/2013/02/22/as-
sequester-deadline-looms-little-support-for-cutting-most-programs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite foreign aid's lack of public support, the P.L. 83-480 Food
for Peace program has survived and thrived for sixty years, thanks in
large part to the domestic economic benefit provided to America's
farmers and mariners. That support has provided a base of political
support that has ensured that P.L. 83-480 would be shielded from the
harshest of spending cuts necessitated by public concerns about the
Federal budget deficit and the national debt.
Without the support made possible by the coalition of agriculture,
maritime and our private voluntary organizations, food aid would likely
see major cuts, if not complete repeal. Were Congress to repeal cargo
preference for food aid or otherwise make major changes to the P.L. 83-
480 program that reduce its domestic economic benefit, there is a
strong chance that the program itself may not survive in today's harsh
budgetary climate. Were that to happen, the Food Aid Reform community
would have no one to blame but themselves for the disastrous impact
such cuts would have on the welfare of millions of hungry people around
the world who rely on the generosity of the American people to survive.
We owe it to the American taxpayer to do our best to provide as much
domestic benefit, economic and diplomatic, for every dollar they
willingly send abroad to help needy people.
As has often been the case, those pushing ``reform'' are blind to
the reality that their efforts, if successful, could destroy the entire
program. Fundamentally changing the Food for Peace program from an in-
kind program that provides domestic benefits to the agriculture and
maritime industry while supporting our diplomatic mission abroad into a
cash giveaway program is ensuring the program ends up on the road to
permanent repeal. While we are committed to working with Congress and
the Executive Branch to ensure food aid's continued viability and to
explore efforts to create greater efficiencies, we cannot support any
changes that would undermine the political viability of such a critical
program to the lives of so many. That would be irresponsible and
morally wrong.
To be clear, those of us in the maritime industry wish to continue
the decades long partnership between America's farmers, her mariners,
and those committed to feeding the hungry around the world. This is a
partnership that has worked for over sixty years and we hope will
continue to work for many, many more. I would call upon all to soften
the bitterly divisive rhetoric being used against the maritime and
agriculture industries. Accusing us of wanting to starve children in
order to line the pockets of greedy foreign businessmen is not only a
ridiculous falsehood, it undermines the credibility of those making
that argument.
America's cargo preference laws are critical to the continued
existence of our merchant marine. Tinkering with P.L. 83-480 and the
calls for repeal of cargo preference threaten that existence, and
threaten our overall military readiness.
The bottom line is simple--without cargo there are no ships,
without ships there are no mariners. The American merchant mariner is a
critical national security asset that must be protected. Continued
Congressional support for cargo preference, food aid, the Maritime
Security Program and our other Federal maritime programs ensures that
we have a sufficient mariner pool to meet our commercial and military
sealift needs no matter the crisis, foreseen or unforeseen. It is
critical that we do not allow the Food Aid Reform community to
accomplish what the Royal Navy could not do in the Revolution, what
German submarines could not do during World War II, and what pirates
off Africa could not do in 2009.
I strongly urge you to reject the dangerous arguments made by those
seeking an end to in-kind food aid and cargo preference and continue
the steadfast, bipartisan support the United States Merchant Marine has
enjoyed from Congress for over 200 years.

Mr. Rouzer. I thank each of you for your testimony. Mr.
Chairman, do you have any comment or question?
Mr. Conaway. No, just refreshingly blunt comments from all
four of the witnesses, so I thank you for that, but no
questions.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Shapiro, my question is directed towards
you. Of course, in the past USDA and USAID have each handled
substantial components of the food aid programs, including
shared responsibilities for commodity transportation and
procurement. I think this would make sense, I wanted to see
what you think. Would it make sense to consolidate the
commodity transportation and procurement within USDA instead of
duplicating much of that at USAID?
Mr. Shapiro. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman. I think that, in the
commercial world, the purchasing of commodity and the awarding
of transportation contracts are handled in the same place. They
are not handled in different places. And in the commercial
world, it is a much more efficient practice because the
commodity and the transportation are done consecutively, with
each other, by the same people. To have it split amongst two
different government agencies, one in Washington, one in Kansas
City, makes no sense at all to me. It is a redundancy. It is a
waste of money, and it is an inefficient way to operate.
Mr. Rouzer. My next question is for all of you on the panel
that wish to respond, and I want to attack this head on.
Critics of U.S. delivery of in-kind international food aid
complain about inefficiencies in delivering food aid as a
physical commodity. For each of you that have a comment on
this, I would like to hear your response to those criticisms,
and your perspective on what can be done to address any of
those criticisms.
Mr. Shapiro. I am not sure what inefficiencies people are
talking about. When I listen to some of the hearings by
Chairman Rouzer's Committee, they talk about the delay in the
delivery of cargo. I can tell you, for my company, we have been
in lay-up half the year with each of our three ships. That has
never happened in 27 years in business. And since we have less
ships than we had before, that illustrates how disastrous this
current market is.
The inefficiencies which exist are inefficiencies in
contracting by the government, frankly, where risk is
apportioned to us. If we are giving food aid to a starving
nation, why should we have to wait 20 days to discharge into
port because there is no priority berthing agreement between
the United States Government and the recipient nation? Why do
we not have priority berthing in the United States? We are
paying for the ship. Our ships are more expensive than the
foreign ships that are loading at the same terminals. It seems
to me that if the government is doing food aid, and giving
money and benefits to starving foreign nations that need to
feed their people, they should be able to dictate terms that
would arrange for an expedient delivery of the cargo to the
recipients.
Mr. Schoeneman. In addition to what Mr. Shapiro said, I
would like to point out, one of the problems that I have with
the argument about inefficiencies, I mean, we have been working
on trying to resolve inefficiencies for a decade or more. We
have started pre-positioning food in warehouses across the
world that is close enough to the regions that it needs to go
to. We have been involved in that process for a while now.
But, one of the things that gets lost is we need to
recognize, P.L. 83-480 is not just a disaster assistance
program. It is a chronic hunger alleviating program that is
designed to go into regions of the world that have chronic
hunger problems that we know in advance. And USAID prides
themselves on being able to tell where there is going to be a
crop failure, or where there is going to be a need for food
years in advance of when it actually happens. So the idea that
we aren't efficient enough, or we can't get food fast enough,
well, I would not agree with that statement, but it underlines
an attempt to change what the purpose of P.L. 83-480 is, away
from a long-term sustained program to alleviate world hunger,
and into a disaster program that simply reacts to problems
around the world. We have programs like that. We have an
international disaster assistance account. We have other
programs that are focused on emergencies. P.L. 83-480 is the
only program that attacks systemic ongoing hunger, and that is
why these programs needs to survive, and they need to thrive,
and we can't do that if we are constantly fighting with each
other over a continued limited amount of appropriations.
Mr. Caponiti. If I could just add, and Philip may need to
back me up a little bit on this, but the issue of commercial
terms has been something that we have debated for many, many
years. I know MARAD debated with USAID, the carriers themselves
have debated with USAID, the acceptance of the notion of
commercial terms. A lot of the delays, we believe, are because
of the terms that are concocted inside USAID, the way they do
business. And Philip, you basically referred to that, but, I
mean, this idea of commercial terms is something that the
industry has urged for quite some time.
Mr. Shapiro. We carry, Mr. Chairman, under a different set
of rules than every other commercial shipment which is going on
the high seas because USAID refuses to change its charter party
and allocate risk to the person in the transportation chain
that has the ability to control that risk, be it from loading
the vessel to discharging the vessel.
On inefficiency, the inefficiency that I can demonstrate is
the inefficiency of cash. If you read the November 2014 United
Nations Inspector General of the World Food Programme's report,
he says that of the $700 million that was sent to Syria,
Lebanon, and Turkey for cash vouchers, that there was
substantial, ``encashment of vouchers for less than face value
for things other than the intended purpose.'' That kind of
inefficiency is the grossest violation of what could be
expected from this kind of program. We need to restore the 75
percent. The Congressional Budget Office says we need
approximately $8 million a year to restore 75 percent carriage
for U.S.-flag ships. But in the Lebanon, Syria, Turkey relief
program, we gave hundreds of millions of dollars in vouchers
away that disappeared. So the inefficiencies that I see are the
inefficiencies of cash.
And those academics who claim--there were government people
who claim they need flexibility. We have seen what flexibility
happened when Mr. Bremer brought suitcases of cash into Iraq.
We have seen that flexibility. That is not the kind of
flexibility we need.
Mr. Rouzer. My time has expired. Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Shapiro, for your
passion on this issue, and let us call it for what it is. I
mean, these vouchers, sadly, corruption in that part of the
world is the grease that makes that place work. And who knows
whose hands it has gone in? Potentially some of our enemies. I
mean, it is outrageous, and I couldn't agree with your concerns
more.
You recommend an improvement in contracting and
transportation for practices for in-kind food aid, and you
talked about specifically putting the risk of loss on the
person in the transportation chain most able to control and
mitigate the risk. Could you give some specific example in that
instance?
Mr. Shapiro. I think I have already done that, but, for
instance, when we discharge a vessel, if we are bringing--our
ships carry 50,000 tons of cargo. If we are bringing 50,000
tons of corn, wheat, sorghum, soybean meal, rice, whatever it
is, there are certain ports that we go into, and we discharge
right away. There are other ports, in Africa, where we sit for
20 days, waiting to discharge, because other commercial
shipments are coming in, and the receivers of those cargoes
have to pay money to the ships that wait. The U.S.-flag ships
don't get that benefit. We have usually a line----
Mr. Costa. So you sit there?
Mr. Shapiro. Which means that the risk is on us to have----
Mr. Costa. Right.
Mr. Shapiro.--built that cost into our rate.
Mr. Costa. Okay. Mr. Caponiti, could you give more detail
on how the new regulatory mandate might strengthen MARAD's
oversight and enforcement authority, and some examples of the
problems inherent in that new regulatory scheme?
Mr. Caponiti. Thank you for the question, sir. We need a
mechanism that makes it clear that one entity is setting the
rules and interpreting the law. Right now, and for many years,
the shipping agencies themselves might disagree with the
interpretation of how to implement a portion of the law or the
regulation. And I know that MARAD and USAID have had many
disagreements over the years, and the shipping agencies
themselves choose to follow their own policies. The regulation,
hopefully, would make it very clear where the buck stops, and
MARAD would have to issue this regulation that would be subject
to the public process. There would be comments and evaluation
of the rule, and then they implement it. And then from that
point forward, that is how the law is interpreted, and that is
how the program will be carried out.
Mr. Costa. Thank you. Captain Murray, you said that, in
essence, it is much cheaper to maintain a U.S.-flag fleet as
opposed to maintaining a fleet of inactive government owned
ships on standby. I mean, it seems to me we are being penny
wise and pound foolish in this effort. Do you want to explain
as to when we look at our current predicament.
Mr. Murray. I would agree that our commercial fleet--you
have to understand, on our Maritime Security Program fleet, we
engage in a whole host of activities, commercial, non-U.S.-flag
cargo, et cetera. So we have an opportunity to deliver to the
government a very reasonably priced asset at time of need. That
ship is 100 percent at the disposal of the government, and
under VISA and the MSP. But normally we don't operate with full
government cargo. There is no way we could ever do that.
Mr. Costa. Now, did you say you are a graduate of the
Merchant Marine Academy?
Mr. Murray. No, sir, Maine Maritime Academy. It is a better
school.
Mr. Costa. Okay. I wanted to make sure. So, as a graduate
of the Maine Maritime Academy, what role does your company, in
addition, provide to training mariners today and future
mariners tomorrow?
Mr. Murray. Well, our company today also carries cadets
from the United States Merchant Marine Academy. We also carry
cadets----
Mr. Costa. They are pretty good too, right?
Mr. Murray. Pardon?
Mr. Costa. They are pretty good too, right?
Mr. Murray. Yes.
Mr. Costa. Okay.
Mr. Murray. We have Mass Maritime, Maine Maritime, New York
Maritime----
Mr. Costa. We have an ability to make appointments to
those, and I am always interested in how that academy's doing,
in terms----
Mr. Murray. They are all doing well. The problem that we do
have is there aren't enough ships for the cadets coming out of
the academies for training purposes. And we have had, at times,
as many as six cadets on a ship just to provide the billets for
them to get their sea time. They cannot be licensed upon
graduation without having a pre-requisite amount of sea time,
and we have had to double and triple them up. Normally we carry
two, but, as I say, we have carried as many as six.
Mr. Costa. Mr. Schoeneman, do you want to comment on that,
in terms of providing an adequately trained mariner force?
Mr. Schoeneman. Absolutely. I think Captain Murray's point
here is valid. When we don't have ships sailing, and we don't
have jobs available for our members, that has a real impact on
their credentials and their ability to remain actively serving
in the Merchant Marine. Under the standards, basically the
convention on standards, the STCW is what we call it,
essentially those rules require strict amounts of time at sea
in order to maintain, and to continue to maintain, for
officers, their licenses, for my own licensed members, all of
their endorsements. They have to be able to be working in order
to do that. When they are not working, they are losing that
time, and that has a real impact on their ability to maintain
their professional credentials in the industry.
The SIU, along with all of the major maritime unions, we
have training programs for our members. We have an unlicensed
apprentice program that brings in folks who aren't familiar
with the industry and gets them trained up and ready, and
guarantees them their first job, and that is about a year long
process. And we do that every year, and then all of the other
maritime unions also have training programs and upgrading
programs for their members as well. Training is a critical
thing that we provide to our membership, which is one of the
reasons why we have such high union density in maritime.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much. My time has expired.
Mr. Rouzer. Chairman Hunter?
Mr. Hunter. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. First, this is proof that
there is somebody watching this hearing. I already heard from
the Foreign Affairs Committee that I might have misrepresented
Chairman Royce's take on food aid. Now, I want to get this
straight, because it is interesting, they said--and he is pro-
MSP too, we helped--and he helped with the language of the MSP
and the National Defense Authorization Act, but he is pro-
commodity. He is pro-food aid, but for cash, which is what we
have been talking about, as opposed to shipping the commodity,
giving them cash where there is famine, and having them buy it
there. Obviously that is what we have been talking about for
the last 2 hours. That is a big difference. So I just wanted to
set that straight.
I guess the question is, are there government agencies that
don't go by the cargo preference rule? I mean, are they
breaking the law? And if they are breaking the law, who is
supposed to enforce them? Who is supposed to enforce the law,
the cargo preference law?
Mr. Caponiti. It is MARAD's responsibility to enforce the
cargo preference law. The idea behind the regulation is to give
them more specificity, give them the club. I mean, they need a
regulation to make it clear that they are the ones that
interpret this provision, or that provision, and the provision
itself would be----
Mr. Hunter. So there is no overarching umbrella law? I was
reading that USDA and USAID both interpret the law differently
on geographic location of where they take the food, right?
Mr. Caponiti. That is correct.
Mr. Hunter. Because there is no overarching direction from
MARAD. I would ask Chip, because he is still here, is MARAD
working on giving that direction, and do you have the ability
or the purview, I guess, to even do that.
Mr. Jaenichen. Let me tell you, sir, that that is in the
rule that is under----
Mr. Hunter. So what is the recourse, then, of MARAD if
someone doesn't follow the cargo preference law?
Mr. Schoeneman. That is the problem.
Mr. Hunter. Do they sue them?
Mr. Schoeneman. That is the problem, Mr. Chairman. Right
now the enforcement mechanisms just aren't there. There is the
ability, under the new law that was passed, I guess it was 2008
now, that would allow MARAD to charge a $25,000 fine a day for
folks who violate cargo preference, but those regulations
haven't been issued. And the joke we have internally, and we
always talk about this, there is no cargo preference jail. We
can't put somebody in cargo preference jail because they
violated the law.
Mr. Hunter. Yes, so what happens if the Department of
Energy or somebody else violates the cargo preference law?
Mr. Schoeneman. Nothing.
Mr. Shapiro. Nothing.
Mr. Caponiti. Nothing.
Mr. Hunter. How many waivers are requested every year to go
to use foreign flag ships for commodity trade, for food aid? Do
we know?
Mr. Shapiro. I am not aware of any. I can tell you that
there is another part of this program that needs to be
addressed, and that is that, for an American company to bid on
a cargo preference tender, we have to own or control a vessel.
Yet, we are bidding against foreigners who don't have to own or
control a vessel. They have to name a vessel that is ``on the
merit approved list''. And the merit approved list could be any
vessel that has carried a cargo preference cargo for the last
20 years.
Mr. Hunter. Explain this.
Mr. Shapiro. And if they then speculate and get the cargo,
then they go out into the market, and they find----
Mr. Hunter. Well, let us go from scratch. So you have a
cargo preference cargo----
Mr. Shapiro. Correct.
Mr. Hunter.--and then American shippers bid against foreign
shippers----
Mr. Shapiro. Well, okay, so a tender comes out, each
company responds to the tender, if they have a ship available.
Mr. Hunter. A foreign company and a domestic?
Mr. Shapiro. An American company, in order to put their bid
in, has to own or control the vessel that it is offering, which
they usually do own them, or have chartered them, and the
government agencies know that that company controls----
Mr. Hunter. And how does a foreign----
Mr. Shapiro.--that vessel?
Mr. Hunter.--company bid if they don't own a U.S. vessel?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, how a foreign--how many of the foreign
companies that carry bid is they are located somewhere in a
garage or in a house, and they put in an offer. If, all of a
sudden, they are low bid, because they are foreigners, they win
the cargo, they then go out and try to find a vessel.
Mr. Hunter. A U.S. vessel?
Mr. Shapiro. No, a foreign flag vessel, because the USAID
today makes the decision on whether----
Mr. Hunter. They have an understanding.
Mr. Shapiro.--it goes on a U.S.-flag vessel, or a foreign
flag vessel, or split between the two. But what the process, I
am trying to point out, does, it allows people with no
experience, no money, to basically speculate on the U.S.
Government's foreign carriage side without having any stake in
the game. And we are competing as Americans, where we are
subject to a whole set of rules, including the fact that we own
or control the vessel. Chip knows this, we have discussed it.
It is another area that needs to be addressed.
Mr. Schoeneman. And a follow-up on what Mr. Shapiro said,
the other thing we like to remind everybody, the 50 percent
requirement, that is a minimum, it is not a maximum. USAID and
USDA are more than welcome to put more than 50 percent of their
food aid cargo on American-flag ships, and we would encourage
them to do that. There is nothing in the law that says that
they can't do that. The issue there is simply that they are
trying to get the most bang for their buck, and they would
rather, and, frankly, some of the folks up here that have been
working with them, would rather that there be no cargo
preference at all, because then they could feed more people----
Mr. Hunter. They would be happy if there was no cargo at
all.
Mr. Schoeneman. That is exactly right. And the problem for
us is I would much rather come up here hand in glove with USAID
and the rest and try to fight for a larger appropriation for
the P.L. 83-480 program, because it has such an important
impact not just on American security, but also on international
security. But, instead, we are spending all of our time
fighting over numbers that have been reducing and dropping over
the years.
Mr. Hunter. There is one thing I don't understand still,
though. So you have two companies, a foreign company and a U.S.
company, and say that there is 100,000 pounds of food, okay?
Mr. Shapiro. Let us start with tons.
Mr. Hunter. Or----
Mr. Shapiro. Say 100,000 tons.
Mr. Hunter. Whatever you want to say. Half of that has to
go to a U.S. company.
Mr. Shapiro. Depending on when in the year it goes,
correct.
Mr. Hunter. Okay.
Mr. Shapiro. Because they have to fix America----
Mr. Hunter. When you say that you compete, though, against
a foreign company, that is for the other 50 percent, not the 50
percent that is guaranteed to a U.S.-flag vessel, right?
Mr. Shapiro. Not necessarily, Chairman Hunter. How it works
if we are starting the fiscal year, the first cargo to a
certain country or region has to be fixed American. But once
they have done that--let us just say 40,000 tons, they ship
20,000 tons on a U.S.-flag vessel, and 20,000 tons on a foreign
flag vessel. The next tender that comes out doesn't necessarily
mean it is a different country or a different region, depending
on whether it is USDA or USAID. They determine what the breakup
is between foreign companies----
Mr. Hunter. I see.
Mr. Shapiro.--and American.
Mr. Hunter. So say in a geographic region, they could say
all of Africa, as opposed to a country in Africa, we have
already met 50 percent for this region?
Mr. Shapiro. Absolutely correct. In the----
Mr. Hunter. I see----
Mr. Shapiro. In the Reagan years----
Mr. Hunter.--vessels.
Mr. Shapiro.--the Maritime Administration took the
position, with the shipper agencies, that they were going to go
to regions because they were looking to maximize the amount of
cargo that could be sent----
Mr. Hunter. On foreign----
Mr. Shapiro.--and on American ships country by country, we
may have 200 tons going to one country, 300 tons, but 50,000
tons going into a geographic area. They wanted to have the
maximum tonnage available to move because it was economically
efficient to move it that way.
Mr. Hunter. Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Garamendi?
Mr. Garamendi. This is extremely useful testimony. I thank
the gentlemen for all of the testimony. There has been
discussion back and forth here about how to improve the P.L.
83-480 program and related programs, the 50 percent, 75
percent, and the like. Just to inform the Members of the
Committee here, we are in the process of drafting legislation.
We welcome any ideas that the panel has, or any of the
witnesses in this hearing, anybody else, about how to improve
the issues. Mr. Shapiro, you have stated several of them. I
know that Captain Murray and the other witnesses have also. I
am not going to go into it now, but I want to put that on the
table. That draft legislation should be available the 1st of
the year. It will be out for discussion. It ought to cover much
of the questions that have been raised here, including the last
question, about regionality, and the games that are played with
regard to the 50 percent minimum, or is it 75 percent?
Second, P.L. 83-480 is not the only way in which we can
enhance the Merchant Marine and our national security. There is
a piece of legislation moving around through Congress on the
export of crude oil. Back in the 1960s we talked about
exporting crude oil out of Alaska, North Slope, and it was
required to be on American ships with American sailors. Good
for the shipbuilding industry, good for the shipping industry,
good for the sailors--or the mariners, let me make it more
broad. Here we are again, with an opportunity, should we take
advantage of it, and simply say it is United States policy, for
national security reasons, that this essential national asset,
oil, be shipped on American ships. Why not? Why not do that?
Why not build those ships in America, crew them, put them under
American flag?
I will put that on the table for you, if you gentlemen
would like to take 10 seconds apiece, or 15 seconds, and just
comment on that, and then we will move to LNG.
Mr. Caponiti. Well, I will begin. I think it is safe to say
that we would applaud such a thing, to have a mandate to ship
some portion of the crude, or the LNG, whatever it is, on U.S.-
flag ships. With respect to the shipbuilding, we would probably
recommend that is a little bit steeper hill to climb. We
support shipbuilding in the United States, but the immediacy of
it would be difficult. I think you might have to have a pilot
program, or something like that, to kind of try to ease that
in----
Mr. Garamendi. We call it a phase in over time.
Mr. Caponiti.--as a conceptual idea----
Mr. Garamendi. And I am perfectly willing to negotiate
downward from 100 percent to 95 percent.
Mr. Caponiti. The other thing that you run into a little
bit, this obviously helps the mariner pool, which, as you have
heard over and over, is essential. Crude carriers themselves
are not something that the military needs. They need product
carries so a crude oil carrier might not be a militarily useful
vessel, from the standpoint of the military. A product carrier
would. So that is a wrinkle that you need to consider in the
equation.
Mr. Shapiro. Congressman, I support all programs that call
for the building of ships and the employment of Merchant
Mariners. And any program we can have, be it cargo preference,
cargo reservation, export of crude, grossing up MSP, whatever
we can do, we need to have a U.S. Merchant Marine that is
capable of providing what we provided over the last 20 years to
this country, in the conflicts, especially in the Middle East,
and any program that, ship owners always say, ``Give us cargo,
and we will build ships.'' Well, we need cargo, because our
cost structure is higher than the foreigners because of U.S.
regulations and taxes.
Mr. Garamendi. Captain Murray?
Mr. Murray. Congressman, yes, we would support that. That
makes a lot of sense. And I understand the comments on the DOD
aspect, and that is fair. But I will say that it would enhance
the mariner pool, and that is what I see as the biggest
challenge that we have in our country right now. It is not just
ships, it is people to run them. And Mr. Schoeneman can expound
on that more, but I see that in my side of it as well, so----
Mr. Schoeneman. Mr. Garamendi, you get us the jobs, we will
fill them.
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. I will take the last 16 seconds
here to simply say we ought to be doing this. If we care about
America, and it is America's future, everywhere from
manufacturing ships, and sailors, and everything in between,
this is how we can do it. And we can do it within the current
trade laws, including the TPP. And by the way, gentlemen, for
the record, your analysis of the TPP on shipping would be
appreciated, can you do that for the record. Mr. Chairman, I
think I am out of time. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Rouzer. Mr. Graves?
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to note
for the record that for the last 2 years the House passed Coast
Guard authorization bill did include stronger cargo preference
enforcement provisions that were ultimately rejected by the
other body, so I am going to make a motion to migrate to a
unicameral form of government, as opposed to this. No, I am
kidding, sort of.
I wanted to mention some things that I have had the
opportunity to discuss with some of you in the past, just the
kind of competitive regulatory environment in the United
States, as compared to other countries where you operate. Can
you talk about some of the economic, regulatory, and other
factors that have the biggest impact on the number of vessels
and the operating environment in the United States, as opposed
to other countries?
Mr. Caponiti. Well, I will begin. For one thing, our
companies and our mariners pay taxes. Many foreign regimes do
not. Many foreign regimes have hidden subsidies. You can be
sure that China is absolutely supporting their Merchant Marine.
They want to be the Merchant Marine. I don't know if that is
the proper term in China, but they want to dominate world
shipping. They want to crew every ship sailing the seas. That
is part of their policy.
Among the foreign trade fleet, you are competing against
the lowest common denominator in bad acting, that is compliance
to regulatory provisions, compliance to IMO rulemakings. The
United States, we kind of gold plate what we do here, and we
follow the law, and we have high standards. You are not
necessarily competing against a foreign carrier that has
equally high standards. The cost of living, to pay a living
wage in the United States vis-a-vis what you could call slave
conditions in some foreign flag regimes. I don't want to say
that they all use slaves, but the level of compensation, and
the concept of a living wage isn't necessarily available on all
the foreign flag ships that we might be competing against. So,
I mean, there is a whole array of things. And I will let my
colleagues continue.
Mr. Graves. Mr. Schoeneman, could you comment on that?
Mr. Schoeneman. Absolutely. I mean, there was a great
article in The New York Times in July of 2015. The headline
was, Stowaways and Crimes Aboard a Scofflaw Ship. It was
written by a guy named Ian Urbana. It was great. Essentially it
demonstrated that the reason why the U.S. has trouble competing
internationally is we play by the rules. We actually follow the
law, and we hold ourselves accountable when we make mistakes.
The rest of the world does not do that. And, unfortunately, as
a result of playing by the rules, we sometimes end up competing
internationally with one hand tied behind our back.
There are minimum standards in the international fleet,
both in the United States and globally, that the International
Maritime Organization and others put forward that are supposed
to govern everybody uniformly, and some countries don't follow
them as well as we do. And that, unfortunately, puts us at a
competitive disadvantage.
Mr. Graves. Thank you.
Mr. Schoeneman. The bottom line is, we follow the rules.
Mr. Graves. Thank you. Right now we have fewer than 90
U.S.-flag vessels that are participating in foreign trade. We
have seen the trend going downward. Can you tell me how many
vessels it is going to take, and when our next major military
sealift is going to occur? Obviously there is not an answer to
that question.
Mr. Schoeneman. I wish I had a crystal ball----
Mr. Caponiti. Well, I mean----
Mr. Schoeneman.--to tell you that.
Mr. Caponiti. I mean, the MSP is viewed as the primary
resource that they would use. Obviously we have the organic
fleet that we have talked about, the ready reserve force, and
the command. I mean, Iraq and Afghanistan was historic from
the--whether you liked the war or not----
Mr. Graves. Sure.
Mr. Caponiti.--the sealift to Iraq and Afghanistan was
historic. It was very, very cost-effective, very, very timely.
The improvements that were made between the first Gulf War and
the Iraq conflict were night and day. I mean, the ready reserve
force itself wasn't too ready in 1991. DOD was smart enough
to----
Mr. Graves. I have a few seconds left. Let me just make one
point and get one last question out real quick. With the fraud
and abuse that has been documented as we have migrated to a
cash-based system, in effect you are subsidizing other
countries, as many of these governments are subsidizing their
own shipping interests. I think it is an important point to
make, in some of the testimony today we have talked about the
additional cost by being a U.S.-based company. Captain Murray,
could you talk a little bit about the tax differences in U.S.
operations, as compared to international, and foreign
governments, what are the efforts they take to subsidize their
foreign shippers?
Mr. Murray. Congressman, I would be glad to do that. Some
countries don't have a personal income tax, or that sort of
thing. The point I would like to make is that the cost
differentials have been well studied. MARAD has done it, DOD
has done it, independent analysts have done it. The bottom line
is there is a cost differential to operate a U.S.-flag vessel
versus a foreign flag vessel, and a respectable international
flag vessel is still three times cheaper to operate than an
American ship.
So the question we should be asking is not where the cost
differentials are. How do we overcome that delta? And we have
always overcome it, the MSP stipend covers maybe 30 percent of
the delta. The balances have to come from cargo. Be it
military, food aid, Ex-Im Bank, that cargo is reserved for
U.S.-flag carriers. The other guys can't get at it, only us.
And on that basis, that is how we get over the cost hump.
Mr. Shapiro. Congressman, can I just add one thing before
you depart? On the cost differential, I agree with Captain
Murray that it is a 300 percent differential. One area where it
is a 400 and 500 percent differential is insurance, and we need
to address that as an industry, but we need Congress' help.
Because, frankly, when someone is hurt on one of our vessels,
we want to be fair to them, and pay them what they are entitled
to get paid. But we have jury verdicts coming out of certain
states that are millions of dollars for a broken arm, millions
of dollars for a hurt back, and----
Mr. Graves. Look, after I am finished moving to a
unicameral system of government, I am going to go to bad
attorneys, so we will take care of all this.
Mr. Shapiro. And we do have a responsibility to work with
you to try to reign in some of these differential costs. And on
the insurance side, it is achievable if we went to a Federal
Workmen's Comp kind of panel that would decide what these
injuries were worth.
Mr. Murray. Mr. Chairman, if I could just jump on that, if
it is okay? I agree with everything Mr. Shapiro just said,
however, we are where we are today. That is not going to get
fixed overnight.
Mr. Shapiro. Yes.
Mr. Murray. That is a process, a legislative process, more
debate. I think the state of our Merchant Marine today is much
more urgent than that.
Mr. Rouzer. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. In 2010,
when I was the Chairman of the Coast Guard Subcommittee, I
convened two hearings to examine the status of a U.S.-flag
fleet. During those hearings, our Subcommittee Members bemoaned
the continuing decline of the U.S.-flag oceangoing fleet, noted
its dependence on preference cargoes, and the MSP program, and
emphasized that if we did not take decisive action to arrest
the decline, it would continue. During those hearings, we were
repeating warnings and observations that had already been made
in the 2000s, the 1990s, and then the 1981 GAO study.
In the intervening 5 years, the MAP-21 highway bill cut,
from 75 to 50 percent, the amount of government-impelled
agricultural commodities that have to be carried on U.S.-flag
vessels. The drawdown from Iraq and Afghanistan has sharply
reduced U.S. military cargoes, and no new policies have been
implemented to stabilize the U.S.-flag fleet in foreign trade.
And, guess what, the size of the U.S.-flag oceangoing fleet in
foreign trade has continued to decline. When I was Subcommittee
Chairman, we had just over 100 vessels in the fleet. As of last
month, we have 78.
Today's hearing appears to be an exercise in repetition.
However, there is no mystery surrounding the decline of our
fleet that needs further study. The only question is whether
we, as a nation, are simply resigned to see our oceangoing
foreign trade fleet sail away, and leave our nation, and its
commerce, totally dependent on foreign flag vessels. I believe
that, contrary to mischaracterizations prevalent in the media,
that the United States Merchant Marine is an essential
component of a vast network of logistics contractors that
support our U.S. military and sustain and create broader
economic opportunities in communities around our nation. And I
also believe that spending U.S. taxpayer dollars to buy food
grown by U.S. farmers, and transport it on U.S.-flag vessels
crewed by U.S. seafarers is not unlike other Buy America
policies that ensure the expenditure of U.S. taxpayer dollars
to support the interests of the United States taxpayers.
And with that, let me ask all of the witnesses, what is the
most important thing that could be done right now to at least
arrest the decline in the U.S.-flag oceangoing fleet in foreign
trade?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, I would say there are several factors.
One would be on the food aid side, for the food aid program to
restore the 75 percent, or even go to 100 percent. There are
many nations in the world that give aid, and require that that
aid move on their ships. Japan being one, for instance.
Mr. Cummings. Okay, number two?
Mr. Shapiro. Number two, we need to increase the stipend
for MSP ships to cover the loss of defense preference cargo.
Number three, we should be looking, as Congressman Garamendi
has suggested, at alternate cargo sources, whether they come
from the commercial, the military, or the government side. We
need to set aside cargo in order to have ships.
Mr. Cummings. What happened to four, five, six, and seven?
Mr. Shapiro. Well, I could do that, sir, but I----
Mr. Cummings. Go ahead.
Mr. Shapiro.--might exceed my time.
Mr. Cummings. Does does anybody else have anything?
Mr. Murray. Congressman, it is very important, and I agree
with Mr. Shapiro, and in our case, MSP is number one. I don't
believe you were here earlier, when Administrator Jaenichen
testified that we only have 57 ships in the MSP program today.
Traditionally, as we have worked together as MSP operators, if
an extra slot became available, we would kind of work our way
around it with a--somebody would want it. Today, the
Administrator said he is going to be publishing a notice here
shortly that slots are available. Nobody is running to get them
right now.
Mr. Shapiro. I will take it, John. If it is available,
Liberty will take them.
Mr. Schoeneman. Look, bottom line, just to follow up on
what Mr. Shapiro and Captain Murray said, we have to get MSP to
$5 million a ship, period. That has to happen. I mean, the fact
is we do not; frankly, not only do we have to get it to $5
million a ship, we have to make sure that that appropriation is
solid. Every single year all of us up here, and the folks
behind you, we go up on the Hill, and we pound the pavement,
and we tell everybody we absolutely need this money, and it is
getting harder, and harder, and harder to make that case,
particularly given the tough budget environments we are in.
But the second thing, obviously cargo is critical. Cargo
for a ship is like an engine in a car. If there is no cargo, it
is not moving. And if it is not moving, my guys don't have
jobs, and these guys aren't making any money. So, at the end of
the day, we have to find, as Mr. Garamendi pointed out, we have
to find new and outside of the box thinking, try to get us some
additional cargo sources that will make it possible for us to
carry things into the future.
One last thing, I want to point something out on the in-
kind food aid versus the cash issue. Go and read this GAO
report from August. It is unbelievable the stuff that is
happening right now that we are letting happen. Philip pointed
this out to a certain extent in his comments with the overhead
imagery. GAO report, we are handing out envelopes of cash to
crowds of people in Syria. There is no way to know where that
is going. There is no way to make sure that that is accountable
and being spent on food. It could be spent on anything, and I
don't even have to tell you what it could have been spent on,
because you guys are thinking like I am.
They are talking about areas in Africa with USAID programs
that have not seen a USAID person on the ground in over a year.
They are viewing these work programs with satellite imagery.
Really? The bottom line is we all need to work together, but
the best way to make sure that someone is fed is to put some
food in their hand. And we have been doing that for the last 60
years, and we absolutely need to keep doing that well into the
future. We can't allow any of these misguided notions of
efficiency, or folks that are constantly trying to find ways to
scrimp and save, and squeeze that extra dollar, to really take
food out of the hands of people, which is what is happening
right now.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Rouzer. The gentleman's time has expired. In closing,
let me say I greatly appreciate the gentlemen on the panel, and
thank you for your participation. And, of course, I appreciate
the gentlemen who were on the first panel for today's hearing.
I think this has been a very informative, very good joint
Subcommittee hearing. Mr. Garamendi, do you have any closing
comment you would like to make?
Mr. Garamendi. I see a woman walking up a hill with a 50
kilo sack of grain on her back, and I see the hands clasped, a
gift from the American people. She did not starve, nor did her
family.
Mr. Rouzer. Under the rules of the Committee, the record of
today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to
receive additional material and supplementary written responses
from the witnesses to any questions posed by a Member. This
joint hearing of the Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture of the Committee on Agriculture, and the
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation of the
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure is now
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the Subcommittees were
adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Supplementary Material Submitted by Hon. David J. Berteau, Assistant
Secretary of Defense, Logistics and Materiel Readiness, U.S. Department
of Defense
Insert
Mr. Garamendi. Very good. What is a sufficiently sized fleet?
Mr. Berteau, what is a sufficiently sized fleet, and then what
is the sufficient mariners to man that fleet.
Mr. Berteau. So we create our requirements not in terms of
number of ships, but in terms of the requirements of what goes
on those ships. So it is square footage, it is tonnage, it is
container capacity, it is roll-on/roll-off capacity across the
entire fleet. Translating that into ship by ship numbers ends
up with a range, if you will, of ships available to us. We
haven't fully tested the limits of our current capacity and
capability for quite a number of decades. I mean, the closest
we have come was Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm,
which was mentioned earlier as a high demand test for our
overall capacity. We used a lot, again, at the beginning----
Mr. Garamendi. Were we able to meet the demand with domestic
ships?
Mr. Berteau. Today we can probably meet the demand. We have
not done a capability requirements study in about 6 years now.
I think it is about time for us to undertake another one. A lot
of the world has changed since 2009, the last time we did it. I
think it is time for us to update those requirements.
* * * * *
Mr. Jaenichen. I can certainly give you some specific
examples. With regard to Desert Storm and Desert Shield, about
23 percent of the actual cargo that DOD actually moved, it was
forced to go on U.S.-flag due to lack of availability. We also
activated 76 out of the 96 ships that were in the ready reserve
fleet at the time. I would note that that 76, although it was
not a full activation, that is 30 more ships than I currently
have in my ready reserve force fleet today of 46. Additionally,
at that time, I had 199 ships under U.S.-flag in the 1990-91
timeframe. Today that is 78. General McDew, who is the current
Commander of the U.S. Transportation Command, is on record
saying that if we were required to do the same amount of
movement to be able to support Desert Shield and Desert Storm,
we do not have the sealift capacity today.
Mr. Berteau. And that is why I am uncomfortable.
Mr. Garamendi. Does that also mean the mariners, as well as
the ships?
Mr. Jaenichen. It does. In fact, our mariner pool today
stands at about 11,300, and I believe that we are on the very
hairy edge of being able--we can certainly man all of the ships
that we have currently in the reserve sealift fleet, however,
we would not be able to support a rotation of those crew
members at the 3 to 4 month point.
Mr. Berteau. And I would note that the two examples we use
here, Persian Gulf I in the early 1990s, Persian Gulf II in the
early 2000s, neither one extended over a period of time longer
than 6 months. So the real problem could become with a second
rotation beyond a 6 month period.
Mr. Garamendi. Mr. Chairman, just for the record, could you
provide the specifics in this discussion for both of you? Thank
you. I yield back.

The Department used the Mobility Capabilities and Requirements
Study 2016 (published 2010) and the Mobility Capabilities Assessment
(published 2013) collectively to determine mobility requirements for
sealift force projection and sustainment. Capacity requirements are not
measured by number of vessels, but by usable square feet for Roll-On/
Roll-Off (RO/RO) vessels, Twenty-Foot Equivalent Units (TEU) for
container ships and Barrels for tank vessels.
The RO/RO requirement is 19.9M\2\. The square footage was achieved
using vessel capacity from government-owned organic vessels, allied
shipping and U.S.-flag commercial industry, and equates to
approximately 91 vessels. The commercial portion of this requirement is
approximately 3.8M\2\ which equates to approximately 23 vessels.
Currently there are 18 vessels accessible through the Voluntary
Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA) Stage III, or approximately
3.1M\2\ of capacity, resulting in a moderate risk to force closure.
The shortfall is expected to be met once the three vacated Maritime
Security Program slots are filled early next year.
The Container requirement is approximately 34,000 TEUs, with a peak
demand of approximately 3,000 TEUs per week. The requirement was
achieved using 36 commercial containerships. The 52 containerships
currently committed to the VISA program provide sufficient capacity to
meet this requirement.
The Tank vessel requirement is approximately 420,000 barrels per
day. This requirement is met using a combination of four vessels in the
Voluntary Tanker Agreement, two alliance vessels and the remaining 80
vessels accessed through the international market or requisitioning.
To meet the mariner requirements, DOD relies on U.S. commercial
mariners credentialed to operate unlimited tonnage upon any oceans. The
Maritime Administration (MARAD), under National Security Directive 28
(NSD-28), is tasked with ensuring there are sufficient mariners
available to support the DOD Ready Reserve Fleet and commercial vessels
needed to meet national security requirements.
______

Submitted Question
Response from Hon. Paul N. ``Chip'' Jaenichen, Sr., Administrator, U.S.
Maritime Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation
Question Submitted by Hon. Carlos Curbelo, a Representative in Congress
from Florida
Question. In the southern portion of Miami-Dade County, Florida,
our farmers are facing a quarantine of 97 miles\2\ to contain a nasty
invasive pest, the Oriental Fruit Fly. Since the initial Fly was first
discovered in Miami-Dade County on August 26, officials have found 165
individual pests. Luckily the last time this fly was found was on
October 10, but the quarantine is still supposed to last until February
21, 2016.
Since the Oriental Fruit Fly has already been discovered, there is
great fear it could be spread by the public when they bring or mail
uninspected fruits, nuts, vegetables, or other host plants from foreign
or domestic quarantine areas to uninfected areas of the United States.
Although the USDA, as well as the Florida Department of Agriculture and
Miami-Dade County's Department of Consumer Services are tasked with
dealing with the current crisis by providing safeguards to prevent the
diseases' spread, they are limited in their resources.
This quarantine of the 97 miles\2\ in South Florida is having a
devastating effect on our farmers and agribusinesses. The crops grown
year-round and the agriculture industry in Florida contribute $120
billion to the state's economy. Because of Florida's warm climate, our
farm production provides essential produce to most of the nation
during, and immediately following, each winter season.
What can be done, whether it be at the ports of entry with CBP,
with USDA and Florida Ag, or perhaps even stricter safeguards from the
maritime industry, to search for and eradicate these invasive pests
before they come on land? Do you have any suggestions how we can avoid
future infestations of the Oriental Fruit Fly or other diseases like
Citrus Greening?
Answer. Although the Maritime Administration (MARAD) has no
regulatory or enforcement authority with regard to agricultural
inspections of vessels, MARAD cooperates with sister Federal agencies
to prevent the introduction of invasive species, including the Oriental
Fruit Fly. As you are aware, Customs and Border Protection actively
enforces regulations issued by the Department of Agriculture's Animal
and Plant Health Inspection Service, which require inspection of any
and all agricultural products entering the U.S. by any mode of
transportation, including ships. MARAD-owned vessels, including those
of the Ready Reserve Force and the training ships used by the nation's
six state maritime academies and the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy,
comply readily and fully with these regulatory requirements.

[all]
