- BIG DATA AND AGRICULTURE: INNOVATION IN THE AIR

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BIG DATA AND AGRICULTURE: INNOVATION IN THE AIR

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GENERAL FARM COMMODITIES
AND RISK MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 23, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-54

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

_____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-574 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2016
______________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JEFF DENHAM, California              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETE AGUILAR, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MIKE BOST, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

______

Scott C. Graves, Staff Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk Management

ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas, Chairman

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota,
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              Ranking Minority Member
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
JEFF DENHAM, California              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
DOUG LaMALFA, California             JIM COSTA, California
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
MIKE BOST, Illinois
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Crawford, Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'', a Representative in Congress
from Arkansas, prepared statement..............................     2
Submitted statement on behalf of Andrew D. Moore, Executive
Director, National Agricultural Aviation Association.......    49
Graham, Hon. Gwen, a Representative in Congress from Florida,
opening statement..............................................     3
Lucas, Hon. Frank D., a Representative in Congress from Oklahoma,
opening statement..............................................     1

Witnesses

Faleide, Rodney ``Lanny'', Founder and President, Satshot Inc.,
Fargo, ND......................................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Crago, Tim, Vice President, North West Geomatics Ltd., Calgary,
AB, CAN; on behalf of Craig Molander, Senior Vice President,
Business Development, Surdex Corporation, Chesterfield, MO.....    13
Prepared statement of Craig Molander.........................    15
Blair, Robert, Vice President, Agriculture Division, Measure, the
Drone as a Service
'
Company; Owner/Manager/Operator,
Blair Farms, Kendrick, ID......................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27

Submitted Material

Dombrowski, Ph.D., Christopher C., Chief Technology Officer,
TerrAvion, Inc., San Leandro, CA, submitted statement..........    51

BIG DATA AND AGRICULTURE: INNOVATION IN THE AIR

----------

THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2016

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk
Management,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Frank D.
Lucas presiding.
Members present: Representatives Lucas, Neugebauer, Rogers,
Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia, LaMalfa, Allen, Bost, Abraham,
Bustos, and Graham.
Staff present: Bart Fischer, Callie McAdams, Haley Graves,
Matt Schertz, Skylar Sowder, Stephanie Addison, John Konya,
Anne Simmons, Liz Friedlander, Mike Stranz, Nicole Scott, and
Carly Reedholm.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM OKLAHOMA

Mr. Lucas. Thank you all for being here this morning for
this hearing exploring big data and agriculture: innovation in
the air. This is our second hearing in a series to educate
Members about different facets of the new frontier in
agriculture.
Production agriculture from 100 years ago is markedly
different than it is today. While our farmers still produce
many of the same crops, a plow once pulled by mules is now
pulled by a tractor with a satellite guiding it through the
field. When formerly the only option a farmer had to control
weeds was tilling the field with major losses to water and wind
erosion, pinpoint chemical and fertilizer application now
enable the use of no-till farming technologies.
While these are just two simple examples, an important
piece underpinning much of the innovation in agriculture, and
specifically in precision agriculture, is the development of
imaging and mapping technology. As we all know, maps of
farmland and cropland are not new, but the means of capturing
and utilizing the imagery is constantly changing.
We will have an opportunity to hear about three
technologies used to capture images: manned airplanes,
satellites, and Unmanned Aerial Systems or drones. Each of
these technologies serve a specific purpose for providing
information based on imagery for farmers and improving their
stewardship of natural resources and the sustainability of
their farming operations.
While we are only scratching the surface on the innovation
that satellites and Unmanned Aerial Systems will bring to
agriculture, manned airplanes also continue to play a vital
role. Aerial imagery from manned airplanes is the foundation of
the administration of Farm Service Agency programs, such as ARC
and PLC, and we will hear more today about how FSA's National
Agricultural Imagery Program, NAIP, is useful to farmers and to
a broad spectrum of other users, which in the past has included
companies such as Google.
This hearing is timely since the FAA finalized the Small
Unmanned Aircraft Rule, known as Part 107, which governs
commercial use of drones, just this week. Commercial drone use
will now be possible without the need to acquire a special
exemption, which under the old regulations could take up to 6
months to be approved. We will be engaging with industry to
gather their views on the impacts of this new rule on the use
of drones in agriculture.
And before I turn to my colleague, I would like to note
that the hearing on the Committee of Agriculture, Big Data and
Agriculture: Innovation in the Air, has come to order, and
before I recognize my ranking colleague in my role as a
substitute, she too is ably manning this position, I think it
would be worth noting that our good friend and the Ranking
Member of this Subcommittee, Mr. Walz, is not at the hearing
this morning. As many of you know, his brother, Craig, was
killed in a tragic accident this past weekend, and Craig's son,
Jacob, was seriously injured. It is an incredibly difficult
time for the Walz family, and of course, I and you together
will keep them in our thoughts and prayers over the coming days
and weeks ahead.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crawford follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, a Representative
in Congress from Arkansas
Thank you all for being here for this hearing exploring big data
and agriculture: innovation in the air. This is our second hearing in a
series to educate Members about the different facets of this new
frontier in agriculture.
Production agriculture from 100 years ago is markedly different
than it is today. While our farmers are still producing many of the
same crops, a plow once pulled by a team of mules is now pulled by a
tractor that satellites guide through the field. When formerly the only
option a farmer had to control weeds was tilling the field with major
losses to water and wind erosion, pinpoint chemical and fertilizer
application now enables the use of no-till farming techniques.
While these are just two simple examples, an important piece
underpinning much of the innovation in agriculture, and specifically in
precision agriculture, is the development of imaging and mapping
technology. As we all know, maps of farmland and crops are not new, but
the means of capturing and utilizing this imagery is constantly
changing.
We will have an opportunity to hear about three technologies used
to capture images--manned airplanes, satellites, and Unmanned Aerial
Systems or drones. Each of these technologies can serve a specific
purpose for providing information based on imagery for farmers and
improving their stewardship of natural resources and the sustainability
of their farming operations.
While we are only scratching the surface on the innovation that
satellites and Unmanned Aerial Systems will bring to agriculture,
manned airplanes also continue to play a vital role. Aerial imagery
from manned airplanes is the foundation of the administration of Farm
Service Agency programs, such as ARC and PLC. We will hear more today
about how FSA's National Agricultural Imagery Program, or NAIP, is
useful to farmers and to a broad spectrum of other users, which in the
past have included companies such as Google.
This hearing is also timely since the FAA finalized the Small
Unmanned Aircraft Rule, known as Part 107, which governs commercial use
of drones, just this week. Commercial drone use will now be possible
without the need to acquire a special exemption, which under the old
regulations could take up to 6 months to be approved. We will be
engaging with industry to gather their views on the impacts of this new
rule on the use of drones in agriculture.
Before I conclude and before we carry on with today's hearing, I
want to briefly change the subject. You can all see that the Ranking
Member and my good friend Mr. Walz is not at the hearing this morning.
As some of you may know, his brother Craig was killed in a tragic
accident this past weekend and Craig's son Jacob was seriously injured.
This is an incredibly difficult time for the Walz family, and I'd ask
that you keep them all in your thoughts and prayers over the days and
weeks ahead.
Ms. Graham has graciously agreed to fill in for him today, and I
now recognize her for her opening statement.

Mr. Lucas. Ms. Graham has graciously agreed to fill in for
him today, and at this point I would like to recognize her for
any opening statement that she would have.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GWEN GRAHAM, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM FLORIDA

Ms. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I echo your
thoughts regarding Mr. Walz, and I ask that we all continue to
keep him and his family in our prayers.
It has been a tough time to be a farmer in America today.
The farm economy is struggling, and farmers are being forced to
do more with less. As Members of this Subcommittee, our role is
to protect our existing agriculture infrastructure, while
exploring new ways to make it work more effectively and
efficiently.
Aerial imaging is at the forefront of innovation in
agriculture. This technology has already proven to be an
important tool for agriculture agencies, and it has great
potential to make farming operations more streamlined and
efficient. I look forward to hearing today how we can safely
harness this technology to benefit individual farmers and farm
programs like crop insurance and others.
Thank you very much for being here today. You all represent
the different sectors of the aerial data collection industry,
and your testimony will shed light on applications for this
technology in the realm of agriculture. I look forward to
hearing from each of you, and Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. I thank the Ranking Member for her insightful
opening statement. The chair would request that other Members
submit their opening statement for the record so that the
witnesses may begin their testimony, and to ensure that there
is ample time for questions.
I would like to welcome to the table our witnesses. Mr.
Lanny Faleide, President of Satshot, Incorporated, Fargo, North
Dakota. Mr. Craig Molander, Senior Vice President, Business
Development, Surdex Corporation, Chesterville, Missouri, was
unable to be with us today due to flight complications, and
every Member of this Committee understands the joys of flights
in this day and time. In his place, we have Mr. Tim Crago, Vice
President of North West Geomatics Limited, Calgary, Alberta,
will be giving his testimony, and also, Mr. Robert Blair,
Farmer/Vice President, Measure Drones as a Service, Kendrick,
Idaho.
And with that, Mr. Faleide, you may begin whenever you are
ready, sir.

STATEMENT OF RODNEY ``LANNY'' FALEIDE, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT,
SATSHOT INC., FARGO, ND

Mr. Faleide. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
inviting me to your hearing here today, and the Members of the
Committee as well. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss a
little bit about our experience and how imaging technologies
and big data comes together. I have my written testimony, as
has been submitted, and I will provide an overview of that.
There are many details in there that I won't go into.
Let me give you a little history of why I am in this
business and how it all happened. I farmed for about 18+ years
with my father in central North Dakota, starting around 1978. I
received my pilot's license before that, and I was actually
taking pictures of my fields with new infrared photography back
in about 1977. I thought it was pretty cool looking at the
fields, and I remember one time or many times, actually, my
father would say to me, ``Gee, Lanny, the fields don't look
very good. Your new ideas are maybe not proper ones.'' And of
course, I would say, ``Dad, why are you looking at the fields
at noon? Why don't you look at them at 8:00 a.m. in the morning
when you are up and I might still be in bed, or at night at
8:00 p.m. when the sunlight reflects off the leaves and shines
the quality of the crop?'' Well, that was always a discussion
point that we had.
But I learned from my father's history and how he grew up
in an open cab tractor how the soils worked, how the fields
looked, how the vegetation changed. I saw the variability in
the fields back then as a young farmer. I went through the
1980s. As many of you know, that farm situation was very
difficult. Actually, I looked into some satellite stuff in 1987
when some of the first private satellites went up, European
satellites and government satellites in the United States. But
in 1992, we decided to go back to school and change our
careers, because farming was very difficult. That lasted for
about a year, and I started a company, and so we went and say
well, I like to do imaging technologies with satellites. That
turned into a discussion with American Crystal Sugar Beets, a
company up in Fargo Morehead, and a colleague of mine now that
works for me was part of that. I said let's go look at all the
sugarbeet fields. Let's see if we can monitor nitrogen off of
these sugarbeet leaves and come up with a more environmental,
economically sound practice to develop variable rate solutions
to manage nitrogen. Because they were paying on high quality
sugar content. So back 20+ years ago, we were already looking
at that.
In 1996, we did the first actionable--that is the word,
actionable variable rate application of nitrogen with a
satellite image: 1996. That is 20 years ago. The technology was
put into a tractor with an ag leader monitor, GPS, variable
rating with a Raven Industries nitrogen controller, a company
out of Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
The technology that we are talking about, bringing imaging
in to help precision agriculture, which started at about the
same time officially was available then. We have been doing
this for 20 years. The difficulties to get that technology out
into a form that allows the farmers to understand it and to see
it easily with one, two, three button approach, it has been a
struggle. We were using mobile devices in the early 2000s,
around the 2000 timeframe, but it wasn't on the phone. Because
of the iPhone, android phone, mobile devices, the ability to
stream that into the farmers' hands, right into the tractors,
is now completely available today.
The question is, is how do we get that technology to scale
up? All the interpretation of imagery, whether it is from a
satellite, an airplane--and we did aerial imaging in 1998 as
well--and drones now, or UAVs, let's bring the proper
terminology to that, is now using technologies that have been
developed by the scientific community and from NASA and others,
and now we are just embracing that. Now with the mobile
technologies going and bringing that into the hands of
everybody just in the last 4 or 5 years has become commonplace,
and with the stringing of fiberoptics across many parts of the
rural areas, which I am very happy in North Dakota, where I am
from, we are maybe about 80, 90 percent fiberoptic-based. And
that actually helped our company partner with a new Silicon
Valley company to put two $1 million satellite receiving
stations in the middle of North Dakota on my prairie farmland.
What I am trying to get at is the technology is moving
fast. Education really needs to be done more, but the economics
of the current farm situation is now starting to open up eyes
to a number of farmers and ag companies, and that scaling up of
availability of data to help control costs is becoming a very,
very possible situation.
This morning I just had a brand new customer clamoring for
imagery from us, and I said, ``Look, we just got an image 2
days ago that covered all of Iowa. Here you go. Let's do
variable rate nitrogen.''
So in closing, I will be open to any questions here, more
details, but the big data situation is taking care of a lot of
things. Our big data today is tomorrow's small data. The
industries are adapting to that, but there is a great future in
precision agriculture and how imaging is going to be used to
help farmers to economically farm in the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Faleide follows:]

Prepared Statement of Rodney ``Lanny'' Faleide, Founder and President,
Satshot Inc., Fargo, ND
Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford,
Chairman,
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk Management,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Subject: Big Data in Agriculture--Innovations in the Air

I am the founder and President of Satshot. I have been deeply
engaged in developing remote sensing technologies for agriculture since
the early 1990's. My accomplishments include creating the first
variable rate applications map back in 1996, based on imagery and
assisting in the development of agronomic remote sensing methods. My
current responsibilities at Satshot include driving strategic vision,
overseeing operations, and marketing the Company's products to high-
value strategic accounts.
Satshot began analyzing satellite imagery for agriculture in 1994.
In 1998, the Company released their first web-based GIS mapping
software, becoming the first commercial user of MapServer, a NASA
funded open-source software that serves as a geographic data rendering
engine. In 2003, Satshot migrated its mapping database to open cloud
based technology, allowing more user customization and seamless
integration with more data sources.
Satshot is focused on producing and marketing satellite data
products for sale to agribusiness, such as production cooperatives, ag
suppliers, crop consultants and also crop Insurance companies as well
as to individual producers. Satshot is currently marketing the Satshot
system across 400 million acres across North America and expanding
around the world in countries like Brazil, Argentina, Russia, Ukraine
and Australia.
Our Satshot system is also being integrated into Precision Ag
systems softwares to access satellite imagery directly through their
processes. Our history, current business and leading capabilities
position us for exponential growth in Agriculture Sales & Marketing,
Precision Agriculture, Ag Intelligence, Crop Identification, Crop
Acreage Estimation, Yield Evaluation and Environmental Monitoring.
Satshot is one of precision agriculture's longest operating and
most interconnected data providers, uniquely offering advanced
analytics through automated processing and distribution of imagery.
Satshot's cutting edge push notification system enables global delivery
of updated field-specific imagery the moment it becomes available.
Satshot is sensor agnostic and has the ability to bundle the entire
imagery distribution chain, delivering from all sources. Image sensors
have the same specifications and conform to NASA standards, thus the
supply of imagery data sold by Satshot is based on the same structures
of multi-spectral bands. As a result, Satshot's core code can enter any
imagery server, including drones, and distinctively pull out imagery
field by field.
The remote sensing imagery for agriculture has its official
beginning back in the early 1970s when the first satellite Landsat was
launched for largely to monitor agriculture. Since then technology has
rapidly increased with resolution coverage and technical enhancements.
The concept of using imagery to define field crop conditions is nothing
new. Even in the previous decade, near infrared photography was used to
define vegetation bias with photographic film, For example, all SSURGO
soils maps created were based off of high resolution grayscale images
taken in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s
I got my start taking aerial NIR images of my fields in 1977 of my
farm in central North Dakota. The advancements in technology has now
allowed me to look at any field anywhere on the earth right from my
desk or through a mobile devices in the tractor and use that image to
define crop production patterns while adjusting them on the fly to
manage crop inputs more efficiently for more profit gain. You can also
look at crop damage to assess crop insurance loss across a field and
define more accurately production and quality of the growing crop.
These real-time observations and advancements are the core future
of how agriculture will be managed to gain the best profitability to
manage our food production system for our food security needs.
There are many way to provide image crop production data to the
user. My company Satshot, specializes in satellites because of their
ability to cover large area of the [E]arth. We also use aerial and UAV
imagery if desired by the customer. There are many consideration of
logistics to get the proper data to the farmer cost effectively and
timely. Each of these platforms whether Satellite, Aerial and UAV have
their advantages and disadvantages.
Satellite imagery has a relative advantage over other types of
other agronomic data layers given its comprehensive geographical
coverage, lack of privacy issues, and rapidly increasing analytical
capabilities. The scalability of satellite imaging also makes it the
most cost effective form of coverage. Ongoing development in the
private commercial satellite industry provides detailed spatial and
spectral resolution imagery that allows for increasingly accurate in-
season yield variability measurements, soil and water content
monitoring, and harvest yield estimates. I believe that at this time
that accessing any field on the earth anytime is an extremely valuable
tool, that is why we focus on the satellite source as first option.
Satellite Imagery Market
New satellite launches will make consistent weekly access to in-
season imagery possible, providing growers real-time crop conditions.
Scheduled satellite launches will provide daily curated imagery for
future growing seasons. Advancements in on board remote sensing
analytic capabilities from satellites coupled with increasing adoption
rates for precision ag services in general are projected to drive
considerable demand for imagery based crop health analytical products.
Recent estimates show the size of the precision agriculture market
in the U.S. is between $1.5 and $2.0 billion. It is estimated over the
next 5 years to grow at greater than 13% per annum to reach $3.0 to
$3.5 billion. Outside the U.S., including developing countries where
the need to improve productivity is even greater, the growth rate is
expected to be over 25% per year. Satellite imagery offers the
compelling benefit of being the fastest growing area of the precision
agriculture market, while also having the highest ceiling.
The recent CropLife/Purdue Precision Agriculture Survey project
that this year that over 46% of the growers are using satellite
imagery, up from 33.3% in 2013. Next generation imaging promises
further intensification of demand with improved remote sensing
technology and increasing downstream market potential.
Satellite Imagery Data Agriculture Uses
Satellite imagery has important applications to other aspects of
farm management which also include: year-to-year comparisons on a
micro-area or macro basis; early detection of crop stress (weeds,
disease); accurate mapping of damage (hail, floods, etc.) for insurance
purposes; yield estimation of crop and acreage and others.
Satellite Imagery allows Agribusiness the visibility to precisely
target their products and solutions to the right prospect at the right
time and with the right offer. In addition to serving the Agribusiness
sector, we provide solutions for the growers. Imagery analysis involves
quantitative evaluation of satellite images for crop health vegetative
growth patterns across fields.
Satellites can deliver broadscale field resolution imagery,
information and analysis to the farmer/grower to use in their precision
farming systems. Crops and vegetation appear differently in each
spectral band, and these differences can vary due to plant vigor, soil
type, available moisture, and a host of other factors.
Results of this analysis are used to supply information for
precision farming operations, in assisting crop production decisions,
and in making yield and quality estimates on a detailed level. Growers
can draw in their field and analyze each field by acres, and build maps
to scout or variable rate their field. Maps can be exported directly to
variable rate controllers into their tractors or application equipment.
GIS mapped farm boundaries associated with landowner contact
information and related vendors for substantially all farmland in the
United States can also drive field-level distribution. Back-end
tracking of notification interest and imagery distribution allows the
user to build multi-layer relationship trees that identify valuable
interactions within the big geospatial data systems hierarchy user
ecosystem. As a companies user base grows, these relationship networks
become increasingly valuable.
Imagery analytical tools allow the grower to analyze a farm field
for vegetation variability, which relates to different productivity of
soils within the field. Tying this information with agronomic knowledge
and farming techniques, one can efficiently apply chemicals and
fertilizers where needed for improved productive capabilities.
Vegetation field variability is determined by analyzing near Infrared
wavelengths obtained from the satellite sensors.
By providing soil type, precipitation and the history on farm field
production down to 5 meter\2\ resolutions or better, the grower can
efficiently maximize farm production by applying the right quantity and
type of seed variety, the optimal amount of water and fertilizer, etc.
To the dealer it provides the farm field level intelligence to
recommend the optimal seed variety to the farmers or appropriate type
and quantity of fertilizer.
Satellite Imagery can be available within as early as 24-48 hrs.
from the time the satellite takes an image. Once available, web-based
GIS systems allow the user to quickly submit field information over a
website, which can be turned into management information for ag
companies. In return farmer/growers can have access to incentives for
crop information submitted.
Although many precision ag platforms still use the free low
resolution imagery from Landsat, it has significant limitations in
deciphering the sub-field variance necessary to make accurate agronomic
decisions. Detailed image accuracy allows for more precise field
management. Different satellites provide comprehensive offerings of
high quality imagery data sources with resolutions ranging from 30
meters to 25 centimeters:
Insight into crop variability using various graphical indicators,
known as vegetation indices are created by the coordination of various
satellite sensor readings for electromagnetic reflectance. During the
photosynthetic process, the chlorophyll in plants captures
electromagnetic energy, but does so at varying levels for waves of
different lengths. Vegetation indices use the variation in specific
wavelength channel reflections to analyze chlorophyll content and
extrapolate a field's vegetation biomass.
These analytics are accomplished by sensor reflectance readings for
near-infrared, red-edge, red, green, and blue electromagnetic waves.
Healthy leaves with high chlorophyll levels reflect wavelengths that
distinctively fall in the near-infrared band, whereas distressed leaves
absorb waves. High near-infrared reflectance corresponds with crop
health. Similarly, chlorophyll strongly absorbs red wavelengths and
reflects green. As such, low red reflectance and high green reflectance
are both indicators of healthy pants. The different vegetation indices
utilize different wavelength channel reflectance to provide a variety
of field information
Imagery is increasingly viable for determining real-time intra-
field yield variability, an essential component to precision ag
practices. Near-infrared wavelengths show the most detailed field
variability analysis of a field.
Precision Agriculture Growth
Powerful technological trends are developing within precision
agriculture. These trends include increasing hardware and software
adoption, cloud connectivity, and growing data standards for platform
integrations. Rapid growth in the agricultural data science market is
fostering companies to move quickly to penetrate the market. Many
companies are developing large user geospatial bases by empowering
local agronomists and dealers to make informed, graphical decisions for
their clients.
Rapid growth in the agricultural data science market is fostering
unprecedented levels of growth opportunities to penetrate the market.
Precision Ag Data companies are building large client user bases over
years by empowering local agronomists and dealers to make informed,
graphical decisions for their clients.
Field Management focused on fulfilling orders for curated imagery
in real-time and providing clear analytics that intentionally do not
provide direct recommendations, will serve as highly effective tools
for informing or validating agronomic decisions. Enhanced remote sensed
imagery from different multi-spectral channels with multi-temporal
capabilities during the growing season are coveted to quantify, project
and manage vegetation changes of crops throughout the year.
The driving force behind the growth of precision farming is that
patterns of productivity are highly variable within a given farm field,
and that farm management provided to this micro-level of variation can
significantly reduce costs, while also increasing yield. However, this
does require some investment in new equipment. In addition to variable
rate applicators (fertilizer, chemicals, seed, and Water) and in-field
navigation equipment (i.e., GPS), a digital data map is provided from a
geo-referenced vegetation biomass Image dataset that tells the
computer-controlled applicator how much to apply based on vegetation
productivity. The data in this digital map can also be based on a
number of sources, such as soil tests and historical yield (from
harvester monitors). Patterns detected from satellite imagery can
significantly enhance, and in some cases supplant, these other sources
of information.
New Satellite Technology shift
Next generation satellites improve the frequency of in-season
shots, allowing real-time monitoring of crop conditions. Leading
partners developing high frequency satellite imaging will soon 1-3
years operate powerful micro satellites capable of shooting more
reliable, inexpensive imagery on a weekly and eventually daily basis.
The increasing availability of imagery allows the ag industry to fully
leverage its notification capabilities by providing actionable crop
condition updates.
Tremendous disruption is underway for the satellite imaging
industry, and the most notable breakthrough is the ambition of several
well-funded entities to supply global satellite coverage with high-
resolution daily imaging through small low-cost satellites that form
constellations of ``birds'' of Microsats or CubeSats. The CubeSat low-
orbit standard format is revolutionizing how satellites are used by
providing much of the performance of a conventional satellite for a
fraction of the cost by using many off-the-shelf micro technologies.
The low cost of these micro satellites enable increased launches
and therefore high frequency data. This creates a radical new data set,
which makes clear a need for advanced processing and distribution
technologies. The paradigm shift in the satellite imaging industry is
that a current lack of image availability will quickly swing towards
overcapacity over the next 10 years.
The first private companies to build CubeSats already have a
significant amount of traction and are entering their latter financing
rounds with strong proof of concept. Critical design is complete and
the focus has shifted to large-scale manufacturing and deployment. Many
companies are planning to launch extensive constellations, several of
which will cost in excess of $1 billion.
At the same time, traditional satellite cost is also declining and
many planned launches for relatively smaller and infinitely more
powerful structures exist as well. Upcoming generations of satellites
will also use new technologies like short-wave infrared, which is
capable of seeing through smoke, clouds, fog and other particulates.
The most recent or identified upcoming Satellite launches (traditional
and CubeSat) will provide consistent global coverage and a nice scale
to meet agricultural needs.
Satellite imagery has a relative advantage over other imaging
aerial platforms given its comprehensive geographical coverage, lack of
permission issues, cost effectiveness, and rapidly increasing
analytical capabilities. A single satellite image can cover millions of
acres, enabling cost effective coverage.
New satellite launches will make consistent weekly access to in-
season imagery possible, providing growers real-time crop conditions.
Scheduled satellite launches, will provide daily curated imagery for
users. Advancements in remote sensing analytic capabilities from
satellites coupled with increasing adoption rates for Precision Ag
services in general, are projected to drive considerable demand for the
industry. This increased availability of imagery will allow farmers to
fully leverage image notification capabilities by using actionable crop
condition updates.
Most satellite imagery is used as a crop health vegetation analyses
overlaid on a precisely bound, recent satellite image of a grower's
field. These images and analyses provide valuable insight for pre- and
in-season crop conditions. Field image analysis employs a variety of
data correction techniques on orthorectified satellite imagery and then
applies a set of index algorithms which interpret channel wavelength
data.
Precision Ag software systems display this data as an image,
enabling growers to easily view several measures of crop variability
such as biomass diversity. Primary crop health indices include NIR, NIR
Red Edge, NDVIR, NDVIG, and NDVI Red Edge. These graphical indicators
enable users to easily build variable rate application maps or identify
precise in-field zones to scout. Currently, Satellite processed spatial
resolution of 5 meters provides the ideal mix of analytic capabilities,
image cost, and geographical coverage.
Many precision agriculture platforms employing imagery rely on low
resolution imagery for cost savings, delivery now of \5/10\ meter
resolution imagery provide a drastic improvement over the industry
standard Landsat images, which are often only available 2-4 times per
season. While irregularities can begin to be seen with 30 meter
imagery, the reduced resolution also makes these images a less
effective tool for precision applications. Distinct advantages of a
high resolution quality data layer is essential for the level of
accuracy for performing agronomic cross-analysis activities including
definition and adjustment of management zones for variable rate
applications.
For super high resolution imagery from 1 MM to 6" resolution, The
market for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) commonly known as drones
will be available upon approval by the FAA, which infant drone
technologies seek to fill the white space left by satellites. UAV's
have a place along the modern agriculture imaging chain, and the
marketplace will eventually grow once standardized, processing and
delivery drone imagery will be little different than that of aerial
imaging or satellites.
Despite its limitations regarding logistical processing and
scalability, the commercial unmanned aircraft systems market is
projected to experience growth as a result of the integration of UAVs
into the National Airspace System. UAV data will be more available
following clarity on legal permission issues, standardization of
imagery, and decreased bandwidth utilization.
UAV's do present problems associated with managing the data load
because of the massive amount of pixel data, and the stumbling
logistical points of platform execution. UAV's do not currently provide
scale and coverage, and are akin to fine dining for imaging. Big
geospatial data systems are being developed to capitalize on this
opportunity by easily incorporating UAV data into its existing data
storage and analytical framework, This will require bigger servers and
more bandwidth, but future core architectures will handle any data load
to scale across the agriculture sector.
A strong platform for imaging will ultimately fuse the use of UAV,
satellite and aerial imaging, and capture the benefits of each source.
With scalable infrastructure, these big geospatial data systems will
have the ability to expand data curation, analysis, and delivery
capabilities to include diverse geospatial data in raster and vector
formats, from micro-weather sources, and soil sensors, among others.
Satellites, Airplanes and UAV's will solve the problem of imagery
access in the near term, and successful systems will deliver these
images in a useful format to the common grower. However, capabilities
in a decision support system within the cab will make the biggest
impact in terms of decision-making on the farm. Distribution of real-
time data streams, coupled with unbiased education regarding how to
leverage this information is really the Holy Grail of platform
execution. Simplifying the massive data to meet the daily needs of the
common grower through decision support modules will change the farming
paradigm!
Big Data--Cloud Structure--Todays Big Data Is Tomorrows Small Data!
Cloud systems are becoming logical steps towards building a larger
platforms for data storage, analysis, and mosaic processing, enabling
distribution and management of mass amounts of satellite, aerial, and
UAV data.
Service providers, resellers and operators concur that the Internet
is a key enabler in disseminating (EO) Earth observation data and
services. Web-based platforms are becoming common for storing and
distributing data sets and products, and will continue to provide
innovative delivery platforms from which users can obtain data and
services.
A pillar of wide-ranging user ecosystems that include leading
agronomic data providers, growers, cooperatives, crop consultants, crop
insurance companies, dealers, crop input retailers, equipment
manufacturers, and independent dashboards will become more available.
Internet platforms and distribution is expected to be the important
tool for attracting enterprise and private users in the effort to bring
EO data to the masses.
With these systems, Big data is now transforming modern
agricultural practices by ingesting real-time field information into
geospatial mapping systems. These systems along with big data allow
farmers to get more out of their arable land in order to meet rising
commercial agriculture production needs. There are few big data
platforms which have proven to be scalable globally, particularly in
areas of the world where there is limited access to historical yield,
weather, water, topography and soil data to develop decision algorithms
and support optimization of various agronomic models.
In more advanced agricultural markets like the United States, data
platforms struggle with logistical issues like quality of data
acquisition and privacy. For reasons like these, the market is becoming
increasingly reliant on satellite imagery technologies to collect real-
time field crop data to inform GIS models for pixel-level applications.
A focus on data cloud imagery infrastructure enables image
providers to develop a range of applications that previously required
complicated contracts with data providers or the maintenance of a
separate geospatial database. Robust open platform user ecosystems
continue to grow through an increasingly diverse group of agribusiness
related entities, as third party developer momentum proliferates.
Cloud infrastructures for back-end distribution for digital imagery
curation and distribution capabilities are needed to highly scale to
the ag sector. Once an image is delivered, users can measure, or
project growth characteristics such as early season crop vigor,
biomass, or yield variations through agronomic modeling. These models
may determine economic return variability, define effective management
zones, or inform timing of planting, treating, and harvesting the crop.
Through the culmination of years of software development,
leveraging cloud-driven distribution capabilities in a manner that
provides more timely and frequent field management insights, companies
like us are providing synergistic benefits and allow users to also
leverage the clouds data infrastructure for easy storage, management,
and sharing of their agronomic data. Cloud data systems must permit
users to import other geospatial data layers such as UAV imagery,
aerial imagery, and soil sensor data. For imagery, analysis tools must
be broadly applied.
Cloud Data delivery and notification infrastructures are also
extending into third party software through API's (Application
Programming Interface). Core API structures must be enterprise ready
and provide retrieval and batch processing of multiple value-added
images from a single imagery hub. Also platform partners must be able
to redistribute image products to a growing number of connected
applications and users.
Push to Grower Technology
Data notification platforms are massively becoming deployable
through relatively frictionless distribution. To accelerate scale,
companies can intentionally omit direct recommendations, in favor of
offering the most impactful set of applications and data for the use of
their grower/advisor clients as support for individual judgments. The
ability to link geospatial data and imagery with precision to areas
within the individual farm field gives a distinct grower touch and
results in the ability to deliver unique and highly relevant data. Data
image hubs can effectively reach the edges of a mass user base at a
fraction of the overall cost.
Distributing predominantly high-resolution imagery, directly to the
cab will help ease the case for precision management and machine
empowerment through automation. Solutions must be scalable for rapid
integrations into large agribusinesses. Enterprises must be able to
quickly set up and link users to fields through extensively attributed
databases and allow tools for the creation of a hierarchy of users,
which enables clients to track interactions for active field management
and big data analytics which will offer unique opportunities to
immediately acquire a scalable, robust, and vertically focused imaging
platform for agriculture.
Platforms that are successful will tactically and strategically use
cloud core code to enable a broad range of solutions for tracking user
activity for social or ecosystem benefits while leveraging the cloud
notification systems backbone to generate real-time, relevant dialogue
with the grower. This allows scalable big data analysis through a
network of APIs and advanced database-level algorithms, which users can
access a system that is limitless in data-depiction and manipulation.
Mobile Apps
Mobile Image analytics software apps are now mostly cloud-driven,
and used for in-field decision support solutions. These mobile
applications offer analytical tools specifically focused on in-field
analysis which enable users to define management zones for variable
rate applications as well as track in-field crop condition events.
Scouting tools within the app also provide tracking capabilities
for users to record all the harvesting, soil-testing, and scouting
events that take place throughout the season. Events are linked
directly to field boundaries, allowing the information to be included
in any related analysis. Additionally, ``Photos'' tabs give users the
ability to shoot in-field images of problem areas from their mobile
devices. These photos are precisely geo-tagged with the geographic
coordinates of where they were taken.
These mobile apps not only provide satellite and aerial imagery
based analytics, but also seamlessly incorporates UAV imagery into the
apps platform. When users conduct in-field biomass analyses based on
satellite imagery, they are directed to specific zones of concern
within the field. This streamlined process allows for targeted high
resolution UAV imagery to detail leaf-level crop conditions. This
synergistic use of satellites and UAV's provides the optimal mix of
data storage and detail for large scale management. Mobile in the field
platforms show the consultant to the variations in the field. The
consultant has the option to take a picture of the affected area and
beam that right to the management team back at the office for immediate
management techniques.
Next-Generation Notification Capability: Automatic notification of
field observations is fundamental to next generation customer
acquisition and user interaction. Using multiple imaging sources to
increase frequency and quality, normalizing all images, and introduce
change detection algorithms in the near term and will be scalable
globally, likely driving adoption of the notification center and the
platform in general.
Crop Insurance Claim & Compliance Analysis
Satellite imagery has also been used extensively for 10 years or
more for Crop Insurance and field loss claims.
The USDA/RMA and the crop insurance industry uses satellite imagery
to evaluate crop damage and assess a more accurate loss analysis of the
crop loss event. Imagery is taken from satellite archives before the
damage event and another image is tasked of the area after the event.
An analysis of vegetation conditions are provided by acreage and
percentage of vegetative change to the adjustor in the field, resulting
in a more accurate loss determination. Imagery is also used in fraud
claims to evaluate losses from previous year to determine accuracy of
the adjustment.
For crop loss determination, users can track crop loss claims and
reports while at the same time analyzing vegetation loss through
satellite imagery analysis. Features include claim tracking, map
creation of field location, with GPS coordinates plus acreage of
analysis using a satellite image taken 10 days of the loss. Map report
generation of the vegetation zone characteristics by acre and
percentage. Loss maps are printed and emailed to the loss adjuster in
the field.
Imagery is also used for creation of Crop Insurance map booklets
tied to historical insurance yield information. For crop loss
determination, imagery is used to evaluate crop damage and assess a
more accurate loss analysis of the crop loss event.
AG Intelligence
Agricultural uses of satellite imagery to date, have historically
focused on broad macro-based evaluations, such as regional, national,
and international estimates of acreage and yield. However,
agribusiness's demand for satellite data is shifting to a more micro-
based (local area, individual farm, and in-field) focus. The primary
driver in this shift is the increasing adoption of precision farming
techniques for increased crop input and yield maximization efficiency.
Individual field vegetation analysis of satellite data provides
users access to enhanced tools to process and analyze satellite imagery
of comparable fields or groups of fields. Imagery analysis involves
quantitative evaluation of satellite images for patterns and trends.
Crops and vegetation, can be compared by farm to farm or county by
county by a host of agronomic vegetative factors.
Software platforms will continue to be developed further to provide
more advanced crop monitoring tools automatically for the Agribusiness
community and provide detailed reports of crop acreage conditions. This
allows grain buyers/traders to quantitatively assess the impact of
drought conditions. Similarly, users can use tools and datasets to
evaluate crop growing conditions.
The need for future food security for evaluating crop levels will
allow stability of the food supply for Worlds needs. In the past few
years, volatility in crop prices has been caused by a lack of real-time
information on crop conditions and their levels of productivity. For
example, in the 2010 season the agriculture grain trading industry was
affected by the inadequate crop information sources of the Russian
wheat crop, resulting in a 50% increase of prices within weeks.
Also these past years, inaccurate USDA crops report have resulted
in an increase in crop prices that has affected the stability of
commodity stocks , like corn and soybeans. The ability to track crop
information down to the field level and its infield variability tied to
grower operator information will result in new tools to allow the food
security situation to be addressed.
The ability to have real-time information of crops is invaluable
for the proper pricing of commodities. Satellite imagery provides real-
time crop information across the country and the world throughout.
Crop Identification, Crop Acreage Estimation and Yield Evaluation
Many new satellites have just been available in the past years.
These new satellites have changed the logistics in accessing real-time
growing information like never seen before. New satellites system can
access ten times more information real-time than current and previous
satellites. World coverage of satellite images and data linked with
field boundary data allows multiple satellite sources in varying
resolution and footprints to remotely:

Identify crops, current vegetation and crop density.

Evaluate and track crop growth trends against other regions,
other years.

Assist crop insurers to estimate risk based on vegetation
patterns and confirm loss claims.

Assist Farm lenders to evaluate current and potential crop
income.

Provide grain buyers visibility to available grain
production acres.

Early detection of crop stress (weeds, disease).

Accurate mapping of damage (hail, floods, etc.) for
insurance purposes.

Estimated current vegetation using biomass information which
has been calibrated with verifiable crop data.

Precipitation and weather data.

Previous crop rotation (i.e., is their current vegetative
state the product of a good crop year or crop rotation).

3D topographic elevation of each farm field.

Biomass Index that allows to estimate current level of
vegetation in regular (e.g., every 3-4 days) intervals.

Weather reports tied to Grower degree days and crop stages
relating to Vegetation Image maps.

Other developments in the market include environmental monitoring,
for carbon management and food security. Technologies allow regulators
or the market to accurately define the level of total biomass carbon
sequestration on agricultural land and its acreage. Identifying and
monitoring actual carbon sources and carbon sinks within a given region
or farm, with comparisons of net carbon dioxide emission sources
amongst individual crop fields, can improve annual reporting of carbon
sequestration levels per agricultural grower.
Hyperspectral Imaging
Applied research for high spectral resolution imagery in
agriculture is increasing due to availability of new image sensors.
This technology is expected to gain high levels of adoption in the
future once new spectral libraries are created, improving efficiency
and market awareness of detailed crop conditions.
The benefits of hyperspectral imagery lie in its ability to
attribute a complete wavelength spectrum to each individual pixel. This
creates hundreds more spectral bands than multi-spectral imagery,
enabling precise measurements that support a variety of agronomic
activities. This includes added accuracy for yield predictions,
vegetative stress detection, seed stock differentiation, and crop
tillage methodology assessments. Advancements in hyper spectral remote
sensing and applied research will provide users added precision for
better yield projections, vegetative stress detection, and crop quality
differentiation.
Future Agricultural Imaging Trends
Curated imagery provides a powerful data layer along with robust
suites of analytical tools to support long-term agronomic decision
making processes. High volume satellite image distribution platforms
have ben available for agriculture for a number of years, and as the
commercial space industry releases next generation satellites capable
of more frequent in-season monitoring, scalable, high utility
components for agronomic platforms must be available for the
agricultural information market
Big data will be an ever increasing concern because of the massive
amounts of information we gather for defining our fields needs for more
efficient production. The tech industry has the infrastructure to
handle this growth. The main issues are data privacy and security
concerns which need to be addressed, and the proper rules applied for
secure access to agricultural data. These issues can be resolved by
looking at other industries data policies, and to allow open data
standards to continue to develop. Transparency of data will be key to
the growth of the agriculture information industry to allow new
technology to proliferate and create a robust food industry for our
future growth as a society.
Sincerely,

Rodney ``Lanny'' Faleide,
President,
Satshot Inc.

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Faleide.
Mr. Crago, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Pushing that
button is always important, yes.

STATEMENT OF TIM CRAGO, VICE PRESIDENT, NORTH WEST GEOMATICS
LTD., CALGARY, AB, CAN; ON BEHALF OF CRAIG MOLANDER, SENIOR
VICE PRESIDENT, BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT, SURDEX CORPORATION, CHESTERFIELD, MO

Mr. Crago. It is only one button. You think I could figure
that out.
Mr. Chairman and other Members of the Subcommittee, thank
you very much for the opportunity. I appreciate it very much.
What I would like to provide is a bit of a discussion on the
innovation in the air, and specifically as it relates to the
NAIP Program, which is the National Agricultural Imagery
Program. This is a longstanding aerial imagery program that was
initiated and is currently maintained by the Aerial Photography
Field Office out of FSA in Salt Lake City. The program has been
running since 2002, and from its beginning and what it is today
is a program that collects high resolution aerial imagery of
the entire lower 48 states, currently, on a 2 year refresh
cycle. There are three prime contractors that are awarded 5
year contracts with annual task orders issued, and these
companies work in collaboration with the APFO in Salt Lake City
and with each other in ensuring that the entire lower 48 states
are covered on a 2 year cycle.
The program is interesting in the way that it came about,
and as it has evolved over the years. What I would like to do
is find my presentation and put some examples of the imagery up
for you to view. There we go. Thank you.
So this program is undertaken with aircraft, and as it has
evolved over the years, it has taken advantage of technological
advances in the sensor technology. What you see on the screen
here are two images taken last year in Wyoming, one standard
color RGB, the one on the right is color infrared. These two
renditions are part of the visible spectrum that are acquired
simultaneously by a single sensor. Another example of it from
Craighead County in Arkansas, again taken in 2015.
This evolution of the technology that has occurred has
really been a result of driving from the USDA from FSA, and
manufacturers of these sensors in trying to accommodate the
requirements of the USDA and undertaking its role in providing
this type of data to the USDA and to the farmers themselves.
Here is another example of the ability to take this imagery
and provide a 3D version of it, simply from a single flight.
One of the innovations that has occurred, and you can
appreciate that this data is acquired, the value of the data is
getting the data into the hands of those folks within FSA that
have requirements with respect to management of various
programs, including RMA programs and other programs within the
USDA.
The urgency of getting this data and the currency of this
data is of utmost importance. One of the innovations that has
been driven by FSA has been the requirement now to provide this
data within 5 days of a flight, so you can appreciate that at
the beginning of the program, delivery times were something in
the order of months, and today we are delivering the imagery to
Salt Lake City within 5 days of acquisition. It is made
available through a web service, and it is available to all
participants within the FSA and their requirements for
compliance and monitoring.
To give you an idea of what we are talking about here, to
cover \1/2\ of the lower 48 in a single acquisition season--and
remember, an acquisition season is during peak crop growing
times--the three contractors that undertake this work have, at
any one time, up to 25 aircraft with sensors in the aircraft.
Some of the parameters for the acquisition are 35,000
altitude, speeds of up to 200 knots.
In summary, what I want to communicate to you is some of
the improvements that have occurred and the importance of this
program in the sense that the original program was partial
state coverage. This is now full state coverage. It is \1/2\ of
the 48 states. Resolution has gone from a 2 meter acquisition
now to some states being done at a \1/2\ meter resolution.
Originally the program was all film. It is now all digital. It
is all multiband. Accuracy is an extremely important part of
this when you consider the comparison and use of CLUs and other
land units in relationship to the imagery. Delivery, as I said,
has gone from several months down to 5 days. And finally, what
we have is a program now that is being undertaken for
approximately \1/2\ of the cost that it was being undertaken
with as recently as 5 years ago.
This funding issue is probably one of the most significant
ones in the sense that the program is not authorized
specifically for the NAIP program, and you can see in this
chart the fluctuations in the funding. The desire of the USDA
and FSA and the APFO in Salt Lake City is complete 48 state
coverage within 1 year. That would require an authorization of
approximately $30 million per year. The last couple of years,
we have been able to secure funding for about \1/2\, and this
is a consideration we would like to put to the Subcommittee is
consideration of an authorization for full 48 state acquisition
annually at an annual cost of $30 million per year.
And with that, I will thank you for your time, and I would
welcome any questions later. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Molander follows:]

Prepared Statement of Craig Molander, Senior Vice President, Business
Development, Surdex Corporation, Chesterfield, MO
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:

Thank you for the opportunity to testify at this morning's hearing
on ``Big Data and Agriculture: Innovation in the Air.'' I am Craig
Molander, Senior Vice President of Surdex Corporation, one of the three
prime contractors working with the USDA's Farm Service Agency (FSA) to
implement the National Agricultural Imagery Program or NAIP. With me is
Tim Crago, Vice President of North West Geomatics Ltd., representing
another of the three NAIP contractors. Surdex and North West have each
been involved with NAIP for 15 years.
Agriculture, because of its tie to the land, has been a leader in
mapping since the 1930s when USDA first began collecting aerial
photography of farmland on a small scale basis, then consolidated its
efforts with the Aerial Photography Field Office in Salt Lake City
(APFO) in 1977. NAIP was initiated in 2002 to coordinate the collection
of imagery in support of the administration of FSA farm programs.
Today, NAIP imagery covers the entire lower 48 states and has achieved
a 2 year refresh cycle. It is safe to say that this is the largest
continuous imagery mapping program in U.S. history.
So useful has NAIP imagery become that a 2014 National Earth
Portfolio Assessment by the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy ranked NAIP as the fifth most important of 149
existing [E]arth observation systems in terms of assisting Federal
agencies and providing societal benefits. Much of the imagery in
consumer products, from automobile GPS systems to web services
companies, that consumers assume originate with satellites, actually
come from NAIP and other aerial sources.
Imagery from satellites and drones also play vital roles, and we
appreciate that this hearing has been structured to explore the
importance of each of these technologies in a complementary fashion.
NAIP, however, has demonstrated that aerial imagery acquisition is
uniquely capable of providing widespread coverage that meets the
demanding seasonal windows aligned with peak crop growing seasons and
weather and cloud constraints.
Within USDA, NAIP imagery is a key geospatial data layer for FSA,
the Risk Management Agency (RMA), the Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS), the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), and the Animal and
Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), which use it for a variety of
farmer services and program compliance functions. But NAIP imagery is
used far beyond USDA itself. It is made available both government-wide
and to the public for digital download, purchase at nominal cost--
literally the cost of a thumb drive--or web imagery services hosted by
the APFO. Within the Federal Government, other users include the
Department of [the] Interior and its U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Homeland Security, the Census Bureau, and
the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency. State and local
governments use NAIP imagery to support functions from law enforcement
to fire and emergency services to crisis management to transportation
to urban planning to natural resources management and monitoring. In
the private sector, NAIP imagery has become an essential tool for
companies involved in mining and energy, urban planning, engineering,
and environmental analysis. Attachment A shows the range of entities
using NAIP imagery from the USDA NRCS portal.
Finally, individual farmers and their supporting services use NAIP
for a host of farm management functions. They are a foundation for
FSA's Common Land Units, crucial to acreage reporting for crop
insurance and farm programs, and are integrated into precision farming,
agronomic analysis, and irrigation systems. Attachment B is a list of
typical NAIP farmer uses. In order to assure consistency and avoid
duplication, the NAIP program, and particularly its technical
specifications, are coordinated though the government-wide Federal
Geographic Data Committee created in 1990 by OMB Circular A-16 and co-
chaired by the Secretary of [the] Interior and the Deputy Director of
OMB, as well as its National Digital Orthoimagery Program (NDOP)
subcommittee.
The collection and processing of NAIP imagery each year is a
substantial undertaking that has required continual investment by
contractors in equipment, software, and process refinement. Imagery is
acquired under ``leaf-on'' conditions during the growing season in
order to reflect crop status. This is in marked contrast to nearly all
other Federal, state, and local government ``leaf-off'' projects at
higher resolution for traditional mapping. The aircraft used in NAIP,
approximately twenty-five of them in 2015, represent an investment of
$2.5 to $3.5 million each. These aircraft operate at up to 35,000
using multi-spectral sensors yielding color and color-infrared imagery.
Standard NAIP products include Compressed County Mosaics (CCMs) and
Digital Orthophoto Quarter-Quadrangle (DOQQ) imagery. In recent years,
the contractors have implemented Early Access Web Services (EAWS) to
provide initial imagery within 5 days of acquisition, allowing USDA and
its Federal partners to begin analysis earlier and meet demanding
reporting timelines.
NAIP imagery fits seamlessly into modern Geospatial Information
Systems as a ``base layer'' that is combined with other layers such as
farm program data, information on structures and underground pipelines,
political boundaries, financial and [C]ensus information, land
agronomics, elevation data, soil qualities, addresses, so on. Often,
these systems also incorporate imagery from drones and satellites to
address special needs, creating powerful systems for business,
government, and science.
Over the years, we have witnessed numerous improvements in NAIP:

Cost: The program cost has fallen sharply from an estimated
$55 million per year to cover the entire lower forty-eight
states a few years ago to now just below $30 million, a result
both of improved technology and excellent program management by
FSA's APFO. APFO has reduced the program to three prime
contractors (down from as many as ten early in the program) to
streamline management and coordination.

Quality: NAIP imagery is now entirely captured with digital
sensors rather than film cameras, and has improved in clarity
to as fine as \1/2\ meter resolution, thus meeting established
map accuracy standards at the highest level. The multi-spectral
data can be exploited using automated classification for
investigation of plant health, spread of infestations such as
bark beetles and the like. The success of the program has
resulted in its standards and guidelines being adopted by many
other Federal, state, and local projects.

Speed and currency: Initial imagery is now available within
5 days of acquisition and final products within 30 days. With
resolution of the funding issue discussed below, it is possible
to provide coverage of the entire lower 48 states on an annual
basis, which would provide substantial benefits to program
users. User surveys conducted by the USDA and organizations
such as the National States Geographic Information Council
(NSGIC) highlight the need for annual coverage. Surveys by the
USDA have shown a consistently very high level of satisfaction
among NAIP users.

The result of these improvements has been an extremely high return
on taxpayer dollars, a high value for funding partners, and more
widespread use both by public- and private-sectors.
The single greatest concern regarding NAIP is its funding structure
that has resulted in instability. Since NAIP originally was created as
an internal oversight/service initiative within the FSA, it has been
funded primarily out of FSA's own ``salaries and expenses''
appropriation--despite the program's wide use both by government and
the public--and without a separate statutory authorization from
Congress. FSA's support for NAIP has been strong and unwavering, a
principal reason that NAIP has survived several years of budget
constraints. FSA annually provides about \2/3\ of the annual cost of
NAIP, with its partners, notably USGS, NRCS, and USFS, funding the
remaining portion along with occasional investments by state partners.
As mentioned earlier, public users of NAIP and noncontributing
government agencies obtain imagery essentially for free.
This situation has placed FSA in a difficult position with regard
to NAIP, and the result has been unpredictable program funding.
(Attachment C contains a chart showing the annual NAIP funding from
2003 through 2016.) In years when FSA faces severe internal funding
needs--be it staff training, implementation of farm bills or other
major legislation, computer upgrades or maintaining field offices--
these create direct competition for funding NAIP. In some years, FSA
has been forced to turn to the Commodity Credit Corporation to fill the
gap. In other years, contracts were finalized too late for much of the
growing season.
For this reason, we have long advocated that Congress adopt a
statutory line-item authorization and appropriations for NAIP as a
basis for long-term funding stability. We hope you will consider this
idea in upcoming legislation.
From our collective experience in contracting with Federal, state,
and local government, we at Surdex and North West Geomatics have found
NAIP an exemplary illustration of a true government-private partnership
that has improved products and services and exploited technology to
lower costs, resulting in expanded coverage. Our annual contractor
meetings with APFO at the end of each year to review lessons learned
and explore improvements features open discussions benefitting both
sides and, most importantly, improve the quality, accuracy, and
timeliness of our imagery for the end-users.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear at today's hearing.
We would be glad to answer any questions you might have.
Attachment A
Data Distribution by the USDA

Downloads of CCMs from the USDA             Downloads by Usage
Geospatial Gateway

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Note: APFO CSS more than             >30% are from some level of
offset the drop-off in 2012-         government.
2013.

Graphics courtesy of Farm Service Agency.

Attachment B
How Farmers Benefit from NAIP Imagery
Managing their Farms:

Keep current, effective farm records.

Oversee operations and plan new projects.

Find best locations for grain bin and other farm structure
locations for loans.

Identify urban encroachment, sites for new buildings, gas
and oil well development.

Review topography changes around waterways after flooding or
other extreme weather.

Identify and plan irrigation changes.

Assist with crop reporting.

Support program appeals.

See surrounding lands and fields for comparison and
planning.

Receiving benefits from USDA agencies:

Respond to inquiries on USDA programs.

Self-check for program compliance.

Verify crop history and planting patterns.

Apply for and receiving disaster response/assessments.

Manage food plots on CRP fields and CRP-managed haying and
grazing acreage.

Assess, monitor, and address crop and animal disease
outbreaks with APHIS.

Assist U.S. Forest Service in managing forest lands.

Work with NRCS on resource assessments & inventory
management.

Benefit from NASS, ERS, and University statistics and ag.
Research in USDA program; management and development.

Receiving services from private vendors:

Agricultural industry:

Precision farming systems.

Agronomic services.

Private insurance offerings.

Irrigation consultants and monitors.

Tool for obtaining carbon offsets where available.

Basis for Google Earth, Microsoft Maps, and OPS navigation
systems used by farmers.

Forestry management companies:

Inventory and financial planning.

Fire tracking and mitigation.

Riparian analysis.

Fire inventory.
Attachment C
Funding Challenge
CCC Funding Replaced FSA S&E Funding for 2011-2014
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

PowerPoint Presentation
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Crago.
Mr. Blair, whenever you are ready, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT BLAIR, VICE PRESIDENT,
AGRICULTURE DIVISION, MEASURE, THE DRONE AS A
SERVICE
'
COMPANY; OWNER/MANAGER/OPERATOR, BLAIR
FARMS, KENDRICK, ID

Mr. Blair. Okay, thank you.
Good morning and thank you, acting Chairman Lucas, acting
Ranking Member Graham, and Members of the House Subcommittee on
General Farm Commodities and Risk Management. I am honored to
be here today and I appreciate this opportunity to discuss the
benefits of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, UAVs for short, in
agriculture and some of their challenges. My name is Robert
Blair, a fourth generation north Idaho farmer raising wheat,
barley, peas, lentils, and garbanzo beans on the rolling hills
of the Palouse. I am also the VP of Agriculture for Measure,
the leading Drone as a Service
'
Company. We put
pilots and systems in place for agriculture and other
industries to collect data and return it to the customer in a
timely manner.
Agriculture has a tremendous challenge and responsibility
of producing enough food to feed nine billion people by the
year 2050, and doing so sustainably. Global agriculture is
under increased pressure from different sectors to reduce water
use, reduce erosion, and reduce inputs, while increasing crop
quantity and quality. The agriculture industry cannot do this
alone, but utilizing precision agriculture technologies,
especially UAVs, those working and managing the land can be
successful in this mountainous challenge.
For five generations, my family has incorporated new
farming technologies and practices to raise better crops with
less labor and inputs. Our farm was started in 1903, and my
family has gone from using horses to continually updating
tractors through the years, tractors that have computers and
technology, allowing for placement of inputs exactly where they
are needed from information collected from a UAV.
Many things affect crop production, especially weather and
management. The slide you are looking at is from a 2015 study
conducted by Measure and multiple sponsors, many in
agriculture. The study shows crop yield gap reduction potential
is reduced approximately 20 percent. This study also shows that
UAVs can positively affect the management gap by 25 percent.
Based upon my own experiences, UAVs can also reduce the impacts
caused by weather.
Any aerial data needs to fit into a cab to be useful,
otherwise it is just a picture. Today's agriculture machinery
has the capability to apply multiple products, either full
boom, in sections, or by individual nozzles. Data collected
from UAV can be used by the farmer to do crop application in
all three instances.
With the announcement of Part 107 on Tuesday by the Federal
Aviation Administration, there is a certainty that UAV
operations are here to stay in the United States, and
agriculture can benefit. However, there is still work that
needs to be done. Agriculture cannot wait for a slow
application process to fly in restricted areas that results in
losing a generations' worth of information. Capturing photos
and videos from a UAV is not enough. Agriculture needs
friendlier regulations in place that allow for UAV application
of products. Furthermore, Congress and USDA need to start
working today to incorporate UAVs into the next farm bill,
while the FAA should strongly consider giving agriculture a
seat at the UAV rulemaking table.
I started my precision ag journey in 2003 doing simple
mapping with a PDA and a magnetic receiver. Holding everything
at the same time was difficult, as you can see here, trying to
pull out the stylus. Well, following the footsteps of what
farmers have done for centuries, I created the solution to the
problem by riveting a piece of metal on the brim of my hat to
hold the receiver. This same hat represents an opportunity
today to start shaping a new solution for the Risk Management
Agency and crop insurance industry by utilizing UAVs to assist
and adjust for claims. Currently when a hailstorm damages my
crops, I would go out in the field with the adjuster. After
walking into the crop where I am guessing damage occurred, the
adjuster or I would throw the hat and do the official
inspection. UAVs can collect high resolution images ahead of
boots-on-the-ground inspections so farmers and adjusters can go
to those exact areas that are damaged. No more hat throwing.
We are in the information age where timing of data is
becoming more critical every day. The precision agriculture
industry is already trying to put a fire hose worth of data
through a straw, and with the announcement of Part 107, the
amount of data collected will only put more strain on an
inadequate Internet infrastructure in rural America, and will
only compromise the ability of American farmers to compete in a
global economy.
With today's low commodity prices and tighter margins, UAVs
and companies like Measure can help reduce costs, increase
productivity, and turn precision agriculture into surgical
agriculture. I am very optimistic about the future of
agriculture and UAVs, because in America, the sky truly is the
limit and UAVs can help keep farmers where they belong, on the
farm.
Acting Chairman Lucas, acting Ranking Member Graham, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you this morning. I look forward to answering
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blair follows:]

Prepared Statement of Robert Blair, Vice President, Agriculture
Division, Measure, the Drone as a Service
'
Company; Owner/
Manager/Operator, Blair Farms, Kendrick, ID
Good morning and thank you Chairman Crawford, Ranking Member Walz,
and Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. I am honored to be
here today and appreciate this opportunity to discuss the benefits of
drones in agriculture and some of the challenges that impact its
adoption and implementation.
My name is Robert Blair and I am a fourth generation north Idaho
farmer raising wheat, barley, peas, lentils, and garbanzo beans on the
rolling hills and canyon tops of the Palouse growing region. I am also
the VP of Agriculture for Measure, the leading Drone as a
Service
'
Company that offers a drone flying service to
agriculture and other industries. We put pilots and systems in place to
collect data, do analytics, and return the data to the customer in a
timely manner.
It is vital to the national security of the United States of
America and to the rural communities throughout that agriculture
remains strong and viable. Rural communities greatly depend upon the
economic success of agriculture but it goes farther than that. All of
America, along with those in many other countries, depends upon U.S.
agriculture success as well. I truly believe that agriculture
technology, especially the use of UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles), sUAS
(small Unmanned Aircraft Systems), or drones, as many people call them,
will pave the way from precision agriculture to surgical agriculture.
Agriculture has a tremendous challenge and responsibility of
producing enough food to feed nine billion people by the year 2050 and
doing so sustainably. Agriculture domestically and internationally is
under increased pressure from many different sectors to reduce water
use, reduce erosion, reduce pesticide use, and reduce nutrient
applications while increasing crop quantity and quality. The
agriculture industry cannot do this alone, but by utilizing precision
agriculture technologies, especially UAVs, those working and managing
the land can be successful in the mountainous challenge.
Agriculture Technology Background
The agriculture industry has always been on the leading edge of
incorporating technology. From the beginning of time humans evolved
from poking their finger in the ground to using a stick to plant seeds.
The Industrial Revolution saw inventions like John Deere's plow,
McCormick's reaper, and Eli Whitney's cotton gin help to increase
productivity, increase quality, and to replace rural labor that was
migrating to cities.
My Great, Great, Great Uncle started the farm in 1903, the same
year Henry Ford started his company that gave us assembly lines, the
same year the Wright Brothers had the first successful manned powered
flight, and the same year of the first successful west to east radio
signal transmission. These innovations are the corner stones for
today's agriculture equipment and precision technologies.
I started my precision agriculture journey in 2003 by using a
simple PDA (Personal Data Assistant) to do simple mapping. Holding the
device, the stylus, and the GPS receiver brought about a challenge of
needing a third hand which led me to creating my own innovation by
riveting metal on the brim of my hat to affix the magnetic GPS receiver
to so I could run the stylus and hold the device.
From that point on, I didn't look back. I incorporated a yield
monitor, which led to saving 20-25% of nitrogen costs; autoboom, which
has saved me between 10-15% on seed, fertilizer, and pesticides; and
autosteering, which has reduced my overlap between 3-5%.
It was a very exciting time in 2004 learning about these
technologies, incorporating them on my existing equipment, and trying
to figure out how they could best serve me and my quest to be a better
manager and steward of the land. It wasn't until I flew in a manned
plane that summer that I realized aerial imagery was the missing piece
to the precision agriculture puzzle.
Agriculture UAV Timeline
Being able to see crops growing from the air in 2004 provided a
perspective I never had before. I could see areas in my crops that were
doing very well and others that were falling down. When scouting a
field, problem areas are hard to identify until I am in the middle of
the worst part. Being able to see my fields from the air was an ``ah
ha'' moment for me.
At the time I did not realize that the person I was working with
was introducing me to remote sensing. He was using a modified camera
with a filter to try to capture images to produce a Normalized
Differential Vegetative Index (NDVI), a form of vegetation health
analysis.
However, the crop ``production line'' does not shut off or get put
on hold while aerial data is being captured and processed; the crops
keep growing. I had to wait at least 3 weeks for the plane to come to
my farm and then another 3 weeks to get the information that I was
paying $6 an acre for. Too much time had passed to where I could take
action to address issues. The information needed to be timely. We have
come a long way since I saw an ad for a UAV in 2006 but the need for
timely information has not changed.
In the early days of experimenting with my UAV I discovered many
shortcomings with the technology. Existing agriculture software was
inadequate at utilizing UAV data, photo stitching software was
practically non-existent, and analytical processing software was almost
not even thought of. I was at the cusp of what this new technology
could achieve.
In 2008, I filed the first petition for exemption to the U.S.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) for commercial UAV use in
agriculture, along with providing the FAA documentation on guidelines
of how they should be used; many of my points are very similar to the
current exemption rules. I also petitioned to try and obtain a seat at
the FAA rulemaking table for agriculture. To this date agriculture
still does not have a seat at the table.
Around the same time in 2008, many people outside of agriculture
saw the possibilities of what this technology could do and companies
sprang up overnight building less expensive UAVs and better software;
technology that farmers could afford. I no longer needed to worry about
building my own UAV, modifying cameras, cobbling software together or
trying to understand hard to use autopilots and flight software. It all
comes down to being able to put UAV collected data into the cab of a
tractor, applicator, or mobile device.
On June 18, 2014, the FAA defined what constituted as commercial
versus hobby UAV operations. Since that time, I have not piloted a UAV
over my own property; instead, I have complied with the rules and had
certified pilots operating under FAA Section 333 exemptions to gather
data over my farm. An example of the distinction made between
commercial and hobby use is that while I can fly a UAV over my property
and take all of the pictures and video I want, the moment I use that
information to make management decisions, I am a commercial UAV
operator.
Over the years I have been asked many times ``Who will be flying
UAVs, the farmer or a service provider?'' With my experience in this
industry, I see a future of service providers flying for agriculture.
Farmers, ranchers, crop advisors, and agronomists have enough on their
plate let alone becoming an aviation expert, remote sensing expert,
software expert, and/or geographic information systems (GIS) expert.
Instead, UAV service providers like Measure can collect the data to
make the jobs of those with boots on the ground easier. A crop advisor
friend stated, ``I am currently managing 20,000 acres and with your
service I could double the acres along with having better information
for the farmer.''
Part 107 was announced on Tuesday, June 21, 2016. There are a
couple of provisions beneficial for agriculture such as obtaining a
remote pilot certificate instead of needing a full pilot's license and
not being required to have a visual observer. Both of these provisions
will save costs making it less expensive to conduct business.
However, I believe UAV service providers like Measure will still be
needed due to the time required for flying, processing imagery, and
trying to make the imagery into actionable information. Operating
safely is a priority of Measure and we will use highly trained and
certified pilots to carry out flights.
While Part 107 is a major milestone for the UAV industry there is
still work that needs to be done. Beyond line of sight (BLOS) operation
will be needed to cover the millions of agriculture acres in the United
States in a timely manner. Rules to fly at night with thermal cameras
can collect data with higher accuracy due to the cooler evening
temperatures. Also, further clarification is needed to conduct aerial
application of pesticides with UAVs.
UAV Benefits and Opportunities
Before I had even heard of a UAV I saw tremendous potential for
aerial imagery that could help my farm and the agriculture industry. I
asked myself questions such as: ``Can I apply nitrogen as needed and
where it's needed during the growing season with certainty,'' ``Can I
identify weed infestations and treat twenty percent of the field
instead of 100 percent,'' or ``Where should I go to do a visual
observation, take a soil sample, take a tissue sample, or do a
combination of the three?''
I have been fortunate to speak domestically and internationally on
the benefits of precision agriculture, remote sensing, and UAVs and
listen to people's questions on how could this technology be used on
their farming operation. I have also benefited from doing two different
agriculture fellowships that allowed me to interact with thought
leaders and technology adopters at all levels in South America and
Europe. These experiences have provided me with a better understanding
of what UAVs can do for agriculture.
Last year Measure did a high-level, two-part study on agriculture
UAVs with many different industry partners as co-sponsors. The
highlight for me was the part of agriculture crops that are lost to
weather and management. Roughly twenty percent of a crop is lost and
the report indicated that UAVs can help gain back \1/4\ of what is lost
due to management. I believe there can be even larger gains because
better management and direct application can lead to gains against
weather.
My experiences helped me gain a unique understanding of how UAVs
can help agriculture today and in the future. Below I will list and
briefly describe where UAVs can be of service to agriculture.

General Scouting--UAVs can assist farmers and agronomists/
crop advisors with their scouting by covering the acres in
advance of needing to put boots-on-the-ground. Currently those
in agriculture go into a field to find a problem. UAVs can
scout ahead of time, locating specific areas that would need
further inspection. Another scouting benefit of UAVs is the
amount of area it can cover. A UAV can cover 100 percent of a
field, while the example included in the testimony only covered
around five percent.

Nutrient Management--Fertilizer is a major expense for most
crops. UAVs can be used to identify and monitor production
zones created for variable rate application of nitrogen. This
type of application not only reduces costs for the farmer but
also helps reduce impact on the environment by applying what is
needed where it is needed.

Irrigation Management--In irrigated crops water management
is critical. UAVs can help identify zones to apply water at
varying rates and identify irrigation equipment issues such as
a plugged nozzle, a worn out nozzle, etc.

Weed Identification--UAVs can obtain high enough resolution
imagery that can show weeds between the rows before a crop
canopies. The ability to use this data so a farmer can
determine the threshold level on treating an area versus not
applying can save thousands of dollars at the farm level.

Insect & Disease Detection--While this is very similar to
weed detection, it is more difficult to achieve in most cases.
The creation of new sensors and a better understanding of where
these pests show up on the spectrum chart are things the
agriculture and UAV industry need to strive for.

UAV Aerial Application--Japan has been doing aerial
application of pesticides for almost thirty years. In the
United States we are just getting started. These UAVs can be
used to do spot applications in fields for small pest areas
along with operating safely in difficult terrain such as
pasture hillsides and grazing land. It could also operate
safely over fields that are located within urban areas.

Crop Insurance--Crop insurance is the cornerstone of risk
management for farmers. UAVs could provide high resolution
images to identify the area of a field that has been damaged by
weather to assist the crop adjuster. Currently, the area
designated for damage counts is identified with the toss of the
farmer's or crop adjuster's hat. Where the hat lands is where
crop inspection begins. Using UAVs to determine the severity of
weather damage would be an improvement upon this process.

Crop Stand & Germination--UAV imagery can be used to detect
how well a crop has been established and/or if there are
germination issues so the farmer can determine if he/she should
reseed. In the case of sugarcane, understanding what percentage
of the sugarcane crop is viable at ratoon * 2 or ratoon 3 is
important so the farmer can determine if he can leave the
existing crop in another year or if it should be worked up and
planted to something else.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: Ratooning (from Spanish retono, ``sprout'') is a
method of harvesting a crop which leaves the roots and the lower parts
of the plant uncut to give the ratoon or the stubble crop. Retrieved
from http://www.britannica.com/eb/topic-492099/ratooning. Britannica
Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2009-01-19.

Cattle--A thermal imaging camera could be used in a feedlot
situation to detect sick animals along with detecting a cow in
heat that is ready for artificial insemination. Furthermore, we
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
can use thermal data to locate cattle on the range.

These are just a few innovative ways that UAVs can be used today.
Just imagine what they could do tomorrow on farms and ranches to help
American agriculturists compete on a global scale and ensure that food
is continually on the dinner table. We need to look at ways this
technology can also be used by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) to keep up with the rapidly evolving and tech savvy
agriculture industry. I believe there are many uses that each
department could take advantage of including:

Risk Management Agency--Crop insurance claims, reporting and
validation.

Farm Service Agency--Crop reporting accuracy, especially
with spring crops.

Animal, Plant, & Health Inspection Service (APHIS)--I have
had discussions with Under Secretary Osama El-Lissy about using
UAVs to inspect cargo ships and containers to identify insect
larvae and nests. Also, how UAVs can be used in the battle to
eradicate the boll weevil by identifying host plants in non-
cropped areas and then do an herbicide application by UAV
instead of by foot.

Natural Resource Conservation Service--Not only could UAVs
be a program enhancement for the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program (EQIP) or the Conservation Stewardship
Program (CSP), it could help to better assess residue in fields
instead of using a 100 string line with markers on it.

While I could go on listing more departments and uses, I believe
this paints a great picture of why UAVs need to be a more integral part
of the next farm bill discussion. Everyone from Congress to the farmer
and agriculture organizations to UAV companies need to start talking
now on how this technology should be used and incorporated at all
levels. This is a tremendous opportunity for all segments of
agriculture.
Challenges
The future of UAVs in agriculture is here. As we watch the creation
of a brand-new technology and industry unfold before our eyes,
questions emerge: who should be working on this new technology, how
should it look, what time frame is acceptable, and how can UAVs be used
safely? None of these are easy questions to answer, and in order to
promote this technology for adoption, the following challenges must be
addressed:

Aging Agriculture--While I initially look at this as a
benefit for using UAVs, it is also a major hurdle. The average
age of a farmer and for the most part, those in supporting
businesses, is between 57-59 years old. They are getting close
to retiring and in most cases do not want to learn something
new. My question to Congress, USDA, and the agriculture
community is: ``What can we do to incentivize the agriculture
industry to adopt the use of this technology?'' One thought is
to provide a premium reduction on crop insurance for
implementation of the technology that is reducing risk from
weather.

Local Expertise--In most instances there is not enough
expertise to show farmers and ranchers the benefits of UAVs and
how to use the data. Agriculture has relied upon universities
and their Extension to be experts, but due to cuts in
agriculture funding, that expertise has fallen behind. We need
to act now to attract young people into agriculture and
technology could be very attractive to a new generation of
agriculturists.

UAV Regulations--The FAA has the important responsibility
and challenge to keep the sky safe while trying to incorporate
UAVs into the most congested airspace in the world; no small
task. I would like to pose some examples for the FAA to
consider when it comes to how American farmers could benefit
from using UAVs for agriculture:

Aerial Application--Japan has been using a helicopter
UAV to apply pesticides for almost thirty years and that
program is overseen by their Ministry of Agriculture,
Forestry, and Fisheries. In the United States, UAVs are
being flown under exemptions instead of permanent rules for
pictures and video--not for pesticide application. I am
hopeful that this week's announcement by the FAA
accelerates this application.

Competing Countries--I spent 6 weeks on an Eisenhower
Agriculture Fellowship studying precision agriculture,
remote sensing, and UAVs in Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil;
countries that are direct competitors to U.S. farmers and
commodities. Not only did I see the first UAV for
agriculture fly in Uruguay at a field day in Rosario, but
they streamed the video from the UAV to a large screen on a
truck. I have never seen that level of technology used in a
U.S. field day.

Timeliness for Agriculture--For 2 years I have been
trying to fly over the test plots of one of the largest
wheat breeding companies in the world with no success. The
process to obtain permission to fly within restricted
airspace in Walla Walla, Washington and other restricted
airspace locations where agriculture is located could be
better. The trials at Walla Walla were for drought tolerant
varieties and the last time a drought was as severe as last
year in the Pacific Northwest was in 1977. The lack of a
timely process led to agriculture losing a generation's
worth of data.

Big Data--Ownership and integrity of the data Measure uses
its UAVs to collect are very important and we work hard to make
that a priority. However, with more technology evolution and
use looming in the future, all segments in the agriculture
chain need to make data security a priority.

Rural Connectivity Infrastructure--Agriculture and natural
resources are the major economic sectors that keep rural
communities going. Many of America's farms and ranches are
international companies that do business on the world market.
At this early stage in agriculture UAVs, we are trying to put a
firehose worth of data through a straw with Internet connection
speeds on my farm at 5-8 Mbs down and less than 1 Mbs upload.
America can and should do better.

Agriculture Representation--Agriculture needs a seat at the
FAA table to make sure rules that are proposed will work for
our industry. The USDA motto of ``Agriculture is the foundation
of manufacture and commerce'' is as true today as it was when
it was first uttered, especially in ensuring the economic
success of rural America.

Safety--This is a critical challenge for not only
agriculture UAVs but the entire UAV industry. Measure's mantra
is ``Safe, Legal, and Insured'' and we try to live that and
lead by example. Often, outsourcing to service providers whose
responsibility is to fly within the current scope of unmanned
regulations is the safest way to obtain aerial data. It is my
hope that Measure and the agriculture UAV industry can help
lead the way on this important issue.

Investment--We are living in a time when the United States
is putting less money into agriculture research when competing
countries are increasing theirs. This trend needs to change for
our national and global security. We are watching the birth of
the UAV industry in agriculture; we must nurture it so it can
mature successfully and become a benefit to American society.

Even though there are many more challenges that could be listed and
that the growing UAV industry will be encountering, I am very
optimistic that with good communication, increased understanding, and
everyone working toward the same objective of safely incorporating UAVs
into the National Airspace System (NAS) and the agriculture industry we
truly will be successful.
Closing
Agriculture has evolved from poking fingers into the ground to
using those fingers to select a specific spot on a screen to be
captured by a UAV. Agriculturists have been doing remote sensing in
shades of green since the beginning of time and now we need to help
this new crop of agriculturists to see things in colors of not just
green, but in red, yellow, blue and all shades in between.
The journey that UAVs have taken me on has brought me closer to my
roots by looking at the technology used on my farm over five
generations while at the same time making me ask more questions about
the future. What will UAVs be doing besides pictures, videos, and
aerial application in 5 years?
Again, agriculture cannot do all the lifting alone; we will need to
work with industries, organizations, companies, and agencies we haven't
had to work with before. However, agriculture does need a seat at the
regulatory table for everyone involved to be successful.
I am hopeful that my testimony has planted one of many seeds on the
road to the next farm bill. Congress and USDA will need to work with
traditional agriculture organizations while expanding to those in the
UAV industry to start laying the foundation of how this technology can
be used and promoted.
However, without better connectivity and a stronger Internet
infrastructure, rural America and all Americans will not benefit. Those
utilizing precision agriculture and UAV data today are struggling
greatly to deliver, in relative terms, this small amount of data today.
America will need to invest into rural connectivity the same way
America invested in a successful electrical infrastructure starting at
the beginning of last century.
We are in the information age where timing of data is becoming more
critical every day. We have larger tractors, combines, and implements
that are equipped with the technology that can utilize the data
collected from a UAV. I have been implementing these technologies on my
farm for over a decade and I am very optimistic about the future of
agriculture, because in America the sky truly is the limit. With
today's low commodity prices and tighter margins, UAVs can help reduce
costs while keeping farmers where they belong . . . on the farm.
Chairman Crawford, Ranking Member Walz, and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you this
morning. I look forward to answering your questions.
[Attachment]
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Since the farm was started in 1903, five generations have
been involved with major technology innovations in agriculture
moving from horses to tractors to autosteering to unmanned air
vehicles (UAV). This new generation of farmers and ranchers
have grown up with computers and precision agriculture and we
need to ensure today that there is a strong infrastructure in
place for these leaders of tomorrow.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In 2006 I became the first farmer in the United States to own
and use a UAV. My two sons, Dillon and Logan have learned what
this technology can do and how it can be used for over a decade
to take pictures. They will need additional rules in place for
uses such as aerial application by UAVs.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Scouting is traditionally done by sitting on a four-wheeler
and driving through a field to find problems. This is
inefficient, time consuming, and does not see all of the acres.
Above, the green line is twenty feet wide and follows the
tracks of the four-wheeler. The twenty feet represents being
able to see into the canopy 10 on each side of center which is
less than five percent of the field.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Incorporating a UAV to detect problem areas, farmers can
place markers on the field like the ones in green to scout to,
instead of hoping to see problems just driving or walking
through a field. We can also create management zones and adjust
inputs based upon productivity potential.
Estimated Yield Increases

Closing the yield gaps

Estimated yield gaps range from 15% to 30%.

Approximately 50% of gap is due to weather.

b Remainder due to sub-optimal management and information.

Based on research and interviews, drones are estimated to
reduce management yield gap by 25%.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In a 2015 study conducted by Informa for Measure and
sponsoring agriculture partners it highlighted that UAVs could
recover 25% of the yield lost by improper management. I believe
that utilizing UAVs during the growing season reductions in
yield lost by weather can also be gained by increasing test
weights, reducing shrunken and broken kernels, and increasing
overall quality.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Images captured by UAVs have greater resolution that can show
more issues to address in a crop. Solutions for treatment can
be incorporated into the cab of a tractor or applicator for
precise placement reducing costs and impacts on the
environment.

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Blair.
The chair would like to remind Members that they will be
recognized for questioning in order of seniority for those who
were here at the start of the hearing, and after that, Members
will be recognized in order of arrival. I appreciate Members'
understanding, and with that, I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Gentlemen, the Committee just concluded a six-part hearing
series focusing on the farm economy and the downturn of the
last couple of years. Things in farm country, we would all
agree, are starkly different than they were just a couple years
ago when the 2014 Farm Bill was signed into law. In fact,
percentage-wise statistically, the 3 year drop in net farm
income that we have encountered is, in some ways reminiscent of
the Great Depression and some commodity years, perhaps even
worse.
That said, though, given the downturn in the farm economy,
how has that affected the utilization and the adoption of
imagery in production agriculture? Basically what I am asking
is when we had the higher prices, to what extent were farmers
willing to adopt the new technology, and now with the
significant drop, how has that affected their willingness to
step up and use the services that have been developed and are
being developed?
And with that, in no particular order, I will start with
Mr. Blair, and if you would care to offer a response, and then
your colleagues, if they would like to comment.
Mr. Blair. Okay, thank you, Chairman Lucas.
For me as a farmer, we have seen going from a $6 week down
to $5 week. Talking with clients around the company or
potential clients, it is hard to sell. They are not adopting
it, and then if we look at the lending institutions and the
bottleneck created there, they don't understand the technology
and the benefits they provide as well, creating further hurdles
in adopting this technology.
We need to work harder in getting the word out as to what
this technology can do, from universities, from land-grant
system extension, private-sector, and USDA system. Here is the
return on investment: Last year, I raised 105 bushel wheat on
dry land in a drought year. Because I varied the rate of
nitrogen, I was able to not only have very good yields, I had
less impact from that drought by better quality, less shrunken
and broken kernels, and less dockage. Furthermore, on my soft
white wheat, because I had low protein, I gained an additional
$10 an acre because I had that low protein from a premium. The
technology can pay. We have not done as good of a job as we can
showing what that return on investment is at the ground level.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Crago or Mr. Faleide.
Mr. Faleide. I can comment on that on adoption. It is
interesting over the years that it has been a difficult sell. I
think whenever there are hard times, people look at different
ways of being more efficient.
In the mid-1990s when we were working with the sugarbeet
industry, we saw a definite increase of usage by the company to
push it to the farms because they needed to grow more sugar
pounds per acre, and there was an advantage to monitor and
manage the fields with nitrogen to create more economic profit.
Then times started getting better in the farm industry in the
late 1990s economically, especially in the 2000s, and recently
very well. We actually saw more of a drop off or a complacency
of using technology or data to drive the machines. Now most
farmers were getting the equipment in their new tractors, and
it has become OEM required because you can't sell your tractor
again if you don't have the proper equipment. So that was a lot
of the argument I was getting.
Now actually, we thought in the last year or so that we
were going to see a drop off in interest because of the
economic problems. We are seeing the opposite, partly because
our company is ready to deliver. We can deliver any image to
any field that the satellite rolls over at a moment's notice.
We have the distribution system in place. We have the big data
infrastructure behind us, and we are getting data. Now we still
need more images. We need more images from satellites. We
wanted more imagery from aerial and to incorporate the UAV data
as well, which we are doing. But we are finding actually that
we are seeing an uptick of interest because we have an
actionable solution that can provide it like that, and that is
part of the whole problem of bringing data and imagery to the
agriculture sector. We do not have enough infrastructure of
satellites on my end. We are working with many satellite
companies to get more satellites up, and that is going to
happen over the course of the next 1 to 2 to 3 years. But,
right now, we are actually seeing an uptick on information.
Mr. Lucas. Mr. Crago, any thoughts?
Mr. Crago. Well, I am not a farmer, but I have worked with
the USDA for close to 20 years now, and what I have seen is the
desire and requirement of the APFO in Salt Lake City is really
being a base for providing fundamental information and data to
the farmer, and providing it in a manner that is fairly open to
them.
From my perspective, one of the areas that really requires
some work is in the implementation of tools and customized
tools, specifically as it relates to precision agriculture and
other uses farmers make of that in being able to use the data.
And so, in my perspective in my work, we really are trying or
attempting to provide a base data layer set that augments what
these other two gentlemen have been talking about in terms of
being able to interpret that data in manners that fit a
particular farmer's issue, and there are a number of them. I
appreciate that.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Crago.
My time has expired. The chair now recognizes the ranking
gentlelady for 5 minutes.
Ms. Graham. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. They left,
but there was a group of Future Farmers of America in the back.
I wanted to recognize them, because my question sort of segues
from that.
Mr. Lucas. I thought they were a bright looking bunch.
Ms. Graham. We have bright ones in Florida as well, so it
is consistent.
One of my early meetings with FFA I was sitting there, and
they were providing a presentation on UAVs, and I was just
amazed at all that they were able to do with this technology,
and recognize that the world that young farmers are growing up
in. We really want to encourage young farmers to get into
farming and have it as their life work, is changing so rapidly.
So you all are experts in this area of UAVs and the new
technologies in aerial imaging. I am wondering, what do you
see? What do you think 10 years from now those new FFA groups
will be involved in that we don't even, we may not be aware of
it on the horizon, but certainly would be interested in what
you all see as the next technology breakthrough and advancement
in farming?
Mr. Faleide. Just my viewpoints that, my youngest boy is
now in college and my two older boys are mid-30s. But I told
them a few years ago, I said it is up to you guys to figure out
how to take our technology to the next generation, and they are
doing that. They have worked for me and actually, my youngest
is interning with me. It is interesting how the younger
generation is so interested in the social media instant
information, and everybody catches themselves: what is the
answer for that? I will Google it, right? So that generation is
now wanting the data immediately. Our generation tended to say
we could take a while to get that answer. There is no time now
to wait. And so the expectation of the younger generation is
going to require more infrastructure to instantly provide that
data to that young person.
We are working with companies to create persistence
imagery, 24/7 imagery over your field in certain locations of
the country or the world. That generation wants it now, and
that is going to be the main thing is the phone, the mobile
device is a part of their social being. That is what the answer
is going to be in my belief, that they are going to demand
data, and the infrastructure has to be in place. The fiber has
to be in place in the rural areas, or they will not agree with
that policy if it is not done.
Ms. Graham. Thank you. Does anyone else have any ideas? Mr.
Blair?
Mr. Blair. Yes, thank you. Thank you, acting Ranking Member
Graham. I, too, wore the blue jacket and it is exciting to see
these young kids growing up in this time. I grew up on an open
deck tractor pulling clutch and pressing brake on a
Caterpillar, not fun. Those were the good old days.
Today, what we are seeing is an exponential increase of how
technology is evolving. I fought doing e-mails. I liked letters
and phone, face-to-face conversation. Now give me an e-mail. I
fought it, too. Back in the mid-1990s, one of the crop
protection providers sent out freebies. It was a Velcro box.
Open it up, here is our product, and you open the pages, and
here is this robot hovering over the ground sucking up the
weeds. Another one they sent out showed a robot on tracks
picking it up and eating them. We are heading in that
direction. Today, we are taking pictures and videos. Tomorrow,
are we going to be putting lasers on UAVs to spot treat for
disease like fire blight in apples, maybe, or the orange
industry?
We have done flights down there for lettuce, string beans,
and sugarcane, and we believe that technologies like thermal
imaging will get better and that we can look at transpiration
from those crops to detect earlier these disease issues that
affect their quality. So we will be evolving quickly with new
sensors and new platforms.
Ms. Graham. Thank you. My time has expired. It would be
great if we could develop a laser to take out fire ants. That
would be great.
Anyway, I yield back, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all very
much.
Mr. Lucas. As Mr. Blair knows, you have not lived until you
have been on that tractor with the heat coming off the engine
and the exhaust in your face. The good old days.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Rogers, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Blair, Auburn University is in my district. It is a
research university. Engineers and scientists there have been
studying how the data collected by Unmanned Aerial Systems
carrying different types of sensors can be used to improve how
we manage agriculture and forestry. One of the current
limitations in deploying UAS over larger agricultural fields or
forests is a rule that our aircraft must be in view of the
pilot during operation. Now the forestry industry is
significant in Alabama. When flying UAS over forests,
maintaining this line of sight between the pilot and the
aircraft is particularly difficult. What kind of development
work is being done in your industry to alleviate the concerns
of the FAA and ultimately allow the UAS to fly safely beyond
the line of sight?
Mr. Blair. Thank you, Mr. Rogers, for that question. Line
of sight and flying beyond line of sight is very important, not
only for agriculture, but for the natural resource industry as
well, and forestry. Idaho, about 80 percent or around 70
percent are public lands and mountains. We need that beyond
line of sight.
What is being done, the FAA has a pathfinder program, and I
know there are companies working on this beyond line of sight
issue. Right now, the technology can allow and is good enough
to allow for UAVs to already fly safely beyond line of sight.
It comes down to regulations and being able to isolate or
locate areas where we could fly line of sight in commercial
research purposes that can benefit both agriculture and the
forestry industries.
Mr. Rogers. Okay, thanks.
Mr. Crago, given the increasing discussions about
Americans' privacy concerns, how can we be sure that these
systems will maintain American privacy and that the data
collected won't be shared with outside groups?
Mr. Crago. Thanks for the question. Privacy is a big issue,
and I know that it has raised its head in a number of
instances.
In the case of the aerial imagery that is being taken for
the NAIP Program, there is a longstanding rule and protection
of the information within FSA to the extent that I am not aware
of any privacy issues that have ever arisen out of aerial
imagery taken for the NAIP Program at 30,000 or at 20,000.
This imagery is highly technical in nature, and the
distribution of private information as I know the contractual
requirements put on us is extremely well-protected within FSA.
I am not aware of any issues of that nature.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Austin Scott.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
Mr. Blair, we have heard a lot about a number of different
technologies, but they all provide imagery.
How does a farmer know which type of imagery is right for
his or her operation, and what factors should a farmer consider
when deciding on which imagery or how imagery might fit into
their farm?
Mr. Blair. Thank you, Mr. Scott, for that question.
The type and size of imagery is dependent upon the
management style of the farmer and what their goals are. It is
my job to help them figure out what their goals and what their
objectives could be. Are you looking for disease or insects on
leaves? We need higher resolution. If you are looking at
nutrient management, less resolution images can work fine. But
it comes down to our equipment, how can that react, and right
now, all three technologies, satellite, manned aircraft, and
UAVs are collecting good data. We need to get the word out
there on how to utilize it better and for that return on
investment.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. It seems to me that one of the
key factors of the UAV is that the individual farmer has the
control over the time at which the imagery is taken, and that
that would be one of the key differences where they don't have
the control with the other technologies. I may be wrong about
that, but----
Mr. Blair. Yes, Mr. Scott. It is timelier information. We
can fly under the clouds where a lot of times satellite can't
get through. We can put different sensors on there, like
thermal imaging, and collect higher value data in a lot of
instances, and get that higher resolution image of about 2
centimeters. The timing right now, we can cover a lot of
territory and ground. We just need that beyond line of sight
would be very, very helpful to incorporate this technology.
While Part 107 has been useful and is giving us in the
industry some permanency with UAVs, there is still work to be
done and line of sight is one of those.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Crago, why does the NAIP
Program use manned aircraft when we have satellites that can
provide similar imagery, and can you provide us specific
examples where the manned aircraft would be able to provide,
would be a better source for the imagery than the satellites?
Mr. Crago. Well, if you understand the requirements under
the NAIP Program, the NAIP Program is designed for agriculture
crop management. So what that means is that the imagery needs
to be taken when the crops are at their peak. So if you take
the State of Texas, for example. The State of Texas is divided
into four acquisition seasons that are defined by the APFO, and
the window to acquire those seasons ranges from anywhere from 2
weeks to 3 weeks. So what is required is an extreme amount of
capacity to be able to acquire that imagery in an extremely
short period of time. The comparison between satellite
acquisition, which is completely dependent upon the orbit of
the satellite and the timing of it, wouldn't facilitate, or
generally wouldn't facilitate, the ability to acquire that
imagery within that particular growing season. And so in the
case of the NAIP Program, you can see as many as six or seven
aircraft being mobilized to a particular area for a 2 day wet
weather window in the ability to acquire all of south Texas.
And so notwithstanding that, satellite plays a very
valuable role in being able to acquire imagery, but in terms of
being able to address the seasonality of the USDA's
requirements, the only current way of achieving that is fairly
massive manned aircraft sensors that can address that.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you. I am down to 30
seconds, but Mr. Faleide, you have been in this business a long
time, and one of the issues that we wrestle with today with
data is who owns the data? And I would be interested in your
opinion on who you think should own the data, and whether or
not there is a difference between satellite imagery and UAV
imagery, and who should own the data?
Mr. Faleide. Well, thank you. Let me start with those
different platforms. These UAV aerial and satellite are just
platforms for a camera. Each one has different abilities
occurring at different resolutions. Like Mr. Crago said, there
are airplanes that come in and specifically target at high
resolution. Satellites will come in more commonplace and see
general areas. Now the satellite infrastructure is improving
rapidly, but you have to put satellites in the category right
now is the best I can get on a satellite right now is 31
centimeters. It is going to move to 25 centimeters, up to 30
meter resolution, depending on what you want. Airplanes fit in
the category of about 6" resolution to approximately 1 to 2
meter resolution, depending on how you scale your lenses. UAVs
will be in the 1 millimeter range to about 6" level. So each
one has its own category, so it depends on what you want to do.
The more infrastructure of satellites that come in, you are
going to see more infrastructure.
Now as for privacy, the common rule of thumb is if I can't
identify your face and know who you are, if you are just an
object that is there, I have not gone past the privacy issue
and the idea of who owns the data, we have taken the opinion
that whoever pays for that data owns that, as long as I don't
enter into your privacy situation. But once I can identify you,
then I am going into a different realm and that can be
problematic.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. My time has expired.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the Vice Chairman of the full
Committee from Texas, Mr. Neugebauer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This device I have
in my hand here would be a flashlight if it wasn't for the
applications that are attached to it, and so one of the things
I was wondering is Mr. Lucas and I sit on the Financial
Services Committee, and we have seen a lot of interesting
technology take place in that sector, and what was done is that
there have been a lot of applications developed for financial
products. But we have a bigger sector of potential users.
I guess one of the questions I would have this morning is
as the technology with UAV or satellite resolution, all that,
as that is getting better, are they keeping up with the
technology, and I will let whoever wants to jump on that first.
Yes, sir?
Mr. Faleide. Yes, I believe it is. At the beginning, based
on the lower resolution imagery that we could pull in from
satellite, we could look at a pattern within a field about
every, let's say, 100, and bring that down to a level to
control a 30, 50 applicator. Okay? And now with the higher
resolutions, the industry is looking at while there is more
data here, we are now able to boom control where we can split a
boom, a 130 sprayer from the green machine would maybe have
about nine to eleven sections. I can change those sections.
Other companies are also bringing in nozzle control where the
planters are going down to individual row units to variable
rate that, or sections that requires higher resolution. So the
more infrastructure that the OEMs and the machinery companies
can start splitting these equipment into different rates, it
requires higher and higher resolution imagery.
So I believe the industry is adapting well. It is maybe not
as fast as I want it, but it is adapting. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Mr. Crago?
Mr. Crago. What we see is really two movements in it, and
the first one is the standard type app that you would download
onto your phone and operate on your phone. And to some extent,
there are some, at least, visualization capabilities coming in
that area.
But equally important or possibly more important is cloud
type where the iPhone or your smartphone is used to access some
activity in the cloud, and that activity may be some form of
remote sensing interpretation. So it could be different bands
or spectrums of the imagery that is acquired, or things like
change detection where it is comparing one vintage of imagery
to another. There clearly is movement down, literally on the
app on the unit, but maybe more importantly in the cloud where
the handheld unit is used to access that through the cloud. It
is moving, yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes. Mr. Blair?
Mr. Blair. Thank you for the question.
Applications are keeping up with the technology. Japan has
been using a helicopter to spray for almost 30 years. We are
just being able to do that here in the United States. The
regulations aren't keeping up. That is what is not keeping up
with the technology. Government programs are not keeping up
with the technology either. We have a great opportunity,
especially with UAVs, not only to do spot spraying applications
after doing a flight and gathering that information. We have an
opportunity to do crop adjusting, being able to gather that
high resolution imagery to not only pinpoint the areas that
have been damaged, but to hopefully assess where that damage is
and how severe that it is.
So is our data engineered for Measure? In a 10 minute
period when we were on the phone talking, he created a
functionality in our software deliverable of just being able to
put points on a map as I am viewing that I can go out and
scout. It is moving fast.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, I know several of my colleagues have
brought up the line of sight thing, but I think that is a very
important part of it. Particularly when you take in my
district, for example, we have farmers that are farming 5,000,
10,000 acres, and for example, a UAV to be effective on that,
rather than following the UAV around in your pickup, being able
to program that UAV to go do a particular mission and come back
and, I guess, download that information. The same way with the
ranching, in my district we have ranches that are 20,000-30,000
acres, and so if you are going to have the digital cowboy that
is going to ride the fence, you are going to have to be able to
program that.
So what are some of the things that might be inhibiting the
use of that technology, and what would be the message to this
Committee?
Mr. Blair. Well, one of the things is the regulations. We
need to have beyond line of sight for natural resource use.
Agriculture is not populated. You are not flying over a lot of
people. We can fly safely and have flown safely. I have been
UAV since 2006, and have not had an incident with any aircraft.
It comes down to communication, and that is very easy. I am
going to be talking to the crop duster who is going to be
flying that low.
The other one is we do need our agencies to be proactive as
well in promoting this technology. How are we going to be using
it? Thermal imaging to identify cattle, for identifying cattle
rustlers in snow storms. I have had phone calls on a lot of
these over the years. We haven't scratched the surface because
we haven't had the regulatory certainty, and beyond line of
sight is one of the most crucial rules that needs to be gone
after for agriculture.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Lucas. The gentleman's time has expired. I would note
to my colleagues that in the line, we have Mr. Gibbs, then Mr.
LaMalfa, then Mr. Allen. With that, I turn to the gentleman
from Ohio for 5 minutes, Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks for this
hearing. It is a very interesting topic, as we know technology
happens fast and regulation of public policy lags. You have
said that.
One thing, I am also serving on the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee, and talking about drones and stuff,
and it seems to me it is a no-brainer. Out in the rural area,
far away from airports, the line of sight shouldn't even be an
issue, especially if they are talking 400. What is the maximum
altitude you really need for a drone to work well to do what we
are talking about here?
Mr. Blair. Well right now, 400, that is really good. To
cover acres we could fly higher, but it comes down to what
resolution do you need? If we start flying the UAV higher, is
that the most efficient way or do we go to satellite or manned
aircraft as the most efficient?
Mr. Gibbs. I guess that may be my next question. The three
components, your satellite, aerial, and drone, and I would
think the drone, as a farmer, if I need real time data today,
if I think I have a problem out in my bean crop or whatever,
the drone would make a lot of sense, probably. I know the
aerial is a wider spot. I guess that is the question I have. My
understanding, the technology is adapting where we can go out
and using these three technologies and determine insect
infestation, disease, that is correct, right? I don't think
anybody has said anything about yield. Can we determine
possible yields through this technology?
Mr. Blair. Yes, we are able to predict yield with some
certainty. There are a lot of things that can affect it. I
don't talk about yield because that brings in a whole----
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, I know. I am going there next. I am going
there next, but it has helped me improve my yields because I
have had better information.
Mr. Blair. Yes.
Mr. Gibbs. Have I been able to predict, no. That is why I
use a yield monitor to give me that actual value.
Mr. Blair. Well, I guess that----
Mr. Gibbs. I am going to the 50,000 question, the macro
question. Is the technology moving towards where through the
aerial or whatever where an entity could come and fly over a
wide area of Iowa or whatever and kind of get a good handle in
August, September, what that corn crop is going to be? Because
USDA has crop production reports and we see what the markets
use them and that speculation. So is the technology moving that
way? Will that be actually feasibly possible?
Mr. Blair. Yes, and with the different technologies out
there, if you incorporate images and we create this database
over time to understand what we are seeing in those images at
the different resolutions, along with using weather data, there
is a lot of very good electronic weather data out there as
well, and when you incorporate those two together, we should be
able to do some very, very good predictive predictions on
yields for agriculture, for NASS reporting, on down the line.
Mr. Gibbs. So that is really going to be a big public
policy question, because that does give an entity the
possibility to get real-time data ahead of anybody else, and it
could affect the markets. It is just an interesting policy
question that I don't think anybody has really discussed yet.
Obviously, the technology is coming, since I started
farming in the mid-1970s, the changes are just immense, and it
is just incredible. It is like the technology builds on itself.
Mr. Chairman, the way this technology goes, it is hard for the
public policy to stay with it, but in this aspect, there are a
lot of aspects that we have to adopt this technology or we will
fall back globally, because I am sure that is another aspect of
it. Where do you see it happening in like Brazil with their
bean crop? What do you see happening with our competitors?
Mr. Blair. Well, I have been fortunate to travel and visit
a lot of these countries and talk with farmers and researchers.
They are outpacing us on adoption of the technology because
they have had to. Their economies and some of those factors
that are forcing them to look at their margins, technology is
allowing them to stay profitable.
We have had it good as farmers in the United States and
haven't really had to look at this until now when the commodity
prices are dropping.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes.
Mr. Blair. Now we are turning to this technology, what can
it do? It becomes more attractive, but those challenges are
there. We need to push this forward to be more competitive with
our competing countries.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you. Thanks for being here. Thank you, and
I yield back.
Mr. Neugebauer [presiding.] I thank the gentleman. Now the
gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Blair, I appreciate you and the whole panel being here
today. My question is pointed at you here first.
I enjoyed some time on a D8 slide bar track layer during my
formative years, cutting teeth on tractors as well, and the
first pass over the fields is a nice one there. There is not
much dust to deal with, but that second or third one, that is
the tougher deal. So I relate to that totally.
Let me touch on: I missed part of the testimony getting
here, but the FAA with their rules released, what do you see
are the latitude that you have, or is there more latitude
needed with the FAA rules that are in place? We have FFA in
here now. FAA rules that are in place, and do you see the
latitude in order to do the work that needs to be done using
the UAV technology?
Mr. Blair. Thank you for that question. I mess up FAA, FFA
a lot over the years. That is a tongue twister, so I am right
there with you.
Part 107 is a great start. It allows us to be more
flexible. We no longer have to try for exemptions to operate
commercially, but there are still areas that can be improved.
One of them is being able to fly in restricted air space.
Agriculture land doesn't know boundaries in the air. It goes
right into restricted air space. In the last 2 years, we have
been trying to fly for one of the larger wheat growing
companies in the world to no avail. We have lost a generation's
worth of data because of we could not fly inside there.
What do I mean by that? Last year, we had the worst drought
since 1977, a generation ago, and we couldn't collect that data
on drought tolerant varieties. So those processes need to be
more responsive for agriculture to----
Mr. LaMalfa. Is the FAA rule the one that precludes the
restricted air space, or is this more you are talking military
bases that already have this in place?
Mr. Blair. No, this is for restricted air space. You still
have to file to fly inside these restricted areas, that 5
mile----
Mr. LaMalfa. Is it because of the FAA rule or because of
military rule?
Mr. Blair. FAA rule.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Blair. And some of the other things beyond line of
sight is another issue that we need to address, and also make
it easier for UAV operators to do aerial application.
Right now, what the exemptions have done is try to shoehorn
UAVs into existing regulations instead of creating their own,
and Part 107 has not addressed Part 137, which is aerial
application.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. I wanted to touch on, you might call it
privacy or a lot of things. When you use your own UAV on your
own stuff or you have a contractor doing it for you at your
request, do you see the FAA rule allowing for some type of
prosecution or restriction of people basically poaching, like
you might have an extremist group that wants to come look at
your junk pile or see what you are doing with your water, or
how you are managing your chemical containers? Flying over your
place, screwing around, looking at that stuff. Do you see
enough teeth in that to be able to keep people from snooping
around your property?
Mr. Blair. Well, right now I can drive down a road, take my
iPhone out, and take a picture. There is nothing to stop me
from doing that. I can be in a manned aircraft, hot air
balloon, ultralight and take the same pictures and it is not an
issue. But because of the negative connotation of the word
drone, now all of a sudden using that iPhone has become an
issue. But to address the example, there is a concern,
especially in the agriculture industry of certain groups and
sectors using this information maliciously. How do we stop
that? The laws and regulations should not be around the UAV,
but it is the use of the information.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. Just for my own info, what is the lowest
elevation someone can fly over your place in this scenario?
Mr. Blair. With a UAV, you mean?
Mr. LaMalfa. Yes.
Mr. Blair. I do not believe they can, well, we cannot fly
over someone's property without their permission, and will not,
and I am not certain of that low altitude.
Mr. LaMalfa. Is a frontier justice allowed if you find
somebody flying over your place?
Mr. Blair. In the words of one of my elected officials long
ago, ``Shoot, shovel, and shut up'' so I am sure that will
happen.
You are going to see those instances. People are going to
do some crazy things out there. In my state, people have shot
at manned helicopters.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. I will yield back. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman, and now the
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
joining us today. I am going to kind of present this to all
three of you and get your comments on it.
Of course, I grew up on a farm and it was a little
different back then, but I did have an experience in my
district to plow a couple of rows or plant a couple of rows of
peanuts, and we cranked up the computer and we planted 14" over
from the year before, basically, and I didn't know exactly why
we did that, and I also did not touch the steering wheel during
this process. And I tell you what it made me think about is
from a business experience now we use technology in the
construction industry to accomplish a lot of the same things we
are doing in agriculture as far as equipment and how to use
that equipment efficiently. I will tell you one of the most
difficult decisions that we had every year in the construction
business was: how much do we invest in this? Because it always
seemed like I said we are not going to spend any more on this,
and then the next year, okay, we got to buy this. We have to
have this. And then, of course, trying to justify the
investment, and then what is that going to yield? What is that
going to do to my bottom line, and what is that going to do to
my longevity as far as this business is concerned?
The third thing is the fact that this Subcommittee and this
Committee is here to promote not only what you are doing, but
agriculture, and what is it that we can do, and maybe you can
think about this and file something like a report on just what
we can do in the next, well, maybe this Congress to help you
accomplish some of these goals that you have, and as I like to
term it, get the Federal Government out of your way.
So we will start right here.
Mr. Faleide. Very good comment, sir. The industry has
focused on hardware, like you were mentioning when is that
device going to be antiquated? And that is a tangible object,
and it is very easy to put value to that. What has been very
difficult to put value to is the data itself. We are now
seeing, and a good friend of mine who worked with us and
started some of this, Gary Wagner out of Crookston, Minnesota,
one of the pioneers of precision ag. In his presentations years
ago, he said this data is so important, it is going to put
value to my land. Some day this data is going to and with the
land sale, because that history of that data, that device that
captured it is long gone, no value. So now the intangible data
now becomes tangible. And so it is very important that we start
looking at information as the value point, not the device, not
whether it came from what color a machine or anything.
What your latter part of your question about what can we do
as a government, the key is to make sure that the regulations
allow that flow of data to not be restricted and to make sure
that the infrastructure is in place that the data can flow,
just like I said before about the fiber optic infrastructure.
We have to have those kind of infrastructures to make data flow
very easily and also very economically. So that if the
government can help in that process, I think that is a good
move for the future.
Mr. Allen. Okay, very good.
Mr. Crago. Yes, I agree completely. I think that the value
of the data is not being fully recognized yet, and in my
particular world with respect to the NAIP Program, the ability
of everyone, farmers, government regulators, to have access to
this open data is of paramount importance, and equally
important is the maintenance of the legacy data and bringing it
forward with current data. The value of being able to analyze
the past with the present and predicting into the future in a
lot of the things that my colleagues here have said is key, and
having that data open and having it widely available is
essential to this, to the process. Yes.
Mr. Allen. Mr. Blair, you have 1 second. Sorry.
Mr. Blair. Thank you. Real quick, risk management is the
key. Using the technology to do crop insurance, we need to work
on that, both for adjusting and on the severity of the claim
and the area of the claim.
Mr. Allen. Also lenders, right? I mean, as far as you know,
you have crop investment and you have the lender, and then you
have the crop insurance. But this information would be
invaluable to lenders to be able to justify loaning the money,
wouldn't it?
Mr. Blair. Yes, it helps, how I view this, if we
incorporate the technology, the grower is doing a better job at
averting risk. The grower should actually get a premium
reduction because he is making those weather and management
decisions right there. If I am utilizing this technology on my
farm, why do I have to pay the same premium as my neighbor, and
I have less risk in the insurance industry?
Beyond line of sight and then Internet infrastructure as
well.
Mr. Allen. Okay.
Mr. Blair. Thank you.
Mr. Allen. I yield back.
Mr. Neugebauer. I thank the gentleman.
This has been a very informative hearing, and a very
important hearing, because one of the things that we know is
there are a lot of challenges for agriculture today. Farmers
are competing in a global marketplace that is maybe not always
on a level playing field, dealing with weather and other
factors. Obviously, we want to make sure that our producers
have all the tools that they need to be as competitive as they
can, and more importantly, to be economically viable. With the
prices we are seeing right now, yield becomes a very important
part of having a successful farming operation.
I thank our witnesses today. One of the things that I
always want to encourage our witnesses is that you come up here
and give us almost an hour and a half of your time, and I know
the preparation that you put in requires additional time. We
appreciate that. I would hope that this is an ongoing dialogue,
because we want to make sure that we are facilitating this
technology and this tool and making it as an effective tool as
we can for our producers.
Before I adjourn the Committee, I would yield to the acting
Ranking Member for any comments.
Ms. Graham. I just want to echo what you just said, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you very much.
I have such a respect for folks who are willing to come up
here and help us understand these issues in a greater way, and
I know it takes a lot of time and so just thank you very much.
It was very interesting, and we learned a lot, and we will take
this information and you will help us do our jobs better, so it
is very much appreciated.
Mr. Neugebauer. Under the rules of the Committee, the
record of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days
to receive additional material and supplemental written
responses from the witnesses to any questions posed by a
Member. This hearing of the Subcommittee on General Farm
Commodities and Risk Management is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Statement by Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, a Representative
in Congress from Arkansas; on Behalf of Andrew D. Moore, Executive
Director, National Agricultural Aviation Association
June 30, 2016

Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford,
Chairman,
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk Management,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
Introduction
[The] National Agricultural Aviation Association appreciates this
opportunity to submit comments to the record on the recent hearing held
June 23, 2016 by the House of Representatives' Committee on
Agriculture, Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and risk
Management titled ``Big Data and Agriculture: Innovation in the Air.''
Since 2005 the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has been
working to develop a regulatory framework to integrate unmanned
aircraft systems (UAS) into the National Airspace System (NAS). In 2012
those efforts were doubled following the passage of the Federal
Aviation Modernization and Reform Act (P.L. 112-95), which has
culminated in the now-finalized small UAS rule, the first step in the
``integration'' phase, as outlined by the FAA's UAS roadmap. Throughout
this process the National Agricultural Aviation Association (NAAA) has
been engaged in informing the FAA of our safety concerns with UAS and
potential uses of UAS in the agricultural aviation industry.
NAAA works to support the agricultural aviation industry which is
made up of small businesses and pilots that use aircraft to aid farmers
in producing a safe, affordable and abundant supply of food, fiber and
biofuel, in addition to protecting forestry and controlling health-
threatening pests. In NAAA's communications with FAA's UAS Integration
Office, NAAA has stressed that above all else UAS, particularly small
UAS (sUAS), need to be identifiable, visible and safely operated to
agricultural aviators (ag aviators) given agricultural aviation is one
of the sectors of general aviation whose missions are performed as low
as 10 above ground level and usually not above 500 when ferrying to a
field to treat a crop or forest.
NAAA urges the Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk
Management to consider the great risk that accompanies UAS integration
into the NAS should the FAA not increase safety precautions for UAS,
and to support the safety provisions outlined below.
Importance of Aerial Application Industry
NAAA consists of over 1,900 members, and represents the interests
of small business owners and pilots licensed as commercial applicators
that use aircraft to enhance the production of food, fiber, and
biofuel; protect forestry; protect waterways, pastureland, and
ranchland from invasive species; and control health-threatening pests,
including mosquitos that spread West Nile virus and Zika virus. Almost
20 percent of crop protection product applications to commercial
farmland are made aerially. As a result, NAAA estimates that 71 million
acres of cropland are treated via aerial application in the U.S. each
year. This does not include pastureland, rangeland, forestry-land and
other areas also treated via aerial application. Aerial applications
are often the only, or most economical method for timely pesticide
application. Additionally, aerial application is conducive to higher
crop yields, as it is non-disruptive to the crop and causes no soil
compaction, thus improving soil health and crop yields. This results in
more food and fiber being produced using less land, allowing the land
to be repurposed for other uses, including habitat preservation for
endangered and/or threatened plant, animal, and aquatic species
beneficial to the environment, and for preserving vegetative ecosystems
important to the sequestration of carbon and water purifying wetlands.
Because of the importance of the aerial application industry, it is
vital a safe, low-level airspace exists to ensure these pilots can
continue to do their jobs safely. Ensuring safe low-level airspace
includes minimizing obstructions which are difficult to be seen and
identified by the pilots. In addition to aerial application operations,
aircraft users of low-level airspace include: Emergency Medical
Services (EMS), air tanker firefighting aircraft and their lead
aircraft; power line and pipeline patrol aircraft; power line
maintenance helicopters; fish and wildlife service aircraft; animal
control aircraft (USDA-APHIS-ADC); military helicopter and fixed-wing
operations; seismic operations (usually helicopters); livestock roundup
(ranching or animal relocation); aircraft GIS mapping of cropland for
noxious weed populations and the like; and others.
Safety Recommendations
NAAA understands that UAS will be used for crop sensing as another
tool to make precision applications and scout for livestock, among
other uses, joining satellite and manned aircraft that also perform
these services.
A January NAAA survey found that about three percent of NAAA
members have begun to use UAS at their operations, and nearly 15
percent are looking into using UAS. Moreover, the world's largest
agricultural aircraft manufacturer and NAAA member--Air Tractor--has
purchased a UAS company and will be looking into their use to aide
aerial applicators to perform crop-sensing and aerial imaging services.
But NAAA believes it's vitally important to both the manned and
unmanned aviation industries to integrate UAS safely into the NAS to
prevent tragic loss of life and prevent backlash against UAS from the
public.
Birds provide an apt example of what could happen if a drone hits a
manned aircraft. According to a joint report by the FAA and the U.S.
Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service
(USDA-APHIS), between 1990 and 2012 over 131,000 wildlife strikes
occurred with civil aircraft, 97 percent of which were the result of
collisions with birds, with 25 resulting in fatalities.
It doesn't take a very large bird to do significant damage to an
airplane. As the photo here indicates, a turkey vulture, which has an
average weight range of between 1.8 to 5.1 pounds can break through an
ag aircraft windshield. Even smaller birds such as a mallard duck have
broken through ag aircraft windshield and that species of waterfowl
only weighs 1.6-3.5 pounds.\1\ NAAA especially fears what will happen
if a sUAS weighing as much as 55 pounds traveling at 100 mph--both
allowed under FAA's finalized UAS operations rule, Part 107--will do to
an agricultural aircraft when much smaller birds are known to do
significant damage. Birds consist of hollow bones, feathers, sinew and
muscle, whereas UAS are made of more solid materials, particularly the
batteries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Fowl Play: Aviation Bird Strikes Could be a Harbinger of
Things to Come Once UAVs Are Approved for Agriculture,'' Agricultural
Aviation. May-June [2014]. Pages 12-15. (see Appendix). Editor's note:
the article referred to has been retained in Committee file. It can
also be found at: http://www.agaviationmagazine.org/
agriculturalaviation/20140506?pg=14#pg14.

Above: Luckily, operator Steve Fletcher only sustained minor
injuries when a turkey vulture blew out the cockpit window of
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
his Air Tractor 802 while he was flying.

NAAA is concerned that the widespread use of UAS as projected in
agricultural areas without devices that allow ag aviators to track and
see these aircraft will result in incidents similar to bird strikes,
which can ultimately prove fatal. Not only could this result in harm
and death for agricultural pilots and chemical spills resulting in
environmental endangerment, but it could also result in a black eye for
the promising UAS industry.
The agricultural aviation industry places a great amount of
importance on the ability to see and avoid obstructions and other
aircraft in the airspace in which they operate. While this principal is
the backbone of safety for our industry and all air traffic operating
under visual flight rules (VFR), it can only be utilized effectively
when all aircraft do their part in sensing and avoiding other aircraft
and, hence, avoiding collisions.
The necessary technology to allow UAS to ``sense and avoid'' other
aircraft has yet to be proven commercially viable. NAAA believes until
this technology is developed, UAS operators in agricultural areas
should be required to be equipped with strobe lights on the UAS itself,
and, to assist with identification of UAS operating areas, on the UAS
operator's ground vehicle. Automatic Dependent Surveillance-Broadcast
(ADS-B) Out technology is a key component of the FAA's Next Generation
Air Transport System (NextGen) that allows the identification of
aircraft based on transponder and GPS signals, and allows nearby
aircraft with the proper reading equipment to identify their exact
location. Proven, ADS-B-like systems designed for UAS are currently on
the market and should also be a requirement for UAS in agricultural
areas, allowing low-level manned aircraft to identify them. These units
weigh as little as 300 grams and cost as little as $1,200. An ag
aviator equipped with ADS-B In technology in his cockpit would be
informed of a UAS in his vicinity, then he would know to look for an
aircraft, such as a UAS, that should also be equipped with a strobe,
outside of the cockpit. This would then enable him the necessary
information to then sense and avoid the object.
NAAA also believes the FAA should require that UAS in agricultural
areas be painted in colors which make them readily distinguishable from
the background. This, coupled with an ADS-B-like system and visible
lighting, will greatly improve our pilots' ability to protect
themselves from potentially deadly UAVs.
NAAA was pleased to see Part 107 will continue to require UAS to
give way to manned aircraft, and believe this practice should continue
to ensure human safety. NAAA is concerned, however, that FAA has set a
low-bar for entry for UAS operators by not requiring that they
demonstrate the ability to safely operate a UAS, or that they be
certified pilots well versed in the safe function of our national air
space. Moreover, NAAA believes that UAS should be certified to be
safely manufactured and maintained like agricultural aircraft and other
manned aircraft must be.
Conclusion
NAAA's goal is to ensure a continued safe operating environment for
aerial applicators and UAS users throughout the UAS integration
process. Given that crop sensing and aerial photography are among the
top growth areas for UAS, we believe it is vital that the future fleet
of unmanned aircraft are marked and piloted by responsible,
knowledgeable professionals.
NAAA urges the Subcommittee to support future UAS safety efforts to
prevent future accidents that would setback the UAS industry for years
to come.
Thank you, and please feel free to contact me if you have any
questions.
Sincerely,
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Andrew D. Moore.
Executive Director.
______

Submitted Statement by Christopher C. Dombrowski, Ph.D., Chief
Technology Officer, TerrAvion, Inc., San Leandro, CA
Innovation in Aerial Imagery and How It Can Be Useful to Farmers
TerrAvion helps farms take a high tech approach to improving yield
and revenue, with the first cloud-based, next day aerial imaging and
data analytics service for agriculture. From small family farms, to the
largest agribusinesses, TerrAvion provides producers with images and
data that accurately detail the conditions of every acre, allowing
farmers to identify problems before they can impact yield. As we move
into the future, with our ever growing population, we will have to rely
on precision agriculture, and just plain farm smarter.
Our company began with our founder and CEO Robert Morris, who
served in U.S. Army as the Tactical Unmanned Aerial (TUAV) Platoon
Leader in Afghanistan. The platoon was the first of its kind in
Afghanistan, and helped uncover critical intelligence that altered the
course of a number of strategically important operations. When he
returned to civilian life, in 2012, a farmer friend said to him, ``You
ran a drone platoon in the army. I need to see all of my crops every
week. Can I use drones for that?'' The friend was not able to survey
the entirety of his fields in the time he had. It was the same problem
that the army had solved with drones and stealth aircraft.
Robert explored the market and quickly ascertained that, as useful
as drones can be, they would not provide a scalable, and affordable,
service to the people that needed it most, the farmers. The other
option of plane-based imagery was available, but they charged $6-$15
per acre, per pass (fly by), and the imagery was not sent for weeks!
Not only was the cost prohibitive, the delay in receiving the imagery
caused the data captured to be too out of date for anything but a few,
limited uses.
Due to his time in the military, Robert know that it was possible
to deliver imagery much more quickly. Our imagery is available next
day, and we are working on cutting that time down. He ultimately
decided to partner with an expert in computer imagery and equipped
light aircraft with the hardware necessary to collect large amounts of
data and deliver it to TerrAvion's servers in real time, where it could
be packaged and sent to individual clients. For far less than the cost
both in time, and capital of procuring a drone, or drone service, a
producer can subscribe to TerrAvion's cloud-based service and not have
to worry about the extra management. Electric drone collection uses 20
times more labor per acre than TerrAvion. This model simply doesn't
work for growers who are trying to control costs or for a populous
expected to reach nearly 10(9) billion people by 2050. Last year
TerrAvion collected more acres per week than all electric drones
combined did in a year. With TerrAvion, the farmer can focus on their
farm.
TerrAvion's core focus is to provide growers with high quality
aerial imagery that is current and actionable. For most of our
customers this means imagery delivered once per week within 24 hours of
capture. By cutting down the time it takes between gathering the data,
and putting it in the farmer's hands, we allow them to act on the
imagery in a meaningful way. With our subscription based plan, we can
take more images and avoid weather and time constraints that affect
other services, namely drones and satellites. The high frequency of
flights gives the grower the ability to rapidly detect issues and
target problem areas in the fields, as well as monitor the efficacy of
different fertilizers, pesticides, seeds, etc. While about 90% of our
customers sign up for annual subscriptions we are also provide single
and multishot services for a variety of needs and purposes. As we
continue to grow we will apply our services to the crop insurance
adjustment sector. In the past, we have provided our customers with
timely imagery of their crops after disasters such as wildfires or
flooding. This information allowed them to document damages and
calculate the acreage affected, a useful tool for farmers and insurance
companies alike.
Our current offerings can be summed up by the following list:

Visible imagery:

Provides overview of entire operation in one image.

Directly comparable to what would be seen on the
ground.

Directed scouting, where to focus manpower, where you
don't need to check.

IR:

Color Infrared, a traditional imaging technique allows
for rapid detection and assessment of vegetation.

NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) allows
for the assessment of plant health and vitality.

Thermal:

Water management, leaks and plant growth associated
with leaks have a strong signature in the Thermal Band.

Stressed plants can be distinguished from non-stressed
plants easily in the Thermal Band.

Analytics:

Through image processing useful information can be
extracted into tabular form. Vegetation mean, planted
acreage, quality variation, et cetera.

This tabular data can easily be compared, field to
field, region to region, or track a crop through time.

Big Data:

Our data can be combined with other GIS ready data
such as weather, soil chemistry, irrigation data, treatment
regimens, et cetera.

Analysis and planning can be done combining all
available data.

These offerings lead me to point another advantage of the precision
agriculture movement, and of TerrAvion in particular. We manage all of
the technological burden. We collect and process the data and make it
deliverable through a standard web browser or mobile application. All
we require from a customer is the location and geometry of the area
they need flown and when. Our API is fully supported and has already
been integrated with several of the largest agricultural retailers in
the U.S., allowing our customers to quickly, and easily, access their
imagery in existing management systems.
TerrAvion provides full documentation and training programs, free
of charge, to teach growers who are not used to using aerial imagery so
that they may manage their crops more efficiently. This support
provides a tremendous value to the grower and reduces a primary barrier
to entry into the usage of aerial photography. While we provide some
analytics, and that amount is growing, TerrAvion knows that technology
is not going to replace farmers, or their personal knowledge. We seek
to provide them the support they need to move forward in a rapidly
changing world. In our minds, we work for the growers.
Because of all of the reasons listed above, growers can farm
smarter. Aerial imagery allows for farmers to target problems areas,
drastically reducing labor costs as well as other inputs. The extra
time provides farmers the ability to improve the entirety of their
field, increasing yield, while decreasing their investments. With our
service a grower can view the entirety of their crops in one place and
have confidence that the choices they are making are accomplishing
results.
As recently as 5 years ago, what we do would not have been possible
at a large scale. The speed of image processing and cloud computing has
made this service accessible to every grower. Sensors are constantly
evolving, giving farmers more and more insight into the plants they see
every day. With our plane-based systems we have the ability to add more
sensors to our collection at a minuscule increase in cost. And now, we
can do this at a resolution that is competitive, or better than drones
and satellites at lower cost that is better or competitive.

What makes TerrAvion different/unique among aerial imagery options?
Among other mapping and technology options?

High revisit and up to date images.

Rapid delivery of imagery. We strive for 24 hour turnaround
from capture to delivery to the customer.

Subscription-based service. Cost is for a season of up to
date images, not per pass. 90% of our customers use annual
subscription, about 10% do single or up to three passes.

Cost and scalability are unbeatable.

Easy integration with other management systems.

Our company is built on serving the needs of farmers/the
market and not on technology/silicon valley hype, that being
said we are always innovating.

We have the ability to survey large areas for insurance
adjusting after natural disasters

What new, innovative practices is TerrAvion employing?

Distributed collection brings collection costs down.

Cloud-based storage, processing, and delivery reduces
infrastructure overhead bringing costs down.

Distributed labor force allows for 24 hour coverage and
overnight delivery.

Image processing and analytics as a service.

How is this different from something farmers could get 5 years ago?
10 years ago? 20 years ago?

Speed of collection and rate of delivery.

Cloud computing has allowed for the processing and delivery
of data on a scale what would have been cost prohibitive even 5
years ago.

Sensor size has dramatically increased while costs have
decreased in the past 20 years.

Competitive or better resolutions than satellite and drones.

What challenges for farmers can be mitigated by using TerrAvion?

Directed scouting, documentation, and overall labor
reduction.

Crop management: problem detection (pest, disease, water,
etc.), yield prediction, side by side trial comparisons,
informed decision making.

Big data analytics.

[all]
