- HEARING TO HIGHLIGHT RESEARCH INNOVATIONS ACHIEVED BY OUR NATION'S AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING TO HIGHLIGHT RESEARCH
INNOVATIONS ACHIEVED BY OUR NATION'S
AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
BIOTECHNOLOGY, HORTICULTURE, AND RESEARCH

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-27

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
96-879PDF                   WASHINGTON: 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JEFF DENHAM, California              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETE AGUILAR, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MIKE BOST, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

______

Scott C. Graves, Staff Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research

RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington,
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                Ranking Minority Member
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
JEFF DENHAM, California              JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan          GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Davis, Hon. Rodney, a Representative in Congress from Illinois,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
DelBene, Hon. Suzan K., a Representative in Congress from
Washington, opening statement..................................     4

Witnesses

Hauser, Ph.D., Robert J., Dean, College of Agricultural, Consumer
and Environmental Science, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL..     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
Suplementary material........................................    61
Moyer, Ph.D., James W., Associate Dean for Research, College of
Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences, Washington
State University; Director, Agricultural Research Center,
Pullman, WA....................................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Brashears, Ph.D., Mindy M., Professor of Food Safety and Public
Health, Texas Tech University; Director, International Center
for Food Industry Excellence, Lubbock, TX......................    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Heithaus, Ph.D., Michael R., Associate Dean, College of Arts and
Sciences, Florida International University; Executive Director,
School of Environment, Arts and Society, North Miami, FL.......    25
Prepared statement...........................................    27
Lacy, Ph.D., Michael P., Professor and Department Head,
Department of Poultry Science, University of Georgia, Athens,
GA.............................................................    33
Prepared statement...........................................    35
Buhler, Ph.D., Douglas D., Senior Associate Dean for Research,
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Michigan State
University; Director, MSU AgBioResearch, East Lansing, MI......    37
Prepared statement...........................................    39
Suplementary material........................................    61

HEARING TO HIGHLIGHT RESEARCH
INNOVATIONS ACHIEVED BY OUR NATION'S
AGRICULTURAL COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

----------

TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 29, 2015

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:06 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Rodney
Davis [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Davis, Thompson, Scott,
Gibson, Denham, Yoho, Moolenaar, Newhouse, Conaway (ex
officio), DelBene, McGovern, Kuster, Graham, and Peterson (ex
officio).
Staff present: Haley Graves, Jessica Carter, John Goldberg,
Mary Nowak, Mollie Wilken, Stephanie Addison, Faisal Siddiqui,
John Konya, Anne Simmons, Keith Jones, Liz Friedlander, Nicole
Scott, and Carly Reedholm.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. RODNEY DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM ILLINOIS

The Chairman. This hearing of the Subcommittee on
Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research to highlight research
innovations achieved by our nation's agricultural colleges and
universities, will come to order.
I would like to first welcome everybody. I will offer my
opening statement here momentarily too. I apologize for being
somewhat late. One of those few occasions here where the
elevators weren't working too well in the Longworth Building,
and in order to try and save one of my--well, some of us.
Actually, I was trying to save, Mr. Chairman, one of your
fellow Texas colleagues who was stuck with a little bit of the
elevator door open. Note to self, don't stick your finger in
there. I almost lost it. But Kevin Brady is doing fine, so he
is okay. So my apologies and my excuse because the Chairman,
Mr. Conaway, always like to start hearings on time and I don't
want him to take away my gavel. So thank you again for coming,
and I would like to begin with my opening statement.
Good morning. Again, I would like to welcome everybody
here. This is the third in a series of hearings highlighting ag
research, extension, and education programs for this
Subcommittee. On April 14, we had the honor of hosting Deputy
Secretary of Agriculture Harden, along with 17 bright and
gifted young people involved in the 4-H Program. These young
men and women spoke to us about the need and opportunity to
build a coalition of urban and rural youth to enhance
agricultural knowledge across our nation. Then on July 15, the
full Agriculture Committee held a historic hearing involving
the presidents of all 19 1890 land-grant universities in order
to commemorate the 125th anniversary of the enactment of the
Second Morrill Act. This Act, like its predecessor in 1862,
contributed to our nation's capacity to conduct research in
support of agricultural production through the creation of
land-grant universities.
Since that time, we have added to our capacity by providing
land-grant status to designated tribal colleges in 1994, and
quasi-land-grant status to cooperative forestry colleges under
the McIntire-Stennis Act, our nation's veterinary colleges
under the Animal Health and Disease Capacity and Infrastructure
Program, and most recently Hispanic-serving agricultural
colleges and universities in 2008.
We have likewise recognized the investment in agricultural
research capacity in numerous unaffiliated colleges and
universities, and have authorized funding to further augment
capacity and infrastructure at these designated non-land-grant
colleges of ag. Together, this system of agricultural colleges
and universities provides our nation's farmers and ranchers
with tremendous advances in technology, as well as helping to
solve problems ranging from food safety to resource
conservation, from nutrition to water quality, and from
diseases of livestock and crops to renewable energy production.
Two weeks ago, the Agriculture Committee heard from the
various mission areas and agencies of the USDA. Among the
testimony we heard was commentary from the Research, Education,
and Economics mission area, highlighting the return on
investment from ag research. For example, the Agricultural
Research Service introduced 348 new plant varieties last year,
and filed 110 patent applications. Some of the work done by ARS
has resulted in the insecticide DEET, the most common active
ingredient in insect repellents, flaked mashed potatoes, sliced
apples that stay fresh longer, and frozen foods. Now, the
flaked mashed potatoes don't come close to the real thing, but
they are good in a hurry. A conclusion drawn by many
stakeholders is that we must prioritize food and agricultural
research within our national policy discussions. I am convinced
by what I have seen, that the public support for ag research
does, in fact, have a very high rate of return. In fact, the
International Food Policy Research Institute, having studied
the impact of ag research and extension published since 1953,
has concluded that this investment has provided an annual rate
of return of 48 percent. I would like my 401(k) to do that. How
about each of you? And to echo comments made by Pope Francis
during his address to Congress just last week, ``I am confident
that America's outstanding academic and research institutions
can make a vital contribution in the years ahead.''
We recognize that as we approach our discussions in
developing the next farm bill, there are numerous policy
changes confronting our nation's research sector. Today, we
will begin those discussions. In doing so, we have assembled a
great panel of preeminent researchers representing some of our
most illustrious agricultural colleges and universities, and
have asked that they focus on the successes that have resulted
from this Federal investment.
I am particularly honored that the Dean of the University
of Illinois College of Agriculture, and my friend, Dr. Bob
Hauser, has joined us today and is participating in the
hearing. Dr. Hauser has served on the faculty in the College of
Agriculture at the U of I for more than 3 decades, and
understands the importance of the agricultural research
conducted at America's land-grant universities. I look forward
to hearing from him and the other distinguished members of our
panel about some of the great success stories from our
agricultural institutions across the country. And, Dr. Hauser,
I have to give you credit, you came just at the right time to
the event I was at Saturday at the U of I, just in time to not
have to hear me speak. That was very good. Yes, exactly.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Davis follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Rodney Davis, a Representative in Congress
from Illinois
Good morning. I would like to welcome everyone here today to the
third in a series of hearings highlighting agricultural research,
extension, and education programs.
On April 14th, this Subcommittee had the honor of hosting Deputy
Secretary of Agriculture Hardin along with 17 bright and gifted young
people involved in the 4-H program. These young men and woman spoke to
us about the need and opportunity to build a coalition of urban and
rural youth to enhance agricultural knowledge across our nation.
Then on July 15th, the full Agriculture Committee held a historic
hearing involving the Presidents of all nineteen 1890 land-grant
universities in order to commemorate the 125th anniversary of the
enactment of the Second Morrill Act.
This Act, like its predecessor in 1862 contributed to our nation's
capacity to conduct research in support of agricultural production
through the creation of land-grant universities.
Since that time, we have added to our capacity by providing land-
grant status to designated tribal colleges in 1994, and quasi-land-
grant status to Cooperative Forestry colleges under the McIntire-
Stennis Act, our nation's veterinary colleges under the Animal Health
and Disease capacity and infrastructure program, and most recently,
Hispanic Serving Agricultural Colleges and Universities in 2008. We
have likewise recognized the investment in agricultural research
capacity in numerous unaffiliated colleges and universities and have
authorized funding to further augment capacity and infrastructure at
these designated non-land-grant colleges of agriculture.
Together, this system of agricultural colleges and universities
provides our nations farmers and ranchers with tremendous advances in
technology as well as helping to solve problems ranging from food
safety to resource conservation; from nutrition to water quality; and
from diseases of livestock and crops to renewable energy production.
Two weeks ago, the Agriculture Committee heard from the various
mission areas and agencies of the USDA. Among the testimony we heard
was commentary from the Research, Education, and Economics mission area
highlighting the return on investment from agricultural research.
For example, the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) introduced 348
new plant varieties last year and filed 110 patent applications. Some
of the work done by ARS has resulted in the insecticide DEET, the most
common active ingredient in insect repellents, flaked mashed potatoes,
sliced apples that stay fresh longer, and frozen foods.
A conclusion drawn by many stakeholders is that we must prioritize
food and agricultural research within our national policy discussions.
I am convinced by what I have seen that public support for agricultural
research does in fact have a high rate of return. In fact, the
International Food Policy Research Institute having studied the impacts
of agricultural research and extension published since 1953 has
concluded that this investment has provided an average annual rate of
return of 48%. And to echo comments made by Pope Francis during his
address to Congress just last week, I am ``confident that America's
outstanding academic and research institutions can made a vital
contribution in the years ahead.''
We recognize that as we approach our discussions in developing the
next farm bill, there are numerous policy challenges confronting our
nation's research sector. Today, we will begin those discussions. In
doing so, we have assembled a panel of preeminent researchers
representing some of our most illustrious agricultural colleges and
universities and have asked that they focus on the successes that have
resulted from this Federal investment.
I am particularly honored that the Dean of the University of
Illinois, College of Agriculture, Dr. Bob Hauser, is participating in
this hearing. Dr. Hauser has served on the faculty in the College of
Agriculture at the University of Illinois for more than 3 decades and
understands the importance of the agricultural research conducted at
America's land-grant universities. I look forward to hearing from him
and the other distinguished members of our panel about some of the
great success stories from agricultural institutions across the
country.
Before I introduce the rest of the panel, I would first like to
recognize the distinguished Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, Ms.
DelBene for her opening statement as well as to introduce her honored
guest.

The Chairman. And before I introduce the rest of the panel,
I would first like to recognize the distinguished Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee, Ms. DelBene, for her opening
statement, as well as to introduce her honored guest.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. SUZAN K. DelBENE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM WASHINGTON

Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
calling today's hearing on a topic that we are both passionate
about. And thanks to all of our witnesses for being here today.
I am especially excited to have Dr. Jim Moyer from Washington
State University here to share his perspective on this issue,
and explain some of the great research being done at Washington
State University. Dr. Moyer is the Associate Dean of Research
for the College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Research
Sciences at Washington State University, and while the main
campus is located Pullman on the eastern side of Washington
State, and closer to Congressman Newhouse's region, they also
have an extension in Mt. Vernon in my district, and an
extension where they are doing fantastic work, particularly in
agriculture. So Dr. Moyer has been doing research in the field
for over 30 years. Sorry to date you there. I am very proud to
have him here. And we look forward to your testimony.
Research provides the foundation for innovation,
particularly in agriculture. Not only that, but it is important
that researchers have the certainty to see a project through to
the end. Starting and stopping research because funding runs
out is highly detrimental. As a former businesswoman, I
understand that when the Federal Government invests in
research, it saves us money in the long run. And it might not
always be clear to everyone why basic research is important or
what it will teach us, but that work has been very critical.
There is even an award called the Golden Goose Award which
celebrates obscure science to show how basic research, even
research that may sound odd, can lead to major breakthroughs
and significant impacts on society.
Last year, as hopefully everyone in this room knows, we
passed a 5 year farm bill. A very important part of that 2014
Farm Bill, for my district and for many others, was that it
included unprecedented funding levels for research on specialty
crops, some of which is being done at Washington State
University's Mt. Vernon campus. Programs like the Specialty
Crop Research Initiative, SCRI, gives us a great return on our
investment. And we are fortunate to have fantastic universities
across the country doing all kinds of valuable research. The
Agriculture Committee recently held a hearing to mark the 125th
anniversary of the enactment of the Second Morrill Act of 1890,
which authorized additional direct appropriations for the land-
grant colleges of agriculture that had been established under
the First Morrill Act of 1862. Not investing in research harms
our economic competitiveness, and hinders the important work
that has been started in many areas.
I am pleased we are holding this hearing to learn about the
innovative work being done throughout the research, extension,
and education communities, and to learn about the challenges
that you are facing.
So thank you again, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member DelBene.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so the witnesses may begin
their testimony, and to ensure there is ample time for
questions. The chair would like to remind Members that they
will be recognized for questioning in order of seniority for
Members who were present at the start of the hearing. After
that, Members will be recognized in the order of their arrival.
I do appreciate the Members' understanding.
Witnesses are reminded to limit their oral presentations to
5 minutes. All written statements will be submitted for the
record.
Again, I would like to welcome all of our witnesses to the
table. Dr. Hauser, Dr. Moyer, and now I would like to also
welcome Dr. Mindy Brashears, the Director of the International
Center for Food Industry Excellence, at Texas Tech University
in Lubbock, Texas. It is okay, it is not the University of
Illinois, and Mike is not here to hear that. Dr. Michael
Heithaus, the Associate Dean of the College of Arts and
Sciences at Florida International University in North Miami,
Florida. And thank you for spending a few minutes with your
Congressman, Carlos Curbelo, as he came by earlier today too.
Dr. Michael P. Lacy, Professor and Department Head, the
Department of Poultry Science at the University of Georgia in
Athens, Georgia. And Dr. Douglas D. Buhler, Senior Associate
Dean for Research in the College of Agriculture and Natural
Resources at Michigan State University in East Lansing,
Michigan. And I ask that you and my colleague, Mr. Moolenaar,
take it easy on the University of Illinois this year in
football.
Dr. Hauser, speaking of the University of Illinois, please
begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT J. HAUSER, Ph.D., DEAN, COLLEGE OF
AGRICULTURAL, CONSUMER AND ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE, UNIVERSITY OF
ILLINOIS, URBANA, IL

Dr. Hauser. Mr. Chairman, and distinguished Members of the
Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research, as
mentioned, I am Bob Hauser, Dean of the College of
Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Sciences. At Illinois,
the Experiment Station and the Illinois Extension is also under
the Dean's supervision.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the subject of
agricultural research and innovation. I will focus my remarks
on agricultural research issues related to major crops and
renewable energy crops, and the role of USDA-NIFA funding.
While my written testimony expands on points made during
the next 4 or 5 minutes, I would like to emphasize three take-
home messages. First, Federal-state partnership for
agricultural research between USDA and state agricultural
experiment stations has been a huge success, and we need to
ensure that same success, going forward, by ensuring
appropriate capacity. Second, agricultural research and
development benefits greatly from partnership between public
and private institutions. And finally, the need for
agricultural research, especially among major crops, is
absolutely critical for consumers at home and worldwide.
For context, our college research derives support from many
sources, with annual research expenditures at about $45
million. Our competitive research support from USDA is roughly
equal to our USDA formula funds, and we are funded at higher
levels from other Federal agencies and from private companies.
We have also been awarded significant grants from the USAID.
Now, I cited several, several, examples in my written
testimony of successful crop research assisted by USDA-NIFA
involving nitrogen uptake, flowering response, photosynthesis,
planting density, and on and on, and these successes often
involve other efforts and partnerships at the University of
Illinois involving, for example, our Plant Breeding Center and
the Energy Biosciences Institutes, and others, but an important
point is that USDA projects are instrumental in a positive
proof of concept, and then leveraged into much, much more.
Another thing to keep in mind is that we translate science for
use in practice, whether it is technology or whether it is
information. I just mentioned some technology examples, but a
couple of other information examples include USDA assistance in
helping us develop FarmDoc, a leading platform for farm and
risk management research and decision tools, and USDA has also
helped us put the timely information in the hands of producers
during the implementation of the most recent farm bill. Again,
as illustrated by most of these examples, we like to leverage
resources through these partnerships. Just yesterday, for
example, a major chemical and agricultural technology company
launched an innovation center on our campus that looks to
partner with us in many ways, including improved cropping
systems. But we do have some challenges. Those challenges are
often related to declining state support for agricultural
research and extension. As higher education relies more on
tuition, we cannot justify subsidizing agricultural research
activity with student dollars. With respect to crop science,
attracting a sufficient, number of top students is an issue,
even though the jobs are plentiful for those students. A
research productivity in this area measured in a competitive
grant funding has been excellent, but crop research, like all
research in academia, is driven by grant opportunities. But
funding for the locally applied research, that locally applied
research in this area, has diminished. Illinois has lost
substantial capacity for crops research, and one example is the
recent budget cut devoted to crops in four field research
centers. But despite these challenges, were all exceptional
opportunities for Illinois and our sister institutions.
Secretary Vilsack addressed us on campus about
international food security a couple of weeks ago, and he
emphasized the need to invest more in agricultural research and
education because all are beneficiaries of agriculture, he
argued, and consequently, land-grant universities must have
capacity to conduct agricultural research and education in the
next levels of competency.
I want to wrap things up here with four policy
implications. First, agriculture, especially major crop
agriculture, has global implications. Invest to meet those
global challenges, but understand the importance of science
applied locally. Two, emphasize partnerships appropriately. Be
willing to apply Federal resources as a public good where the
gaps exist. Three, emphasize competitiveness, but be smart
about capacity, and work with the states to ensure the health
of land-grant institutions. And finally, and this is very
important, universities invest in scientific research in
response to grantors. If resources are not apparent in
agriculture, universities will invest in other areas.
So with that, I wish to thank the Committee again for the
opportunity to share our perspective, and we very much
appreciate your support of agricultural research, education,
and outreach.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Hauser follows:]

Prepared Statement of Robert J. Hauser, Ph.D., Dean, College of
Agricultural, Consumer and Environmental Science, University of
Illinois, Urbana, IL
Mr. Chairman and Distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on
Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research: My name is Robert J. Hauser,
and my testimony is on behalf of the University of Illinois. I
currently serve as Dean of the College of Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences, or ACES, and both the Illinois Agricultural
Experiment Station and University of Illinois Extension are under the
supervision of my college at Illinois.
I would like to thank Congressman Davis, Chairman, Congresswoman
DelBene, Ranking Member, and the other Members of the Agriculture
Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research, for the
opportunity to testify on the important subject of agricultural
research and innovation, and to discuss associated policy challenges,
such as ways to leverage Federal resources, cooperation between various
institutions, means of extension and outreach, and other issues of
importance to the agricultural research community.
I have been asked to focus my comments primarily on agricultural
research issues related to major field crops and renewable energy
crops, and the associated role of USDA-NIFA funding. This is
appropriate, because Illinois is in the heart of the Midwest and is
typically the leading soybean producing state and the second leading
corn producing state, the two most valuable crops in America.
And the University of Illinois is among the leading institutions in
the nation for research and development of biomass feedstocks for
renewable energy.
Following are some key messages that I hope you will take away from
my comments.

1.  The Federal-state partnership for agricultural research, between
USDA and state agricultural experiment stations, has been a
huge success story--and it must also be a success story,
going forward.

2.  The continuum of agricultural research and development has
critical opportunities for partnership between public and
private institutions, but there are important roles for
each to play in their own domains--and there is still a
particularly important role for research as a public good.

3.  The need for agricultural research, especially among the major
crops, is absolutely critical for the consumers of food,
globally--that means everyone--regardless of the relatively
small population of significant producers in America today.

Our portfolio of research derives its support from many sources.
For context, annual research expenditures within the college
approximate $45 million, excluding our permanent state-funded personnel
cost. Of that, the Illinois Agricultural Experiment Station receives
about $7.2 million in Federal capacity funds allocated by formula from
USDA-NIFA, mainly from Hatch and Hatch Multi-State allocations, and
matched with our state resources. Similarly, University of Illinois
Extension receives roughly $12 million of Federal funding, primarily
from Smith-Lever and the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program,
EFNEP, to support our outreach mission.
Our competitive research grants from USDA roughly equal the formula
research funds, and we have been even more successful in competition
for funding from other Federal agencies, and from private companies. We
also benefit from a very robust cooperative relationship with USDA's
Agricultural Research Service. Several of their preeminent scientists
have long-term assignments on our campus, particularly in the
disciplines related to crop sciences. In recent years, we have also
successfully competed for significant grants as part of the USAID Feed
the Future initiative. Further, our scientists have engaged in major
interdisciplinary programs that are situated outside of the typical
wheelhouse of a land-grant agricultural college. It is here at these
nodes of science that future breakthrough innovation is likely to
happen. So the point is that we look for programs that will move our
ideas forward into action and results, and USDA-NIFA programs are a
necessary component of that mix.
Our goals related to our work in crops could be summarized in
several ways, but perhaps to put it simply, we work to help insure food
and energy security, profitable agriculture and food systems, rural and
family prosperity, and resource stewardship.
Successes
We utilize support from our Federal partners in many ways to
further our aims in crop sciences. Important projects are funded by
USDA-NIFA, but it is important to keep in mind that they are very often
part of larger, more significant programmatic initiatives, often
involving other institutions and private firms.
Just to cite a few examples--
Our crop scientists have made significant contributions in
molecular or genomic biology for corn and soybeans. In recent years,
USDA-NIFA competitive grants have allowed our scientists to explore the
mechanisms of nitrogen uptake and utilization in corn. Nitrogen is, of
course, an essential plant nutrient and a source of environmental
concern. Other AFRI funding supports genetic research in soybeans, such
as flowering response to seasonal photoperiod changes, a critical
factor to environmental adaptation of soybean plants.
With the help of our partners in the seed industry, we established
the Illinois Plant Breeding Center a few years ago, which is now
recognized as the leading academic plant breeding program in the
country. This model research and education effort is focused on
training the next generation of scientists who will be needed to drive
innovation forward in plant biotechnology, in order to achieve the
output gains we need to meet future food demand. USDA-NIFA has funded
research and education focused on achieving high corn yield under high
planting density. That fits perfectly within the scope of the Illinois
Plant Breeding Center.
The University of Illinois has made major contributions to
knowledge pertaining to energy crops, biomass production if you will.
As a partner in the Energy Biosciences Institute with UC Berkeley,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and BP, we established the crop
feedstock research program that has formed a scientific foundation for
renewable crops. USDA-NIFA projects on the sorghum genome and economic
analysis of tradeoffs for biomass production contributed to this
effort, and the University of Illinois will continue to operate its
unique Energy Farm as a renewable crops resource, even though the
Energy Biosciences Institute is currently being phased out. As is often
the case, USDA projects were instrumental in some of the foundational
research that led a positive proof of concept, providing the incentive
for other stakeholders to join in building and sustaining the research
program.
I have already emphasized the importance of ARS on our campus,
particularly for crop sciences, where scientists are fully integrated
into our research activities and making enormous contributions. Our
groundbreaking work on photosynthesis has been led in partnership with
ARS, and some of those scientists have been instrumental in our
successful modeling of future environmental effects of climate changes
on crop production, through our unique capabilities for free air
concentration enrichment (SoyFACE) at field scale.
Besides the pursuit of science that is directly related to growth
and culture of crops, our mission is to also translate science for use
in practice, whether that is provided as technology or information.
That occurs not only through Extension programs, but also through
technology commercialization processes, or by means of innovative
research and education approaches that assist management decision
making among the broader audience of users. To illustrate, USDA's
support and data have been instrumental in our development of FarmDoc,
one of the nation's leading platforms for farm management research,
risk management information, and decision tools. Moreover, the grant
for the USDA Producer Education Tools Project, awarded to Illinois from
the Farm Service Agency, allowed us to put timely information and
decision tools in the hands of producers during implementation of the
most recent farm bill.
Illinois also invests its formula or capacity funding in support of
various programmatic initiatives. For example, we have invested Hatch
resources to seed interdisciplinary research in the early stages,
through our Future Interdisciplinary Research Explorations (FIRE)
grants program, and we similarly fund the ACES Research Academy to give
young scientists the necessary tools to success in a research
environment.
We work diligently to develop resource leverage from partnerships.
In any of our cooperative relationships, it is essential to understand
the roles and commitments of potential partners in each segment of the
agricultural research process, basic to applied, and which change over
time.
Just yesterday, for example, a major chemical and agricultural
technology company launched an innovation center on the Illinois campus
that looks to partner with the university in several ways, including
improved cropping systems.
Our main building on campus for crop sciences, Turner Hall, is
undergoing significant renovations to provide better learning and
working space, in cooperation with several major benefactors from the
crop industry. In the same way, we are reaching out to our industry
partners to modernize our research infrastructure to utilize crops, in
projects like our Integrated Bioprocessing Research Laboratory, which
is under construction, and our Feed Technology Complex.
Challenges
Crop sciences at Illinois includes multiple related disciplines:
agronomy, agroecology, plant protection, plant breeding, biotechnology,
and molecular genetics, bioinformatics, horticulture, sustainable
landscapes, and specialty crops.
In some respects our challenges at this point in time may be more
extreme than for some of our peers in the Midwest, largely attributable
to declining state support for the public goods involved in
agricultural research and extension. Illinois is a major agricultural
state, but it also has major urban populations, with significant
competing demands.
Specifically for crop sciences at Illinois, the trends we see are
clear.

Attracting top students to enroll in undergraduate crop
science majors is a challenge, even though the job market for
those students has been excellent.

Our research productivity, measured in competitive grant
funding, has been excellent for our crop scientists. Being on
the leading edge of crop-related science is essential for long-
term excellence, because other academic institutions and
industry aggressively compete for the same talent.

The portfolio of crops research is driven, to a significant
extent, by grant opportunities. The sources of grant funding
for locally applied research have diminished substantially over
the past decade.

Our crop scientists compete, not only for USDA or other
Federal resources, but also for resources within the university
that are derived from the state and elsewhere.

Illinois has experienced substantial permanent losses of
scientific capacity and other assets for crops research over
the past several years. One example is the very recent
announcement of base budget cuts that have prompted us to
reduce resources devoted to crops in four of our field research
and educations centers in Illinois

As our higher education budget model continues to rely more
heavily on student tuition, we lack the justification to
further subsidize agricultural research activity with student
tuition dollars.

Nonetheless, the opportunity for Illinois and our sister
institutions remains exceptionally bright and critically important--to
build upon the success that is feeding the world today. Just a couple
of weeks ago, Secretary Vilsack came to the University of Illinois to
deliver an address on international food security issues. To paraphrase
one of his points, he suggested that we must invest commensurately more
in agricultural research and education, despite the fact that only a
small part of our population is directly engaged in agriculture.
Because all people are the beneficiaries of a robust and successful
agricultural sector, allocation of resources must not be based solely
on demographic patterns or variables. He also made it very clear that
the land-grant universities must have capacity and infrastructure to
conduct agricultural research and education at the next levels of
competency. USDA-NIFA recently asked institutions like ours for
information about their infrastructure assets, in order to better
assess the capabilities and gaps for critical scientific progress going
forward.
States like Illinois are under tremendous fiscal pressure. Our
decision to reallocate resources for our field research, the loss of
personnel to carry out agricultural research programs, and years of
decreasing investment in faculty scientists reflect that pressure.
On the other hand, non-traditional partners may be waking to the
needs and opportunities. An initiative called ``FARM Illinois'' is
engaging the broader business and civic community, especially in
metropolitan Chicago, with the agricultural interests across the state.
Policy Implications
In closing, I would like to leave you with some broad ideas to
consider as you deliberate Federal policies for agricultural research,
education, and outreach.

Agriculture, especially major crop agriculture, has global
implications--but by its nature requires local knowledge. So
while investing to meet global challenges, understand the
importance of science applied locally.

Emphasize partnerships appropriately, and be willing to
apply Federal resources as a public good, where the gaps exist.

Emphasize competitiveness, but be smart about the necessary
capacity--and work with states to insure the health of land-
grant universities and related institutions.

Universities invest in scientific research capacity in
response to the demands and criteria of grantors. If sufficient
opportunities for resources and scholarship are not apparent
for faculty or other scientific talent in agriculture to
succeed in the long-term, universities will invest in other
disciplines competing for scarce resources, especially those
where student demand is strong and tuition revenue is most
apparent. Real cooperation is needed among Federal partners,
states, and industry to promote student interest and research
needs in agriculture.

Finally, because our programmatic research initiatives rely
on multiple partners and sources of support, it is often
difficult to identify a unique contribution from a particular
partner. The temptation for any partner is to desire
accountability for their specific contribution, but
requirements need to be flexible enough for compliance without
significant administrative burden. It is in everyone's interest
to seek administrative efficiency at all levels of the
agricultural research and education process.

I would like to thank the Committee once again for this opportunity
to share our perspective with you, and we appreciate your support of
agricultural research, education, and outreach.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Hauser.
Dr. Moyer.

STATEMENT OF JAMES W. MOYER, Ph.D., ASSOCIATE DEAN FOR
RESEARCH, COLLEGE OF AGRICULTURAL, HUMAN, AND NATURAL RESOURCE
SCIENCES, WASHINGTON STATE
UNIVERSITY; DIRECTOR, AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
CENTER, PULLMAN, WA

Dr. Moyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member DelBene,
Congressman Newhouse, and other Members of the Subcommittee.
Washington agriculture is one of the most diverse in the
United States, growing over 200 different crops, many of which
are classified as specialty crops. Washington is number one
nationally in the production of ten of those crops, including
apples, cherries, hops, and pears, and second in production of
eight others, including grapes, onions, and potatoes. Specialty
crops represent more than \1/2\ of Washington's agricultural
economy, and play a significant role in the agricultural
economy of many other states as well. And further, specialty
crops provide the fruits and vegetables that are the foundation
of a healthy diet for everyone.
Feeding an increasing global population in the face of 21st
century challenges that include climate change, diminishing
water supplies, and disease and pests, requires 21st century
research responses. This morning, I would like to highlight
WSU's unique contributions to the Specialty Crop Research
Initiative, or SCRI, funded by the USDA, National Institute of
Food and Agriculture, as part of that solution.
SCRI is designed to serve the needs of the broader national
agriculture industry by requiring multi-institutional and
stakeholder involvement. This is a thoughtful feature that
brings together the expertise needed to address complex
problems, and to assure relevance. Since 2008, WSU faculty have
been lead investigators, or funded collaborators, on 38 SCRI
program grants that brought over $36 million to WSU to support
Washington's agriculture, and a similar amount was awarded to
collaborating land-grant institutions. These grants funded
research to improve production practices, develop systems
approaches to crop management, study climate change, pest and
disease management, precision agriculture and automation, and
develop genomic and bioinformatics tools to aid plant breeding
efforts.
This morning, I will highlight two projects that
demonstrate the critical value of SCRI. First, is research on
biodegradable plastic fabric for mulches. WSU, with
collaborators, studied mulch fabrics that suppress weeds and
saves water, and can also be used for high tunnels that prolong
the growing season. This was only possible because of the
research collaboration among five universities and farmers. In
addition, the results allowed farmers from Washington,
Tennessee, and Texas to access niche markets for strawberries,
and to improve yields of other crops such as tomatoes. Further,
researchers collected valuable information that was previously
unavailable. They first collected information on the
performance of biodegradable plastic fabrics used to construct
the tunnels and mulch covers. They also collected information
on the effects of biodegradation of microbial communities in
soil, and identify fungi and bacteria responsible for
degradation. This research led to a second project, now
underway, focused on developing non-woven polymers that can be
used to manufacture fabrics that have high utility as
biodegradable mulch.
The second example I will share is actually two projects
that seek to improve the accessibility and application of the
vast amounts of genomic data available for specialty crops. The
data is valuable because it can be used to identify genes
responsible for specific traits, and then by plant breeders to
integrate these traits into varieties. The first project is the
Genomic Database for Rosaceae, which is led by Dorrie Main.
This is a publicly available database with whole genome
sequences, and genetics and breeding data for apples, peaches,
and strawberries, and partial sequences and data for other
crops such as almonds and pears that can be used for breeding
projects. In addition to SCRI funding, this research is
supported by several other sources, including the National
Science Foundation and the Washington Tree Fruit Commission.
In the other project known as RosBREED, scientists from WSU
and Michigan State University are leading 35 scientists from 14
U.S. institutions to utilize information from 22 U.S. Rosaceae
crop breeding programs. This initial project was so successful
that a second phase was funded to develop and apply 21st
century DNA tests and breeding methods to produce new varieties
with improved horticultural quality and disease resistance.
I have provided additional testimony for the record,
describing these examples and the importance of SCRI funding to
Washington agriculture.
I thank you for this opportunity to offer the testimony
today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Moyer follows:]

Prepared Statement of James W. Moyer, Ph.D., Associate Dean for
Research, College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource
Sciences,
Washington State University; Director, Agricultural Research Center,
Pullman, WA
Introduction
My name is Jim Moyer and I serve as the Associate Dean of Research
for the College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences
(CAHNRS) and as the Director of the Agricultural Research Center at
Washington State University (WSU) in Pullman, Washington.
Washington State University is Washington's state university.
Through our five campuses, four research centers and WSU extension, WSU
is physically present in every county, delivering education, research,
and core services that benefit Washingtonians in their communities
every day. The University also has a presence abroad with a new online
global campus and international research. As a premiere, tier one
research university and the state's land-grant university, WSU's
mission is to drive education and innovation into our communities to
support and grow the state's economy.
WSU is led by Interim President Daniel J. Bernardo, Ph.D. (former
Dean of the College of Agriculture, Human and Natural Resource
Sciences) since July 2015 after the death of President Elson S. Floyd.
President Bernardo is carrying on the legacy of Dr. Floyd to maintain
WSU's land-grant mission of advancing, extending and applying knowledge
through local and global engagement.
WSU Research
Washington State University's research enterprise is driven by a
diverse portfolio of extramural support with funding from state and
Federal sources as well as commodity groups and industry. Competitive
Federal funding streams from a variety of agencies are the primary
source of funding for the institution.
WSU faculty have a strong history of success in winning Federal
competitive grants. For 3 of the last 4 years, the 5th Congressional
District in Washington (which includes WSU) was in the top five U.S.
Congressional districts for receipt of USDA-NIFA awards. WSU faculty
also compete strongly for Federal awards from DOE, NSF, NIH, and DOI.
These funds support a broad spectrum of programs that include biofuels
and natural resource management, as well as the entire agriculture
value chain to improve food safety and security, lead to healthier
foods, and enhance production of specialty crops, including organic
production.
These grant awards support investigations in plant metabolomics,
genomics and bioinformatics, plant breeding and animal reproduction,
and pest management, as well as studies that affect end-use quality,
transportation and marketing. Investigations supported by the NSF have
contributed to our understanding of lipid metabolism in plants, as well
as secondary metabolites such as riboflavin that contribute to
healthier foods.
Genomics and bioinformatics investigations have not only led to an
increased understanding of plant and animal genomes, but also the
development of knowledge-based decision tools for pest management and
other production practices. Federal research partnerships also support
studies to ensure high end-use quality for new plant varieties as well
as transportation and marketing research.
Our formula for success includes four research and extension
centers located across the state staffed with over 50 faculty engaged
in research, extension and teaching. Faculty at these centers and on
the Pullman campus maintain strong relationships with growers and other
members of the agribusiness community. This has translated into
significant support for research, including endowed chairs designed to
meet industry needs, as well as matching dollars and other forms of
leverage, such as an internal seed grant program that enhances the
competitiveness of faculty for Federal research funding. Faculty in the
College of Agricultural, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences generate
over $80 million annually in extramural support.
WSU Specialty Crop Research Initiative-Funded Projects
Washington agriculture is one of the most diverse in the United
States, growing over 200 different crops many of which are classified
as ``specialty crops.'' Washington is number one nationally in the
production of ten of those crops, including apples, cherries, hops and
pears, and second in production of eight others including grapes,
onions and potatoes. Specialty crops represent more than half of
Washington's agricultural economy and play a significant role in the
agricultural economy of many other states as well. Further, specialty
crops provide the fruits and vegetables that are the foundation of a
healthy diet for everyone.
Feeding an increasing global population in the face of 21st century
challenges that include climate change, diminishing water supplies,
plus disease and pests, requires 21st century research responses.
This morning I would like to highlight WSU's unique contributions
to the Specialty Crop Research Initiative (SCRI), funded by the USDA
National Institute of Food and Agriculture, as part of the solution.
SCRI is designed to serve the needs of the broader, national
agriculture industry by requiring multi-institutional and stakeholder
involvement, a thoughtful feature that brings together the expertise
needed to address complex problems and ensure relevance.
Since 2008, WSU faculty have been lead investigators or funded
collaborators on 38 SCRI program grants that brought over $36 million
to WSU to support Washington's agriculture. A similar amount was
awarded to collaborating land-grant institutions. These grants funded
research to improve production practices; develop systems approaches to
crop management; study climate change, pest and disease management,
precision agriculture and automation; and develop genomic and
bioinformatics tools to aid plant breeding efforts.
I will highlight two projects that demonstrate the critical value
of the SCRI. First is research on biodegradable plastic fabric for
mulch. WSU developed mulch that suppresses weeds and saves water and
can be used for high tunnels that prolong the growing season. This was
only possible because of the research collaboration among five
universities and farmers. In addition, the results allowed farmers from
Washington, Tennessee and Texas to access niche markets for
strawberries and to improve yields of other crops such as tomatoes.
Further, researchers collected valuable information that was previously
unavailable. They first collected information on the performance of
biodegradable plastic fabrics used to construct the high tunnels and
the mulch covers, a previous barrier to adoption. They also collected
information on the effects of biodegradation on microbial communities
in soil and the identity of fungi and bacteria responsible for
degradation. This research led to a second project, now underway,
focused on developing non-woven polymers that can be used to
manufacture fabrics for biodegradable mulch.
The second example I'll share is actually two projects that seek to
improve the accessibility and application of the vast amounts of
genomic data available for several specialty crops. The data is
valuable because it can be used to identify genes responsible for
specific traits and then by plant breeders to integrated them into
varieties. The first project is the Genomic Database for Rosaceae,
which is led by Dr. Dorrie Main. This is a publicly available database
with whole genome sequences of apples, peaches, and strawberries that
can be used for breeding projects. In addition to SCRI funding, this
research is supported by several other sources of funding, including
the National Science Foundation and the Washington Tree Fruit
Commission.
In the other project, known as RosBREED, scientists from WSU and
Michigan State University are leading 35 scientists from 14 U.S.
institutions to utilize information from 22 U.S. Rosaceae crop breeding
programs. This initial project was so successful that a second phase
was funded to develop and apply 21st century DNA tests and breeding
methods to produce new varieties with improved horticultural quality
and disease resistance.
WSU Projects for Specialty Food Crops funded by USDA
The WSU portfolio of competitively funded research from USDA that
supports specialty crop foods includes research in five areas.

1.  Production practices and systems management includes the
previously mentioned projects for biodegradable mulches as
well as three projects in fruit trees to support
development of systems approaches to crop management.

2.  Pest and disease management studies identified factors to reduce
losses from insect pests such as the brown marmorated stink
bug (tree fruit), the spotted wing Drosophila fruit fly
(all fruit including wine grapes) and spider mites (hops).
In addition, multiple projects have investigated viruses
that cause internal necrosis in potato tubers as well as
the transmission by insects of viruses that cause damage to
specialty crops.

3.  Genomics and breeding includes projects on peas and cranberries
in addition to the highlighted projects above.

4.  Precision and automated agriculture includes projects on water
management, selective mechanical weed control, blossom
thinning, and automated fruit canopy management.

5.  The Organic Research and Extension Initiative (OREI) funds a
number of WSU projects that support specialty crop
production.

The movement by the Federal Government toward supporting projects
that are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional has challenged
institutions to provide more advanced administrative support for these
projects. The preparation of these grants requires greater emphasis on
integrating the granting processes, contract management and research
administration cultures from the participating institutions. This is a
critical phase of grant preparation as well as grant management.
Traditional administrative support for single investigator,
foundational grants is not necessarily directly scalable, due to the
increased complexity and organization of the projects.
Further, we have found that specific support for grant development
to coordinate budgets, subcontracts and the compliance issues of the
participating institutions is essential. In addition, the level of
competitiveness requires support in the writing of the grants as well.
Once the award is received, there is a high level of administrative
work requiring additional resources to support team communication and
organization. These additional resources not only detract from direct
costs formerly available to the researchers, but also require
institutional investments in a time when land-grant institutions are
facing cuts on the state and Federal side. This is in addition to
higher-level oversight needed to manage multi-institutional programs.
All of this results in the lead faculty member devoting significant
time to administrative tasks and less to the actual research. To
respond to these needs, we have created positions specifically to
support grant development, and we are experimenting with creating a
group to assist with project management, which requires additional
resources for administrative processes.
WSU's Grand Challenges
In addition to the ongoing research efforts in the College of
Agriculture, Human, and Natural Resource Sciences, the WSU research
agenda has recently undergone a comprehensive review to address complex
societal problems that require the expertise of research universities
for real world solutions. The identification of these grand challenges
was a collaborative, university-wide effort with faculty, staff and
administrators working together to unite behind the challenge.
Our strong Federal, state and community partnerships are essential
to the pursuit of these grand challenges. WSU's value to Washington
State and Washington, D.C., has never been more evident than through
the successes of our partnerships with our Congressional delegation in
helping position and grow WSU's leadership in five areas:

Sustaining Health: The Uncompromising Pursuit of Healthier
People and Communities.

Sustainable Resources for Society: Food, Energy and Water.

Advancing Opportunity and Equity: The Land-Grant Mission in
Today's World.

Improving Quality of Life through Smart Systems.

Fundamental Research in Support of National Security.

These Grand Challenges are integral to the CAHNRS research
portfolio, with many research programs in each of the five challenges.
We have:

77 research programs in sustaining health,

157 research programs in sustainable resources for society,

47 research programs in advancing opportunity and equity,

28 research programs in improving quality of life through
smart systems, and

15 research programs in fundamental research in support of
national security.

The goal of the Grand Challenges is to increase collaboration
between WSU faculty members and students, across disciplines and with
researchers and partners worldwide, to explore integrated solutions.
Thank you for this opportunity to provide background on the
importance of the Specialty Crop Research Initiative and the importance
of Federal research to land-grant institutions like Washington State
University.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Moyer.
Dr. Brashears.

STATEMENT OF MINDY M. BRASHEARS, Ph.D., PROFESSOR OF FOOD
SAFETY AND PUBLIC HEALTH, TEXAS TECH
UNIVERSITY; DIRECTOR, INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR FOOD INDUSTRY
EXCELLENCE, LUBBOCK, TX

Dr. Brashears. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you very
much for allowing me to speak today about the importance of
food safety research, and the need for future funding in this
area. I am a Professor of Food Safety and Public Health at
Texas Tech University, and I have spent my career studying this
important topic.
August 13, 1997, was a very significant day in my life. Not
only was it my first day on the job as an Assistant Professor
at the University of Nebraska, it was also the day of the
Hudson Foods ground beef 25 million pound recall due to E. coli
O157:H7 contamination, which was, at the time, the largest
recall in U.S. history.
Hudson Foods was located in Columbus, Nebraska, and I was
hired with an extension role to work directly with the industry
and to field media requests. I remember being interviewed on
that first day, and I tried to be reassuring, but really
wondering how can we ever solve this problem. On a day I
expected to be unpacking boxes, I instead was thrown into the
deep end of one of the biggest food safety crises in U.S.
history.
It turns out when you are thrown into the deep end, you can
either sink or swim, or be thrown a life preserver. A life
preserver is what I was given in the form of strong research
funding to develop innovative technologies to control this
pathogen.
Later, I transferred to Texas Tech University, which is in
the heart of the cattle-feeding industry. I partnered with
other faculty to conduct several feeding studies to determine
if a cattle probiotic I had developed controlled pathogens in
the feedlot. To make a long story short, it did work. After
several studies, we found that E. coli can be reduced up to 50
percent in live animals; thus, reducing the risk of product
contamination. This product has been commercialized and is used
in many feedyards across the United States.
Many other things happened in the beef industry to improve
safety, including the implementation of HACCP and the use of
antimicrobial interventions. I was able to set up a pathogen
processing lab at Texas Tech where we developed and validated
many interventions and simulated food processing environments.
We formed a strong research team in the International Center
for Food Industry Excellence, adding additional faculty and
moving into new facilities.
When you jump ahead to 2015, there is great news.
Investment in food safety research in the past 20 years has
saved lives. In the early 1990s, we were scrambling for
solutions to control E. coli, but Federal investment in
translational research delivered effective controls. The FSIS
testing shows that ground beef contamination has fallen more
than 90 percent, and the CDC reports that the human incidence
has been cut in half. However, the food safety problem is far
from being solved. The incidents of Salmonellosis remains
steady, and illnesses associated with Campylobacter are
actually rising. Antibiotic resistance actually decreases our
ability to treat many of the illnesses associated with these
pathogens. The availability of funds for food safety research
has decreased, which leaves scientists scrambling for limited
resources.
Research at Texas Tech can address problems on both the
pre- and post-harvest side of food processing. For example,
recent data indicates that the probiotic that reduces E. coli
in cattle also reduces Salmonella in lymph nodes, which is a
significant source of beef contamination. We have several
studies underway, studying the mechanisms associated with the
emergence of antibiotic resistance. And finally, we have
molecular scientists who study detection technologies so we can
react to problems quickly. We are well poised and ready to meet
emerging food safety challenges. Also, of critical importance,
is a transfer of our knowledge to our stakeholders. We have
engaged social scientists as a key part of our research team to
study human behavior in the food plant environment in order to
effectively implement useful technologies. I am finding that
more scientists like myself are engaging with social media to
provide clarity to consumers. I personally have a a site on
social media, The Food Doctor, which can be found on Facebook,
where I provide science-based information to the public.
In summary, investments in research and education save
lives. There is a need to address food safety issues in the
U.S. and globally to improve the quality of life, and to
protect public health for our population. Funding is the key to
develop new technologies to control emerging pathogens, and to
communicate science-based information to our final
stakeholders.
Thank you very much, and I will be happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Brashears follows:]

Prepared Statement of Mindy M. Brashears, Ph.D., Professor of Food
Safety and Public Health, Texas Tech University; Director,
International Center for Food Industry Excellence, Lubbock, TX
Food Safety Research
I would like to introduce myself as a Professor of Food Safety and
Public Health and the Director of the International Center for Food
Industry Excellence at Texas Tech University. I received my B.S. in
Food Technology at Texas Tech University and my M.S. and Ph.D. in Food
Science with a specialization in food microbiology at Oklahoma State
University. I began my career as an Assistant Professor of Food Safety
at the University of Nebraska and moved to Texas Tech University where
I have been conducting research and developing food safety and security
educational programs for the past 14 years. Food safety and protecting
public health has been the focus of my career. I currently serve as the
Director of the International Center for Food Industry Excellence at
Texas Tech University. My primary academic appointment involves
research and outreach with an emphasis on food safety microbiology.
Contamination of food with pathogenic organisms creates an enormous
social and economic burden on communities, industry, and health systems
all over the world (Ajayi, et al., 2011). In the United States alone,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that each
year, one in six Americans suffers from foodborne illness attributed to
one of 31 major pathogens transmitted through food (Scallan, et al.,
2011). The CDC estimate these pathogens are responsible for
approximately 9.4 million foodborne disease episodes, 55,961
hospitalizations, and 1,351 deaths in the U.S. every year (Scallan, et
al., 2011). Non-typhoidal Salmonella, Clostridium perfringens, and
Campylobacter appear in the top five most common bacterial pathogens,
causing 11, 10 and 9% of illnesses, respectively (Scallan, et al.,
2011). Furthermore, O157 and non-O157 Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia
coli (STEC) account for approximately 176,000 foodborne illness cases
annually (Scallan, et al., 2011).
Data from the Foodborne Disease Active Surveillance Network
(FoodNet) show that in 2013 alone, 818 foodborne disease outbreaks were
reported, resulting in 13,360 illnesses, 1,062 hospitalizations, 16
deaths, and 14 food recalls. Outbreaks caused by Salmonella increased
39% from 2012 (113) to 2013 (157). Outbreak-associated hospitalizations
caused by Salmonella increased 38% from 2012 (454) to 2013 (628) (CDC,
2015). A study conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic
Research Service found that foodborne pathogens impose over $15.5
billion (2013 dollars) in economic burden on the U.S. public each year
(Hoffmann, et al., 2015). Eighty-four percent of the economic burden
from pathogens is due to deaths. This reflects both the importance the
public places on preventing deaths and the fact that the measure of
economic burden used for nonfatal illnesses (medical costs +
productivity loss) is a conservative measure of willingness to pay to
prevent nonfatal illness.
At Texas Tech University we have assembled a team of research
scientists to address global food safety issues. In addition to myself,
the team includes the following faculty members: Dr. Guy Loneragan, Dr.
Kendra Nightingale, Dr. Todd Brashears, Dr. Alejandro Echeverry, Dr.
Leslie Thompson, Dr. Mark Miller, Dr. Chance Brooks, Dr. Marcos Sanchez
and Dr. Henk Den-Bakker. Our team is a diverse group of scientists who
have been strategically selected to address issues related to food
safety and public health in the U.S. and around the world. Addressing
food safety challenges involves a comprehensive farm-to-table proactive
approach with regard to research and educational efforts. Our efforts
do not stop in the laboratory or with a research publication. No
research study will have impact on reducing illnesses if the final
results are not transferred to the end user and therefore, in our of
our research efforts, we strive to connect with our stakeholders. Most
of our research has focused on beef safety, but we have also expanded
to other commodities.
It is important to note that Federal funding was responsible for
early funding for the International Center for Food Industry Excellence
(ICFIE) and the research and educational activities involved in this
center. Our faculty team within ICFIE was able to leverage this money
each year for a 5:1 or greater research match on the funding from
competitive USDA, industry, commodity and other government sources. The
funding has had a tremendous impact on the overall safety of the food
supply in the U.S. and was responsible in part for most of the studies
I will discuss in this testimony.
Investment in food safety research over the past 20 years has saved
lives. In the early 1990s, we were scrambling for solutions to E. coli
O157 in ground beef. Federal investment in translational research
delivered effective controls. The FSIS's testing shows that ground beef
contamination has fallen more than 90%. The CDC reports that the human
incidence has fallen in half and met the healthy people 2010 goals.
Investment can now help solve other food safety challenges.
Campylobacter, Salmonella, and other emerging pathogens continue to
injure too many people. Moreover, Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) makes
it harder to treat some of these illnesses. Investing in Federal
research programs will provides solutions and reduces the number of
people injured by these pathogens, but continued progress is threatened
by reduced funding of transformative ideas.
Over the past several years, the availability of funds for food
safety research at the Federal level has decreased which leaves
scientists scrambling for limited resources from industry, foundations
and other sources. Recent outbreaks and emerging pathogens can be
controlled and even stopped through funding and educational efforts.
Centers such as ICFIE are well positioned to solve food safety problems
given the proper resources. In recent years, Federal funding has been
awarded in large amounts to a small number of scientists limiting the
application of the intellectual capacity that exists in the U.S. in the
food safety arena. Additionally, the majority of food safety research
addressed in the research conducted with these large funds has been
directed towards STECs which are responsible for much fewer illnesses
and deaths compared to Salmonella and Campylobacter. Salmonellosis has
remained constant with little change and recent data indicate that
Campylobacter is prevalent in many food products with increasing
numbers of illnesses each year. We are unable to quickly react to
emerging problems such as antibiotic resistance, Campylobacter and
others due to the lack of funding available to address these problems.
It is imperative that funding be available and even increased for food
safety research and educational efforts in order to protect public
health. I will highlight some of the research that has had a direct
impact on improving the safety of the beef supply that has been
conducted at Texas Tech University and with collaborating institutions.
Research Highlights from Texas Tech
Pre-Harvest Food Safety
Beef is a staple product in the American diet. The beef production
chain begins on the farm, prior to harvest. Cattle can harbor foodborne
pathogens such as Salmonella and Shiga-toxin producing E. coli (STEC)
such as E. coli O157:H7 that can be transferred to the carcass during
harvest and can potentially threaten public health. The cattle's hide
is the primary source of contamination of the final product but the
carcass can also be contaminated through the environment, the employees
or direct contact with the contents of the gastrointestinal tract.
Industry groups such as NCBA provide educational opportunities to
producers on best practices to follow on the farm which create a clean
and healthy environment to raise cattle. Research at Texas Tech in the
pre-harvest realm has targeted interventions that reduce pathogens
prior to harvest.
Over the course of my career, a primary focus of my research has
been on the development of a pre-harvest intervention that reduces
foodborne pathogens in cattle prior to harvest. The intervention is a
Lactobacillus-based cattle direct-fed microbial (DFM) which is
basically a cattle probiotic. The cattle feed additive containing the
selected cultures has been commercialized and sold under the brand
names of Bovamine and Bovamine Defend and has been widely implemented
in the beef and dairy industries in the U.S. This product contains a
specific strain of Lactobacillus (NP51) that has proven to be effective
in reducing pathogens in the live animal prior to harvest in many
research studies over the past 15 years. I have been involved in this
work from the beginning and its initial development but the work has
also been validated by other scientific groups. Funding for this work
was provided by the Beef Checkoff and commodity groups such as NCBA and
AMIF, direct industry support, the State of Nebraska, and funding from
the Federal Government. I will summarize many of the studies and
results of our work in this area.
The microbial flora is an important component of the
gastrointestinal tract and certain bacteria have long been recognized
for beneficial properties and good health. Mechanistically, beneficial
bacteria can prevent harmful bacterial colonization by competitively
excluding, producing antibacterial compounds, and/or promoting healthy
immune function (Berry, et al., 2010). DFM are live bacteria fed to a
host to elicit a beneficial response, and are typically, but not
limited to, Lactobacillus spp. strains. Numerous DFM have been
identified and tested for efficacy against E. coli O157:H7 in cattle
(Callaway, et al., 2009; Loneragan and Brashears, 2005; Sargeant, et
al., 2007). The overall goal of our strategy was to identify bacteria
that are competitive with, or antagonistic to, pathogenic bacteria that
could be fed as a supplement to the cattle diet without having a
detrimental impact on animal performance.
In one of the first large-scale, feedyard studies (Brashears, et
al. 2003), we evaluated 180 steers for shedding of E. coli O157:H7 on
arrival at the feedlot, just before treatment with the DFM, and every
14 days until slaughter. The prevalence on hides and carcasses at
slaughter was also evaluated. Lactobacillus acidophilus NP51 decreased
the shedding of E. coli O157:H7 in the feces significantly during the
feeding period. E. coli O157:H7 was approximately twice as likely to be
detected in control animal samples as in samples from animals not
receiving the supplement. In addition, DFM supplementation
significantly decreased the number of E. coli O157:H7-positive hide
samples at harvest and the number of pens testing positive for the
pathogen. The results of this first study suggested that feeding a
Lactobacillus-based DFM to cattle decreases, but not eliminates, fecal
shedding of E. coli O157:H7, as well as contamination on hides.
Younts, et al. (2004) described the prevalence of E. coli O157 in
the feces and on the hides of finishing beef cattle fed a standard diet
and those fed diets supplemented with a DFM. Two hundred forty steers
received one of four treatments: (1) control: (2) HNP51: high dose of
L. acidophilus strain NP51 (10
9
CFU per steer daily) and P.
freudenreichii (10
9
CFU per steer daily); (3) HNP51145: high
dose of NP51 (10
9
CFU per steer daily), P. freudenreichii
(10
9
CFU per steer daily), and L. acidophilus NP45
(10
6
CFU per steer daily); or (5) LNP51145: low dose of NP51
(10
6
CFU per steer daily), P. freudenreichii (10
9

CFU per steer daily), and NP45 (10
6
CFU per steer daily).
Samples were collected from each animal and analyzed for the presence
of E. coli O157 on day 0 (feces), 7 days before harvest (feces), and at
harvest (feces and hide). At the end of the feeding period, cattle
receiving HNP51 were 57% less likely to shed detectable E. coli O157 in
their feces than were the controls. Cattle supplemented with a high
dose of NP51 had reduced E. coli O157 prevalence in both fecal and hide
samples, again indicating that this treatment may be an efficacious
pre-harvest intervention strategy.
A follow-up study by Younts, et al. (2005) evaluated the effects of
three doses of L. acidophilus strain NP51 and a combination treatment
of strains NP51 and NP45 on prevalence of E. coli O157 in cattle. Three
hundred steers were assigned randomly to 60 pens and received one of
five treatments: (1) control; (2) HNP51, high dose of NP51 at
10
9
CFU per steer daily; (3) MNP51, NP51 at 10
8

CFU per steer daily; (4) LNP51, low dose of NP51 at 10
7
CFU
per steer daily; and (5) NP51145, NP51 at 10
9
CFU per steer
daily and NP45 at 10
6
CFU per steer daily. All DFM
treatments included P. freudenreichii at 10
9
CFU per steer.
Individual rectal fecal samples were collected on arrival and every 28
days throughout the feeding period. Cattle receiving HNP51, MNP51, and
LNP51 had a lower prevalence of E. coli O157 throughout the feeding
period compared with the controls, and the dose response for NP51 was a
linear decrease in prevalence with increasing dose. No decrease in
prevalence for cattle receiving the combination NP51145 was detected
compared with controls. E. coli O157 prevalence values averaged across
collection times were 23.9, 10.5, 9.9, 6.8, and 17.3% for cattle in the
control, LNP51, MNP51, HNP51, and NP51145 groups, respectively. We
concluded that the greatest decrease in E. coli O157 carriage was
achieved using NP51 at 10
9
CFU per steer.
Two further subsequent studies demonstrated the effectiveness of
NP51 in the control of E. coli O157:H7 shedding in cattle. In a study
conducted by Stephens, et al. (2007), 500 yearling steers were housed
in pens of ten animals each. Upon arrival, steers were randomly
allocated to one of five cohorts. Four of the cohorts were fed various
strains and dosages of Lactobacillus-based DFM throughout the feeding
period. Fecal samples were collected from the rectum of each animal
immediately prior to shipment to the abattoir. The prevalence in the
controls (26.3%) was significantly greater than that in cattle
supplemented with L. acidophilus strains NP51, NP28, or NP51-NP35
(13.0, 11.0, and 11.0%, respectively). The greatest E. coli O157
concentration was observed in the controls (3.2 log most probable
number, MPN/g of feces); this concentration was significantly greater
than that observed in positive animals receiving NP51, NP28, or NP51-
NP35 (0.9, 1.1, 1.7 log MPN/g of feces, respectively). We demonstrated
that specific strains of Lactobacillus-based DFMs effectively reduced
the prevalence and concentration of E. coli O157 in harvest-ready
cattle. Another subsequent study we conducted (Stephens, et al. 2007b)
evaluated the effectiveness of DFM in reducing E. coli O157 and
Salmonella in beef cattle. Steers (n =240) received one of four
treatment concentrations: control (lactose carrier only); low
(10
7
CFU per steer daily Lactobacillus acidophilus NP51);
medium (10
8
CFU per steer daily L. acidophilus NP51); and
high (10
9
CFU per steer daily L. acidophilus NP51). All
diets included 109 CFU per steer Propionibacterium freudenreichii NP24.
Feces were collected from each animal at allocation of treatment and
found to have no variation between cohorts concerning E. coli O157
recovery. No significant dosing effects were detected for E. coli O157
recovery from feces at the medium dose or from hides at the medium and
high doses. E. coli O157 was 74% and 69% less likely to be recovered in
feces from animals receiving the high and low diets, respectively,
compared with controls. Compared with controls, E. coli O157 was 74%
less likely to be isolated on hides of cattle receiving the low dose.
No significant dosing effects were detected for Salmonella recovery
from feces at the medium and low doses or from hides at any doses.
Compared with controls, Salmonella was 48% less likely to be shed in
feces of cattle receiving the high dose.
Finally, Pond and Brashears (2013, unpublished data) evaluated the
effect of feeding L. animalis strain NP51 on the prevalence and
concentration of non-O157 STEC serogroups O26, O45, O103, O111, O121,
and O145. In one study, conducted in a commercial feedlot,
approximately 1,800 cattle were randomized upon arrival into treatment
and control pens. The control pens were fed routine feedlot diets
whereas treatment pens received a diet that only differed by the daily
supplementation of 10
9
CFU of NP51 and 10
9
CFU of
Propionibacterium NP24. Twenty-five fecal pats were taken from each pen
(n = 600 samples) prior to transport to a regional abattoir for
slaughter. A second study was conducted in a research-dedicated
feedlot. One-hundred twelve cattle were blocked by weight and
randomized into treatment or control pens at a research feedlot. Fecal
grabs were collected from the rectum of each animal prior to transport
to a regional abattoir for slaughter. In the commercial feedlot, E.
coli O157 was detected in 45% fewer fecal pats compared to the
contemporaneous control cohort. Within positive samples, the
concentration of E. coli O157 was 1.23 log
10
CFU/g lower
among treated animals compared to controls (P = 0.02). Genes encoding
serogroups O26, O45, O103 and O121 were detected 53.2% (P = 0.01),
41.2% (P
9
/head/day L. animalis NP51 supplementation. Immediately
after slaughter, LN were acquired from the steers (n=107). Salmonella
prevalence in bovine subiliac LN from control cattle was found to be
34.0%. A significant reduction in Salmonella prevalence of 88.0 % was
observed between control cattle and cattle fed NP51. Salmonella
concentration in treatment cattle were more likely to be low (at 1 log
CFU/g or below the level of detection) while higher (4 log CFU/g)
concentrations were more likely to be found in control samples. The
results from this study indicated that supplementation with
10
9
/head/day NP51 as a pre-harvest intervention will
successfully reduce both the prevalence and concentration of Salmonella
in bovine lymph nodes.
Guillen and Brashears (2015, unpublished data) evaluated the effect
of L. acidophilus NP51 at a rate of 10
9
/head/day (NP51) on
the reduction of Salmonella prevalence in cattle lymph nodes.
Approximately 1,800 cattle were randomized into two treatments in a
commercial feedlot with 12 pens/treatment and 75 head/pen. Subiliac
lymph nodes were obtained from approximately 25 animals/pen (n= 600) at
the slaughter facility. Salmonella was recovered from 25% fewer LN for
cattle fed NP51 when compared to controls. Quantitatively the NP51
cattle had significantly less Salmonella in lymph nodes (3.1 vs. 4.2
log
10
cfu/lymph node) and per gram of lymph nodes (1.9 vs.
2.9 log
10
cfu/g). Control samples were more likely to have a
higher concentration of Salmonella in lymph nodes with 10.4% vs. 11.7%
between 3 and 4 log
10
cfu/g; 13.7% vs. 6.4% between 4 and 5
log
10
cfu/g, and 7.5% vs. 2.1% greater than 5
log
10
cfu/g. The results of this study indicated that
supplementation with NP51 is an effective pre-harvest intervention to
reduce the prevalence of Salmonella in cattle lymph nodes, which may
lead to a decrease in the Salmonella prevalence if ground beef.
Recently, a study was conducted to examine the efficacy of using
Lactobacillus animalis and Propionibacterium freudenreichii (NP24) to
control Salmonella within PLNs of feedlot cattle (Gragg, et al., 2013).
Cattle were randomly allocated into either control or DFM treatment
groups. Diets of treated cattle were supplemented with 10
9

CFU/head/day of the DFM, while control groups received no DFM
supplementation. During slaughter, one subiliac lymph node (SLN) per
carcass was collected from 627 carcasses from one study and 99
carcasses from a second study. In the first study, effects of DFM
supplementation varied across slaughter days. On the first and second
slaughter days, the prevalence of Salmonella was significantly reduced
by 50% and 31%, respectively. In the second study, Salmonella was 82%
less likely (p = 0.008) to be recovered from SLNs of treatment cattle.
While a greater relative risk reduction was observed in the latter
study, absolute risk reductions were similar across studies. Once
again, the results indicated that NP51 and NP24 supplementation may aid
in reducing the prevalence and concentration of Salmonella in SLNs and,
therefore, serve as an effective control measure to reduce Salmonella
in ground beef products.
Post-Harvest Food Safety
At Texas Tech University we have a very specialized set up to
evaluate processes in simulated industry settings. More than 100 food
processes have been validated in our pathogen processing area in which
results are proprietary to protect specific companies. This validation
service is offered for companies with a need to determine if their
processes result in adequate reduction of pathogens during processing.
In general, we have validated safe procedures for the production of
cooked products, fresh products and even pet foods. We have also
utilized this research laboratory space to a conduct research that
addresses food safety issues to generate data that are directly
applicable to the industry and can be used to make process decisions to
produce safe food products.
We have generated data on reducing the food safety risks of needle
tenderized beef products. In one study, we evaluated three different
intervention strategies (lactic acid, lactic acid bacteria, and
acidified sodium chlorite) to control E. coli O157:H7 and Salmonella in
mechanically tenderized and brine-enhanced beef strip loins when
applied to the steaks prior to packaging and shipment for processing.
After tenderization, lactic acid bacteria reduced internal E. coli
O157:H7 loads 1.2 to 2.2 log cycles, while the acidified sodium
chlorite and lactic acid reduced them between 0.8 and 3.0 log,
respectively. Salmonella was also reduced internally after application
of all interventions between 0.9 and 2.2 log. The application of
antimicrobials to the steaks prior to packaging and shipment on day 0
was effective in reducing internalization of both pathogens in non-
intact beef products. (Echeverry, et al., 2009) In a similar study, our
aim was to validate the use of lactic acid bacteria (LAB), acidified
sodium chlorite (ASC), and lactic acid (LA) sprays when applied under a
simulated purveyor setting as effective interventions to control and
reduce E. coli O157:H7 and Salmonella prior to tenderization. LAB and
LA reduced internal E. coli O157:H7 loads up to 3.0 log, while ASC
reduced the pathogen 1.4 to 2.3 log more than the control (P
5
to 10
6
CFU/g) at
separate times was subjected to five treatments: lactic acid spray
(LS), lactic acid dip (LD), water spray (WS), water dip (WD), and
untreated control (CTL). The dip treatment reduced all pathogens
significantly (P
Exotic pests and disease are being introduced into the U.S.
at startling rates. These introductions, like citrus greening,
emerald ash borer, Asian Long Horned Beetle, Redbay Ambrosia
beetle and fruit flies, have cost Miami-Dade county billions of
dollars in treatment, eradication programs and lost revenue.

Local weather patterns and climate are shifting and will
affect the crops we can grow and threaten food security.
Rainfall and temperature are predicted to shift. For example,
although predicting future changes in rainfall is one of the
harder challenges of global climate models to resolve at the
regional level, we expect shifts in the wet season to cooler
times of year, which will increase heat stress to crops during
the dry season. This is compounded with challenges in managing
water to balance needs for urban, agricultural, and natural
systems. In addition, sea level rise threatens to impact ground
water and agricultural production.

In south Florida, we also face a challenge in food waste. A
large portion of some crops, although edible, is discarded
because of imperfections. Changes in regulations regarding how
this waste can be used or disposed of represents a difficulty--
but also an opportunity--for the local community.

Finally, agriculture is an industry with an aging workforce.
We need to find ways to bring more young people into the
industry and to diversify. Florida also has a large population
of socially disadvantaged farmers. In a region with 20,000
unemployed veterans and nearly 44,000 migrant farmworkers, it's
critical to work with the community to equip these individuals
with technical and entrepreneurial skills, and access to
government assistance which enables them to launch and sustain
viable farm operations.

FIU faculty, staff and students are helping to address these
challenges. The examples below show how Hispanic-Serving Agricultural
Colleges and Universities can add to the expertise in our nation's Land
Grant Institutions.
Developing More Resilient Crops
As part of the International Center for Tropical Botany (ICTB), Dr.
Eric Bishop von Wettberg is working with collaborators around the
country and world to develop new varieties of crops that are more
resilient to changes in climate. The wild relatives of many of our
crops are better able to survive variation in growing conditions
including droughts or periods of excessive rainfall. Using cutting-edge
genetic techniques, research teams can breed new varieties that retain
positive the qualities of domestic crops that incorporate the hardiness
of wild plants. Currently, Dr. von Wettberg works on chickpeas,
lentils, and mangoes. But, this approach holds promise for many other
crop species growing in areas that--like south Florida--will face large
changes in weather and climate. This innovative approach to developing
the next generation of crops also holds promise for responding to
emerging diseases.
Combating Invasive Pests
The aggressive Asian Redbay Ambrosia Beetle currently has Florida's
multi-million dollar avocado industry in limbo. The insect spreads
laurel wilt, a disease so deadly that growers in affected areas can't
ship or move any fruits or plants for fear that it could spread to
other susceptible crops, potentially affecting 430 different fruits,
vegetables and nuts (95 percent of the fruits and vegetables in the
county).
Detection is a major challenge. Diseased trees can begin to wilt
within 2 weeks, and by the time symptoms are visible, the fungus has
likely spread to nearby trees. This is a particular problem in
commercial groves, where trees are planted close together.
Florida International University researchers, funded by the Florida
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, have developed a
unique detection program, Detector Canines, which could have far-
reaching applications for the agriculture industry.
This program, led by FIU Provost and Executive Vice President
Kenneth G. Furton and Biological Sciences Professor DeEtta Mills
couples drone surveillance with canine scent detection:

Drones carry spectral thermal digital imaging instruments
that search for stressed trees before symptoms are visible.

Canines, which have up to 50 times more olfactory receptors
than humans and can be hundreds to thousands of times more
sensitive to detecting odors, have successfully identified
infected trees that were not yet showing symptoms.

DNA tests confirm that the dogs are able to detect the
pathogen much earlier than any other method.

Trees that are detected early can be given an infusion or
injection of the fungicide ``Tilt'' to significantly increase
their chances of survival.

To date, 85% of the pre-symptomatic trees identified have been
saved and will continue to produce safe fruit for harvest. This is a
stark contrast with 100% death rate of trees that are not detected
early. The fungicide treatment is expensive but it protects the tree
for 12 to 18 months. Waiting until symptoms appear jeopardizes not only
the affected tree, but the entire grove. Prior to the development of
this method, the main treatment method was removal of diseased trees
and any surrounding trees.
More than 6,000 of Miami's 74,000 avocado trees have been destroyed
due to laurel wilt. This isn't just a Florida problem. From California
to Latin America, there are growing concerns about how to respond to
this aggressive disease. The spread of infestation has already reached
Texas in its march along the Gulf Coast. With the potential to spread
into California, whose industry is ten times that of Florida, and
Mexico, who produces 100 times that of south Florida, the impact could
be devastating to growers and consumers around the world.
The approach pioneered at FIU holds promise for the early detection
of emerging diseases so we can respond before they become so entrenched
that the costs of treatment are crippling.
Adding Value
Adding value to the raw products grown by the agricultural industry
in critical to the long term success of the community. Value-added
products--like new foods, soaps, oils, supplements or medicines--
provide avenues for reducing food waste, will create jobs, and enhance
the local economy.
FIU has been a long-time academic collaborator with the University
of Florida, and in 2013 entered a partnership to develop an
Agribusiness Incubator. The concept was developed at the request of
agricultural stakeholders in the Redland.
The agribusiness innovation center will:

Improve agricultural products.

Enter new markets and develop products.

Provide market opportunities and information.

Teach financial management skills and access to financing,
technical information and training, and mentorship.

Assist with regulations, standards and compliance.

Miami-Dade county commissioners have decided to unanimously seek
state funding to support the Agribusiness Incubator, which will
include:

a biotechnology production facility with specialized
clean labs including a contemporary tissue culture
facility.

a technology production facility with high quality
infrastructure to accommodate flexibility in space uses
such as moveable walls, a loading dock, and a
``brainstorming room'' that will be available for meetings
on a regular basis for scientists, entrepreneurs and others
to exchange ideas and concepts for forming new
agribusinesses.

a Food Venture Center that will be a high-technology
service laboratory that contains numerous pieces of
equipment that will assist new businesses in product
development.

This facility will be staffed by highly trained technicians who
will guide and direct adjustments needed in refining various
value-added oil, drinks, medicines, etc. FIU will be the lead
institution for the Food Venture Center, and STEM students will
be intimately involved in the work conducted there as well as
in labs at the Incubator.

The Agribusiness Incubator is estimated to generate $45 in local
taxes for every dollar invested and have incubated business conducting
$17M of business per year after 5 years. In addition, a new FIU Kitchen
Lab will improve the well-being of under-served communities, including
low income immigrant food entrepreneurs. They will be able to formalize
and grow their businesses through affordable commercial kitchen space,
industry-specific technical assistance and access to new market
opportunities. The Kitchen Lab will provide opportunities to link new
products to local restaurants and grocery stores. It will also provide
a storefront for innovative new products, making it a focal point for
visitors and a gateway to agritourism in South Dade.
Planning for the Future
An increasingly proactive approach to plantings is critical to the
long-term sustainability of the industry in light of the myriad
challenges outlined earlier. FIU's International Center for Tropical
Botany--a collaboration with the National Tropical Botanic Garden--is
working to not only enhance the genetic diversity of crops but to
predict where crops will grow best in the future, what new crops or
plants might be better adapted to future conditions, and combinations
of plants that can be grown together to reduce unpredictability in
economic yield for farmers and reduce susceptibility to pests and
extreme weather.
K-12 Outreach and Workforce Pipeline
The FIU Agroecology Program has developed an institutional alliance
with area USDA ARS, Miami-Dade County Public Schools, Miami Dade
College (another HSI), local non-governmental agriculture research
organizations, in addition to several organic farms.
Through FIU's organic garden, designated a USDA People's Garden in
2011, the Agroecology program conducts hands-on learning activities for
over 500 K-12 students each year and hosts summer workshops for K-12
teachers. Organic garden activities draw students from disciplines
across the University and throughout the community.
This training creates a pipeline for future recruitment of minority
students into higher agriscience related education. Through summer
internships at FIU, high school students get hands-on experience in
agriculture and related sciences.
FIU researchers serve on the Miami-Dade County Public Schools
Agriculture and Related Science Committee. Routine visits are conducted
at area high schools to recruit minority students into agriculture and
related sciences at FIU. These students participate in annual symposia,
workshops, and conferences on agriculture and related sciences.
By thoughtfully incorporating Hispanic-Serving institutions into
the network of Land-Grant and Extension centers, the USDA has added to
their agricultural and environmental research, education, and outreach
mission. Some examples of FIU education and training programs
complementing our partner Land Grant include:

Since 2005, the USDA has provided over $7 million in funding
to the FIU Agroecology Program to support undergraduate and
graduate student training and research on a wide range of
topics related to agriculture and natural resources. The
program has trained more than 500 students, with more than 40
going on to jobs at USDA or prestigious agriculture programs
for graduate studies.

The Veteran and Small Farmers Outreach Program is designed
for military veterans, socially disadvantaged and beginner
farmers, and nursery growers. The collaboration between FIU,
community partners and the Dade County Farm Bureau is made
possible by a grant from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Office of Advocacy and Outreach, This program, lauded before
Congress this past summer by U.S. Representative Carlos
Curbelo, assists participants in learning technical skills
through hands-on activities with tropical fruits, vegetables
and nursery plants, beekeeping, composting, and disease
management. Their training culminates with a farming
apprenticeship at a local farm or nursery operation.

The Florida-Caribbean Consortium for Agriculture Education
and Hispanic Workforce Development (FCCAgE), led by FIU and in
collaboration with Miami Dade College--North, St. Thomas
University, and Universidad Interamericana de Puerto Rico,
recruits and trains Hispanic students from communities that are
under-represented in agriculture sciences and natural resource
management. The multi-institutional consortium is funded by the
USDA Hispanic Serving Institutions Grants Program and supports
student travel, research, professional development workshops,
summer internships, and job placement. FIU, along with FCCAgE
partners Over 80 students have benefited from internships since
its inception.
Part 2: The Future of University Partnerships To Accelerate Agriculture
Research, Extension and Teaching
In exploring opportunities for Congress and the United States
Department of Agriculture to further accelerate the nation's
agricultural research, extension and teaching priorities, it is
important to consider the policy challenges facing the university
research community.
Adequate support for agricultural research is critically important,
especially as the community aims towards greater sustainability in the
food production chain and an increasing need to respond rapidly to
major challenges from introduced pests, shifting growing conditions,
and economic volatility. In addition to leveraging Federal research
dollars, universities must also increase the direct relationships with
industry and commodity groups in helping fund cutting-edge research,
even beyond any one particular commodity. And of course, maintaining
well-funded, viable, long-term research programs engages undergraduate
and graduate students, who will be the future of providing science-
based solutions for agriculture.
I Continue to complement the extension network and regional
collaboration
Extension is a critical mission of the nation's land-grant
institutions and is built on the partnership between the land-grant
colleges of each state, the Federal Government through the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA), and local county governments.
Traditionally, each county of all 50 states has a local extension
office, although some county offices have consolidated into regional
extension centers. Today, there are approximately 2,900 extension
offices nationwide. In south Florida, the University of Florida and
Miami-Dade County, particularly Agriculture Manager Charles LaPradd
provide outstanding extension services to the community. But, the needs
of the community exceed the capacity. FIU, like other Hispanic-Serving
Agricultural Colleges and Universities, have an important role to play
in advancing the mission of extension by becoming part of the
collaboration. In South Florida, FIU and UF have partnered on multiple
initiatives to serve the community and have corresponded to build
complementary expertise.
II The future of role of our nation's Hispanic-Serving Institutions in
Agriculture
America's Changing Landscape and STEM Challenges

As of 2013, according to U.S. Census Bureau population estimates,
there were roughly 54 million Hispanics living in the United States,
making people of Hispanic origin the nation's largest ethnic or race
minority, at 17% of the U.S. total population.
Increasingly, post-secondary Hispanic students are enrolled mostly
at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs), which are defined in the
Higher Education Act as institutions whose enrollment is made up of at
least 25% Hispanic full-time equivalent (FTE) students. According to
the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities (HACU), HSIs,
like FIU, make-up 12.1% of nonprofit colleges and universities, yet
enroll 20% of all students and 58.9% of all Hispanic students currently
enrolled in higher education. The number of HSI's in the United States
is rapidly growing. In 1990, there were 137 institutions; in 2005, 245
institutions; and since 2013 over 400 institutions. Looking towards the
future, almost 300 institutions are ``emerging HSIs'' with Hispanic
enrollments between 15% and 24.9%.
According to the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA),
although Hispanics represented 15% of all U.S. wage and salary workers,
as of 2012, Hispanics represented 50% of all farm laborers and
supervisors in the U.S., only 16% at the management level. Looking at
the Science and Engineering workforce, the source of many of our food
scientists and engineers, only 3% of those doctoral recipients in the
biological, agricultural, environmental and life sciences are Hispanic.

Hispanic-Serving Institutions and Agriculture

We salute Congress and the USDA for making important strides to
engage with the greater Hispanic-Serving institution community. Notable
efforts with direct impact on leveraging the research, outreach and
educational missions of HSI's include:

USDA and the Hispanic Association of Colleges and
Universities have long been affiliated through a formal
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) and active leadership group
meetings that recognize the need to include more HSIs in USDA
programs and research.

This past year at FIU, USDA piloted a new expedited Pathways
recruitment strategy for interns and full-time employment
targeting Hispanics, African Americans and other
underrepresented minorities. By working with multiple USDA
agencies and other universities in the area, the agency placed
25 successful candidates after one full day of interviews on
campus.

USDA's Hispanic-Serving Institutions National Program and
its leadership have ensured strategic partnerships between USDA
and HSIs like FIU to provide improved access to employment,
educational and institutional development opportunities.

In particular, the USDA HSI National Program's six regional
offices serve as important conduits for engagement and outreach
to universities. The Miami office has served to create
strategic partnerships between USDA and over 80 HSIs, serving
as a valuable asset to our faculty and students seeking to
assist students, faculty, and administrators in accessing
USDA's educational, employment, and funding opportunities.

National Institute of Food and Agriculture's Hispanic-
Serving Institutions Education Grants Program (HSI) is a
competitive grants program intended to promote and strengthen
the ability of Hispanic-Serving Institutions to carry out
higher education programs in the food and agricultural
sciences. Funding for this important initiative is currently at
just over $9 million and has made possible over 80 grants in
recent years.

The HSI Education Grants Program has made possible the
Florida-Caribbean Consortium for Agriculture Education and
Hispanic Workforce Development described in Part I.

The E. Kika De La Garza Fellowship Program offers faculty
and staff from HSIs the opportunity to work collaboratively
with USDA to gain insight and understanding of the Federal
Government. This uniquely tailored experience brings together
HSI staff and Federal executives to address the spectrum of
challenges faced in the development of a well prepared Hispanic
workforce. Fellows spend 2 to 4 weeks in Washington, D.C. to
increase their understanding of USDA and other Federal
agencies, particularly at the national level, and be able to
identify mutual collaborative interests. FIU has been fortunate
to have had faculty and staff participate in this program.

The Multicultural Scholarship (MSP) Program and National
Needs Fellowship (NNF) Program have made an impact in
attracting diverse students to agricultural professions. Many
at FIU have benefited from this support because of diligent
staff at USDA.

Going forth, we present some thoughts on specific policy challenges
facing the research community in Hispanic-Serving universities:

1.  Creatively incorporating Hispanic-Serving Institutions into the
land-grant ecosystem

As FIU and UF have proven, collaboration between a land-grant
institution and Hispanic-Serving Institution is a win for
all involved, and one which advances agricultural research,
outreach and training. With only a handful of land-grants
currently being Hispanic-Serving Institutions nationwide,
the challenge for all involved is how to thoughtfully
incorporate HSI's into the network.

2.  Building greater capacity at HSI's through the Hispanic-Serving
Agricultural Colleges and Universities (HSACUs) programs

Laudably, the reauthorization of the Farm Bill in 2014
preserved the previously authorized programs for HSIs and
Hispanic-Serving Agricultural Colleges and Universities
(HSACUs) and added a new competitive grants program in
support of Hispanic agricultural workers and youth. These
programs are designed to strengthen the ability of HSIs to
offer educational programs that attract, retain and
graduate outstanding students who will enhance the nation's
food and agricultural, scientific and professional work
force. However, none of the HSACU programs authorized in
2008 has ever been funded by Congress and only the HSACU
Endowment program has ever been included in the President's
Budget Requests.

Authorized, yet unfunded programs include:

$20 million for the HSACU Equity Grants Program.

$80 million for the HSACU Endowment Fund.

$40 million for the HSACU Institutional Capacity-
Building Grant Pro-
gram.

$40 million for the HSACU Fundamental and Applied
Research Grants
Program.

$40 million for the HSACU Extension Grants Programs.

$5 million for the competitive grants program for
Hispanic agricultural
workers and youth.

HSIs receive 0.69  on the Federal dollar when compared to all other
institutions of higher education. This funding inequity is evident in
agricultural research and infrastructure development investment by the
U.S. Government. HSIs enroll 60 percent of all Hispanic higher
education students and that proportion is likely to increase.
Congress should then not be surprised by the under-representation
of Hispanics in agricultural-related programs and academic
opportunities. Congress must correct this trend now or our nation's
future food security and economic development will be unnecessarily
limited.

3.  Unintended consequences of the creation of the HSACU designation

Considering the HSACU programs have not yet been funded and
implemented, caution is urged in restricting universities
that may be HSACUs from applying to other programs at USDA.

One example is with the non-land-grant college of agriculture
program, which was also authorized in 2008 and has been
funded. This year's competition awarded $4 million, yet
HSACU applicants had to opt out of their respective
designation to qualify as non-land-grant colleges of
agriculture to be eligible for this program.

FIU looks forward to working with Congress and the U.S. Department
of Agriculture to accelerate agriculture research, extension and
teaching and thanks the Committee for providing the opportunity to
share our perspective.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Heithaus.
Dr. Lacy.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL P. LACY, Ph.D., PROFESSOR AND
DEPARTMENT HEAD, DEPARTMENT OF POULTRY SCIENCE, UNIVERSITY OF
GEORGIA, ATHENS, GA

Dr. Lacy. Chairman Davis, Ranking Member DelBene,
distinguished Committee Members, I am grateful for the
opportunity to represent the University of Georgia College of
Agricultural and Environmental Sciences, and all land-grant
universities across the nation to talk about the intrinsic
value and vital role public university research plays in
keeping American agriculture strong, our economy growing, and
the world adequately nourished.
I want to specifically thank Congressman Austin Scott, one
of the University of Georgia's most distinguished alumni, for
his support. He is a tremendous advocate for agriculture.
All agricultural research is important, however, in this
brief testimony, it will be best for me to focus on my area of
expertise; poultry science. Nowhere else is agricultural
research so open and readily accessible to farmers and
consumers as it is in the United States. This unique quest for
and application of new information relevant to agriculture is
directly attributable to our land-grant university system. The
land-grant model, coupled with USDA-ARS form a powerful
combination that is the envy of the world in its effectiveness
at addressing the critical needs of food production.
A great example of that land-grant USDA collaboration can
be seen in UGA and USDA efforts to address the threat of avian
influenza. Earlier this year, the U.S. faced a renewed threat
to our food security as AI spread through 21 western and
central states, resulting in the loss of over 50 million birds,
including 16 percent of the nation's egg-producing flocks. As
waterfowl that carry the AI virus migrate south this fall, the
threat of this disease intensifies. Because of the sheer size
of the poultry industry in Georgia, a serious outbreak in our
state would be devastating to our economy, and would impact the
entire U.S. food supply. We have been conducting intensive
programs to help producers strengthen biosecurity procedures to
protect their poultry flocks. Our scientists have worked
tirelessly on research related to response plans, humane
euthanasia methods, composting mass-mortalities, in the event
of a catastrophic AI outbreak.
The USDA Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory in Athens,
Georgia, is recognized as one of the leading poultry disease
research facilities in the world. The work done there is of a
measurable importance to the health of the nation's poultry
flocks. The need for funding, recommended to expand the
research facilities at SEPRL, is strategic and vital, as the
serious consequences of the current AI situation vividly
highlight.
In concert with the biosecurity efforts focused on poultry
producers, UGA 4-H is piloting a program with the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention to teach biosecurity principles
to even our youngest citizens, helping them better understand
and prevent disease transmission.
Continuing this poultry health theme, interest in
minimizing the use of pharmaceuticals has spurred research at
UGA on novel ways to protect poultry from diseases such as
coccidiosis. Non-disease-causing variants of the protozoa that
cause this disease have been isolated, that allow poultry to
develop resistance without contracting the actual disease.
These variants have been employed to produce an effective
vaccine now used extensively by poultry producers.
Ag engineers and poultry scientists at UGA teamed up to
address the serious problem of heat stress in fast-growing
meat-type chickens. This work resulted in the development of
ventilation and cooling systems which have eliminated both
heat-related mortality and stunted growth during the hot summer
months.
I could list scores and scores of additional research
projects that have had significant impact in poultry genetics,
nutrition, food safety, et cetera, but in the final minute I
have, allow me to call attention to the recent National Academy
of Sciences report titled, The Critical Role of Animal Science
Research in Food Security and Sustainability. This report
details the important accomplishments of animal agriculture
research, and documents the alarmingly small amount of USDA
funding focused on animal agriculture, relative to its economic
importance and future expectations. As this report concludes,
the need for additional investment in animal agriculture
research is critical.
I do wish to thank the Committee for authorizing the
extension of the Animal Health Research and Disease Section
1433 Program. Full funding of the 1433 Program is still needed.
A well-thought-out research blueprint has been established. The
animal agriculture research community and industry counterparts
came together in 2012 and identified research priorities which
were published in the Farm Animal Integrated Research report,
FAIR 2012. We are prepared to meet the challenges facing the
future of animal agriculture when research funding is
available.
Again, I sincerely thank the Committee for your interest in
and support of agriculture research. That support is never
taken for granted. Thank you for the foresight you have in
regard to providing the investment required to make the
advancements needed to assure food security for a growing
global population.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Lacy follows:]

Prepared Statement of Michael P. Lacy, Ph.D., Professor and Department
Head, Department of Poultry Science, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
I am honored to have the opportunity to represent the University of
Georgia College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences and all
land-grant universities across the nation and to provide to the
Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and Research of the U.S.
House of Representatives Agriculture Committee testimony on the
intrinsic value and vital role public university research plays in
keeping American agriculture strong, our economy growing and the people
of the world nourished.
First, I want to thank you for your past support of our research
programs, and I ask for your continued support of this critical
component of our nation's economy and basic security. All agricultural
research is important; however, in this brief testimony I believe it is
best for me to focus primarily on my area of expertise, poultry
science.
Nowhere else is agricultural research so open and readily
accessible to farmers and consumers as it is in the U.S. This unique
quest for and application of new information and ideas relevant to
agriculture is directly attributable to our land-grant university
system. The land-grant model, coupled with USDA-ARS, form a powerful
combination that is the envy of the world in its effectiveness at
addressing the critical needs of food production.
A great example of land-grant and USDA collaboration is the
relationship between the University of Georgia and USDA in addressing
the threat of Avian Influenza (AI). Earlier this year, the U.S. faced a
renewed threat to our food security as AI spread across 21 western and
central states, resulting in the loss of almost 50 million birds
including 16 percent of the nation's egg producing flocks.
As the waterfowl that carry the AI virus migrate south this fall,
the threat of this disease intensifies in Georgia. Because of the size
and importance of poultry in Georgia, the leading producer of poultry
in the U.S., a serious AI outbreak in our state would be devastating to
our economy and impact the U.S. food supply.
Poultry scientists and veterinarians at USDA, the University of
Georgia and at scores of other land-grant universities across the
country have been conducting applied research and extension programs to
help poultry producers strengthen biosecurity procedures to protect the
nation's poultry flocks from AI. They also have been working tirelessly
on research related to response plans including humane euthanasia
methods and composting mass mortalities in the event of a catastrophic
AI outbreak.
This unexpected threat to poultry production in the U.S.
underscores the critical need for a strong animal/poultry research
infrastructure to address and respond to future major threats to animal
agriculture that no one can currently predict but are almost assuredly
to occur.
The USDA Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory (SEPRL) in Athens,
GA is recognized as one of the leading poultry disease research
facilities in the world. The work done there is of immeasurable
importance to protecting the health of the nation's poultry flocks. The
need for the funding recommended to expand and modernize the research
facilities at SEPRL is strategic and vital as the serious consequences
of the current AI situation highlight vividly.
In concert with the heightened biosecurity efforts of Georgia's
poultry producers, the University of Georgia's 4-H program is
developing and piloting a program with the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention to teach biosecurity principles to even our youngest
citizens, helping them better understand and prevent disease
transmission between animals and from animals to humans.
Poultry and eggs are a major protein source important in providing
vital nutrition for people around the world. We take the responsibility
of producing safe, affordable and high-quality meat and eggs seriously,
and will continue to be vigilant in our quest to address diseases that
threaten the flow of food and commerce. By addressing biosecurity at
all levels of our society, we are better protecting our people, our
animals and our agricultural economy.
Other research innovations related to poultry health include one of
the most promising long-term solutions to disease prevention--
development of genetic resistance. At the University of Georgia,
scientists are working at the basic level to enhance genetic resistance
to viral respiratory diseases such as AI, Newcastle, Infectious
Bronchitis, and Laryngotracheitis. These diseases are a considerable
threat to the U.S. poultry industry, but in developing counties they
frequently devastate entire flocks and can wipe out farmers' hopes of
feeding their families.
Land-grant universities are improving animal health and protecting
the environment through better nutrition. Poultry do not have enzymes
necessary to breakdown phytate phosphorous contained in typical corn/
soy diets. Poultry nutritionists have identified and commercialized
phytase enzymes that are now added to most poultry diets in order to
improve the utilization of this previously unavailable phosphorous
source. These enzymes reduce the need for inorganic phosphorous to be
added to diets. They also reduce the amount of phosphorous contained in
poultry manure, thereby improving the nitrogen-to-phosphorous ratio in
the manure and making it a more effective organic fertilizer.
Animal production is an important user, and in many cases the only
user, of byproducts of biofuel production, human food production and
industrial production. The University of Georgia has been a leader in
analyzing and providing research-based recommendations on the use of
alternative feed ingredients in poultry feeds. These studies have
effectively recycled byproducts, reduced costs for poultry producers
and kept millions of tons of material out of landfills and other waste
streams.
Food safety, water conservation and waste minimization as related
to poultry processing are high priorities for the poultry industry. UGA
and other land-grant laboratories, in partnership with Federal poultry
labs, are developing new processing methods looking at a systems
approach. Scientists and engineers from a number of institutions are
collaborating to examine poultry processing from the hatchery to the
marketplace to enhance food safety, energy efficiency, and
environmental stewardship. Research conducted at land-grant
universities has been key in reducing foodborne pathogens on poultry
products.
Consumer and industry interest in reducing drugs and chemicals in
poultry production has spurred research on vaccines to protect poultry
from parasitical diseases such as coccidiosis. Variants of the protozoa
that cause this disease have been isolated that allow poultry to
develop resistance without causing the severe production losses
associated with the disease. These variants have been successfully
employed in safe and effective vaccines that are now used extensively
in poultry production.
Essentially all the research done at universities these days is
multidisciplinary. Agricultural engineers and poultry scientists at the
University of Georgia teamed up to address the long-standing problem of
heat stress in meat-type chickens (broilers). This work resulted in
development of cost effective tunnel ventilation and evaporative
cooling systems which have virtually eliminated heat related mortality
and decreased growth and efficiency of broilers during the hot summer
months. The value of this research to Georgia poultry producers is
estimated at $15 million annually. These ventilation systems and
poultry housing designs are now the standard throughout U.S. and the
world.
As described clearly in the recent National Academy of Science
(NAS) report, ``Critical Role of Animal Science Research in Food
Security and Sustainability,'' the importance of animal/poultry
production to food security and economic development is significant.
Animal protein products account for 60-70 percent of the total U.S.
agricultural economy. Estimates are that the combination of increased
population and rising middle class in numbers of developing countries
will result in a 73 percent increase in animal protein demand by 2050.
The amount of research funding focused on animal/poultry research
is alarmingly small relative to animal agriculture's economic impact
and future expectations. USDA-ARS allocates 50 percent more to research
related to plant crops and a greater percentage of its budget to
environmental issues, food safety and nutrition than to animal
production research. The NAS report referred to above states: ``In the
past 2 decades, public funding, including formula funding and USDA-ARS/
NIFA funding, of animal science research has been stagnant in terms of
real dollars and has declined in relation to research inflation rate.''
Further, ``animal agricultural research has borne the brunt of decades
of neglect,'' in regard to research funding.
Even so, the results of the modest public research investment that
has been made in animal research are truly remarkable. For example, in
1960 it took over 100 days to grow a meat-type chicken to a market
weight of 5 pounds; today it takes less than 45 days. During the same
time period, feed efficiency improved from 2.5 pounds of feed required
to produce a pound of chicken to just 1.7 pounds today; and poultry
geneticists predict feed efficiencies will approach 1.2 in the next 2
decades. Annual egg production has improved from 230 eggs per hen in
the 1960 to 300 eggs per hen currently. Similar improvements have been
realized in poultry health and livability. These production and
efficiency advancements have allowed for significant improvement in
sustainability and amazing reductions in the environmental footprint of
poultry production relative to water, feed and waste-per-pound of
poultry meat and eggs produced.
The value of the application of the research findings produced by
our land-grant universities is significant, but equally valuable is the
undergraduate and graduate training provided by our scientists. This
development of human capital and training of the next generation of
scientists that our nation needs to assure continued progress and
success in food security may be the most important byproduct of the
research funding you provide. The NAS report emphasizes the need to
``revitalize research infrastructure (human and physical resources).''
Because of the historic funding shortfall and the future demand for
increased animal protein production, the need for additional investment
in animal science research is nothing less than critical. I do wish to
thank the Committee for authorizing the extension of the Animal Health
Research and Disease Section 1433 program. Full funding of the Section
1433 program is needed to address the priorities of food security, One
Health and environmental stewardship. When that funding is provided,
animal and poultry scientists will use it wisely and efficiently. The
animal science research community and industry counterparts came
together in 2012 and identified research priorities detailed in the
Farm Animal Integrated Research report (FAIR 2012). We have a well-
thought-out blueprint and are prepared to meet the challenges and
address the issues facing the future of animal agriculture.
I will conclude on an economic note. Poultry's estimated economic
impact in the U.S. is over $150 billion annually; $30 billion in
Georgia alone. Poultry provides over 120,000 jobs in Georgia and over
500,000 nationwide. Animal and poultry agriculture contributes over $43
billion annually to our nation's trade balance. Poultry and animal
products are an important source of affordable, high-quality protein to
feed the world. Enhanced funding for animal research is an investment
our country needs in order for the U.S. to continue to be the global
leader in poultry and animal production. Investment in animal
agriculture research will continue to pay significant dividends in
improved health, environmental sustainability, food security and
prosperity for farmers, consumers and society.
As with any investment, there must be an expectation of return, and
our track record in this regard stands out. More than 20 independent
studies over the past few decades consistently show that for every $1
invested in agricultural research $10 is returned.
Again, I wish to express gratitude for this opportunity to provide
testimony to the House Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and
Research. Your interest in and support of agriculture research is
appreciated by those of us working to help provide food security for
our country and the world. The funding you provide is important;
however, your acknowledgement, interest and encouragement in regard to
the importance of our research, extension and education programs
continue to inspire and motivate us. Thank you for the foresight you
have in regard to providing the essential funding required to
accomplish this critical work.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Lacy. And we still respect the
University of Georgia, despite of the fact you reminded us all
that our colleague, Mr. Scott, graduated from there.
Dr. Lacy. Go Dogs.
Mr. Scott. Go Dogs.
The Chairman. Dr. Buhler, please.

STATEMENT OF DOUGLAS D. BUHLER, Ph.D., SENIOR
ASSOCIATE DEAN FOR RESEARCH, COLLEGE OF
AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES, MICHIGAN STATE UNIVERSITY;
DIRECTOR, MSU AgBioResearch, EAST LANSING, MI

Dr. Buhler. Well, thank you. Chairman Davis, Ranking Member
DelBene, Congressman Moolenaar, thank you very much for the
opportunity to be here today, and represent the hardworking
research scientists and prevention professionals at Michigan
State University.
One of the benefits of going last is I can start out by
saying I want to concur with all of the comments that have been
made by the previous speakers. The critical nature of what we
do has always been important to this country and the world, but
I believe it is more important now than it has ever been as we
look at the challenges of feeding a growing world, with the
challenges that we face in terms of protecting our natural
resources, et cetera.
Michigan State University is very, very fortunate to have
very strong support from the State of Michigan and industry
partners. That support is very important because it allows us
to leverage the Federal investment in our research and outreach
programs. And so I really wanted to acknowledge that.
Founded in 1855, Michigan State University was the first
agricultural college of its kind in the country. It was
actually founded as--it was called the Michigan Agriculture
College. So we have very strong roots in agriculture, and if
you look at the history of the institution, it is a very
interesting history of starting from a state-based regional
agricultural college, and growing into a world-class
university, really starting and throughout the end of World War
II to the present. Michigan is also a very heavily specialty
crop state. And when you look at Michigan and you look at our
geography, a lot of the places where we grow crops are very
unique. And so when we talk about the importance of the Federal
investment and the state investment in protecting our specialty
crops, it is very critical because many of these crops depend
on the university for support. These crops are very important
locally, but they are not major crops on a national scale. And
so you look at things like tart cherries, asparagus, things
like that, that grow in a very unique environment, and so if
the university is not there to support these industries, there
is not a lot of back-up. And it is really important that we
continue to support the public-sector research and outreach to
support these important commodities.
I also want to point out that a lot of the work that we do
is often difficult to quantify because a lot of it is
protecting productivity as opposed to really generating new
outputs. And what I am particularly talking about here is pest
management. We have made a great deal of investments to protect
the inherent productivity of our crops, and that is something
that we really need to keep in mind as we look forward because
a huge part of what we do, whether it is in the animal
industries or the crop industries, is protecting the
productivity that we have inherent in our genetics and our
environments where we grow our crops.
So Michigan State University, as I said, is really rooted
in agriculture. Many of the early pioneers at our institution
were involved in things like helping to develop hybrid corn,
some of the early plant breeding programs. Plant breeding and
genetics continues to be a core of what we do, particularly in
the specialty crops. For example, our edible Dry Bean Program
has been producing a new variety that has been released into
the industry at a rate of at least one per year over the last
20 years. We have also been very involved in processing,
particularly in the dairy industry, and we will continue to
work in those areas.
An area that I want to make a little bit of a point on, and
it is really critical as we move forward, is that we look at
the issues that are facing us in the future, they are very
complex problems. And as we look at how do we attack some of
these big problems like antimicrobial resistance, which has
been mentioned, some of the weather issues, and others, climate
and so on, some of the water issues, we really need to draw a
broader range of scientists into our agricultural fields. We
really need to bring in fundamental plant science, fundamental
ecology, and things like that, and build teams that can address
these issues in a multidisciplinary way. This often requires
different funding, and it often requires, and would be very
much improved if we could provide more opportunities to work
across Federal agencies, particularly NIH and NSF, to bolster
some of our agricultural investments. And so we really look
forward to continuing to build some of these programs because
we think that it is really critical to moving forward in the
future.
So I just want to wrap up by just making a point about the
importance of the agricultural infrastructure and the
facilities that we need simply to do our research. Agriculture,
in many cases, is a little bit different than many of the other
areas of science, in that we need long-term investments in
things like animal herds, plant breeding programs, vineyards
and orchards, to just give us the basic capacity to do our
work. And that is really where, when you talk about why is
agriculture different than other areas of science, I believe
that is where that is rooted. We have to have these facilities
available, often taking 20, 30, maybe even 50 years to build
that capacity so that we can actually do our research. And so
when I am asked why should agriculture have this more unique
investment, that is the reason that I cite.
So thank you again for this opportunity, and we really
appreciate your support, and we look forward to moving forward
and addressing these important issues of our country and the
world. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Buhler follows:]

Prepared Statement of Douglas D. Buhler, Ph.D., Senior Associate Dean
for Research, College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Michigan
State University; Director, MSU AgBioResearch, East Lansing, MI
Chairman Davis, Ranking Member DelBene, Rep. Moolenaar, and other
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
on behalf of Michigan State University (MSU) at today's hearing to
highlight research innovations achieved by our nation's agricultural
colleges and universities.
I serve as both the Senior Associate Dean for Research in the
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, as well as Director of
MSU AgBioResearch. It is my responsibility to oversee MSU's research
portfolio in the areas of food, energy and the environment.
There is perhaps no greater time than now to be in involved in
research pertaining to sustainable food production. Today, the world
population is growing by about 80 million people each year and is
expected to continue this upward pace for the next several decades.
This presents immense challenges to food supplies. At the same time,
natural resources are being depleted--soil is eroding, water tables are
dipping and fish counts are declining. We need solutions that will keep
our food supply safe and secure while protecting our natural resources.
Like many other agricultural universities, MSU remains committed to
discovering practical, adoptable solutions that address these very
serious issues. And it is through research and outreach that these
sustainable answers will continue to be unearthed, shared and put into
practice at home and around the globe.
Background
Founded in 1855, MSU was the first agricultural college of its kind
in the nation. It also served as a prototype for land-grant
institutions under the Morrill Act, enacted by President Abraham
Lincoln. In 1888, MSU also became one of the first U.S. institutions
under the 1887 Hatch Act to create a network of agricultural experiment
stations where research trials and field studies are conducted on
behalf of farmers.
Today, MSU AgBioResearch operates 13 such outlying research
facilities located in strategic growing and climatic regions throughout
the state, in addition to numerous laboratories and other research
facilities on campus. Key findings from research assist the food and
agriculture industry, which contributes more than $100 billion of
annual economic impact to Michigan alone. With more than 300
commodities produced on a commercial basis, Michigan is the second most
diverse agriculture state in the nation (behind only California). The
MSU College of Agriculture and Natural Resources, MSU AgBioResearch and
MSU Extension work hand-in-hand with the commodity organizations to
address the issues facing growers and producers throughout the state--
solutions on everything from disease management to food processing.
These research results are vital to providing healthy, nutritional food
at affordable prices and with fewer environmental impacts.
Obviously, Michigan State has deep roots in agricultural research,
some of which have even helped breathe vitality into modern-day
farming. Some examples include:

In the late 1800s, botany professor W.J. Beal was one of the
pioneers in the development of hybrid corn, which doubled the
yield for farmers. In 2014, Michigan farmers harvested the
largest corn crop on record with total production exceeding 355
million bushels.

In 1915, F.A. Spragg released the first navy bean variety,
Robust. During the 20th century, 40 varieties of beans in eight
commercial classes were developed at MSU and released. And in
the first decade of the 21st century, ten new bean varieties
were introduced under the direction of MSU researcher James
Kelly, who continues as one of the world's top bean breeders.
MSU has helped Michigan become one of the leading dry edible
bean producers.

In 1929, dairy industry pioneer G. Malcolm Trout linked the
processes of pasteurization and homogenization, finding that
homogenized milk needed to be pasteurized first in order to
have an appealing taste. He also developed new processes to
make cheeses, yogurt and other products. Today, dairy is a
leading segment of Michigan agriculture, contributing $14.7
billion to the state's economy.

Horticulturist Jim Hancock has developed several blueberry
varieties, some of which are the most widely planted
blueberries in the world. For the past 70 years, Michigan has
been the No. 1 state for blueberry production--largely in part
to Hancock's influence.

In 1965, MSU partnered with the U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) to form the MSU-DOE Plant Research Laboratory.
Researchers continue to look at ways to improve energy crop
production and unravel the intricate mechanisms by which
plants--the root of all biofuels--capture, convert and deposit
energy. This effort continues today with the goal of meeting
the cellulosic biofuel blending mark of 16 billion gallons by
2020--as mandated by Congress in 2007.

These achievements help to show how agricultural research can lead
to economic, environmental and health benefits that transcend time and
impact the industry for decades to come.
Recent Highlights
When avian influenza was detected in parts of the U.S. earlier this
year, MSU AgBioResearch and Extension scientists immediately responded
in an effort to assist farmers and educate the public. Educators worked
in conjunction with both the Michigan Department of Agriculture and
Rural Development and the Michigan Department of Natural Resources to
ensure that appropriate steps were being taken to address this serious
biosecurity threat. A website strictly devoted to avian influenza was
developed, which included frequently asked questions and information,
including a YouTube video for backyard farmers. In the end, Michigan's
poultry population remained largely unaffected by avian influenza. This
is just one example of how MSU works with state and Federal agencies,
including the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, to provide
timely, fact-based information to minimize public concern and maximize
human and animal health safety.
MSU has also long been involved with the battle against soybean
rust, a serious disease in Asia for many decades that arrived in the
U.S. in 2004. It was considered such a threat to agriculture that it
was listed as a possible weapon of bioterrorism. Although it cannot
overwinter in areas with freezing temperatures, it can spread rapidly
and explosively over large distances. MSU scientists have been helping
farmers put action plans in place and to define best practices in terms
of early identification and treatment. While the disease has hit states
in southern U.S., Michigan has remained free of the disease.
Through USDA funding, MSU horticulturist Amy Iezzoni led the
development of the RosBREED project to help breeders working with the
Rosaceae family (which includes apples, peaches, sweet and tart
cherries, raspberries, plums, pears and strawberries) incorporate the
latest genetic knowledge and tools in their work. Not only are new
varieties of fruit being created more quickly and less expensively than
ever before, the project is also improving disease resistance. By
applying the latest genetic tools and knowledge, Iezzoni's team has
been making advancements to reduce the crops' vulnerability and keep
the nation's food system more secure. In Michigan alone, Rosaceae crops
are valued at nearly $230 million per year.
Dr. Paolo Sabbatini, with funding from USDA, is leading efforts to
alter grape cluster microclimates, thwart disease and improve grape
quality. MSU has long worked on ways to keep grapes free of pest and
disease, and are now also moving into more studies on new varietals
conducive to the Great Lakes region. Each year Michigan's wine, grapes
and grape juice products and related industries produce nearly $790
million of total economic value to the State of Michigan, pay more than
$42 million in state and local taxes in Michigan and an additional $42
million in Federal taxes. The industry also accounts for 5,000 jobs
across the state and a payroll of more than $190 million.
And with the boom of microbreweries within the state, MSU is
working to help farmers fulfill the need to grow hops and barley to
meet escalating demand for locally grown ingredients. Researcher Russ
Freed recently was able to resurrect 80 year old barley developed by an
MSU plant breeder in 1916. Fittingly called ``Spartan,'' the cultivar
had higher production capabilities and superior quality and by 1950,
was found on farms around the country. Eventually, Spartan was
surpassed by other barleys and the seeds locked away in a USDA gene
bank in Utah. Now a team of MSU researchers is growing Spartan barley
in trials in the northern region of the Upper Peninsula. And Michigan
brewers are expressing interest. Today, more than 2,300 craft brew
businesses are in operation around the nation, representing more than
104,000 jobs and a nearly $20 billion industry.
MSU's Multidisciplinary Appeal
Not only does MSU have a rich agricultural history, it is a
university steeped in multidisciplinary efforts. Faculty members are
encouraged to collaborate beyond college and department lines, reach
across disciplines and work together to achieve results with lasting
impacts. There are many examples, a few of which are described below:
Felicia Wu, a John A. Hannah Distinguished Professor in the
departments of Food Science and Human Nutrition and Agricultural, Food
and Resource Economics, came to MSU in 2013 because of its robust
agricultural research coupled with strong medical programs--a rare
combination for a land-grant university. With funding from USDA, NIH,
USAID and other sources, Dr. Wu is now heading up a new center aimed at
studying the overall implications agricultural practices have on human
health. The Center for Health Impacts of Agriculture (CHIA) focuses on
three pathways by which agriculture affects human health: nutrition,
which includes the quality, macro- and micronutrient content, and
diversity of food; economics also play a pivotal role, particularly in
underdeveloped areas where resources are at a premium; and the
unintended negative consequences of agriculture on human health and the
environment.
Antibiotic resistance, declared a major public health threat by
both the Food and Drug Administration and the World Health
Organization, is a high priority topic within CHIA research as well as
other laboratories at MSU. Increasing and occasionally inappropriate
prescription of antibiotics has led to significant bacterial resistance
in humans. In animals, the use of antibiotics to promote growth, in
addition to fighting bacterial infections, decreases the drug's ability
to efficiently eradicate illness when needed. When used in excess,
antibiotics end up in the environment--in the air, water and soil--and
humans can become exposed not just to the antibiotics but to
antibiotic-resistant bacteria. A goal is to illuminate these pathways
of exposure by studying the transportation and fate of antibiotics and
antibiotic-resistance genes in the environment.
David Kramer is another example of a researcher who came to MSU
because of the university's multidisciplinary research culture. His
laboratory is reminiscent of a start-up business, a convergence of
diverse minds and skills with the same end goal--to improve plant
science. Funded by USDA, NSF, USAID, MSU and others, his group is
looking to solve some of the worldwide challenges related to human
population growth and the need for more food. The John A. Hannah
Distinguished Professor in Photosynthesis and Bioenergetics is leading
a team of scientists, engineers and software developers in a project
called PhotosynQ that is changing the way farmers and researchers think
about collaboration. Growing better crops using new management
strategies relies heavily on how researchers approach information
collection and analysis, particularly with small-scale farming.
The scientists have developed a prototype instrument, which costs
around $100, and includes sensors that measure the temperature,
relative humidity, carbon dioxide, chlorophyll content and several
other facets of plant health. Adaptability is essential, so the sensors
can be easily changed for a wide range of projects. Once data is
collected, it is instantly uploaded to the PhotosynQ website and
available for all users. Researchers can even post a project and
instructions that allow other scientists to contribute. This vast plant
science social network illustrates extraordinary possibilities. There
are roughly 200 devices currently in use around the world. To date,
more than 600 users have taken in excess of 100,000 measurements. The
volume of data is growing exponentially and allowing farmers to make
more accurate predictions about yields, which varieties to use, and
when to apply fertilizers.
Entomologist Rufus Isaacs is another fine example of an MSU
researcher who is leading work that transcends barriers--this time of
the geographical sort. He is leading a multi-state, multi-institutional
project that impacts crops from apples to pickling cucumbers. As honey
bee populations decline, Dr. Isaacs is looking at alternative
pollinators to help maintain the vitality of U.S. crops that are
pollinated every spring and valued at more than $14 billion annually.
Major funding from Dr. Isaacs program comes from USDA, MSU Project
GREEEN and industry organizations.
Dr. Isaacs and several colleagues are also addressing ways to
control the Spotted Wing Drosophila (SWD), an invasive species that
seriously threatens fruit crops such as apples and cherries. Unlike
most pests, the SWD mandible is so strong it is able to burrow its way
into unripe fruit, leaving irreparable damage to the fruit and
unavoidable economic loss to the grower. The Asian insect is believed
to have come to the U.S. via food crates and has become one of our
region's greatest fruit production threats.
MSU's Bruno Basso, an expert in precision agriculture, is leading
an initiative funded by USDA and industry organizations involving an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), or drone, that collects data by flying
over the field. Attached sensors measure plant nutrients, temperature
and size. Using the data, a grower can determine how to apply the right
amount of fertilizer at the right place and time. The research covers
nearly 20,000 acres across the Midwest. Once data is collected, Dr.
Basso uses a modeling software developed at MSU called the System
Approach to Land Use Sustainability. He can then input soil, water and
nutrient data to model crop performance by simulating weather patterns
across several years.
But as issues, such as emerging invasive species and drought
resistance, continue to mount, investments in agricultural research
have unfortunately begun to dwindle.
Facing Challenges
Funding for Formula Programs has declined. These funds, commonly
termed capacity funds, provide critical infrastructure at State
Agriculture Experiment Stations and for Cooperative Extension that
facilitate the success of the U.S. agriculture system. According to
USDA-NIFA data, capacity fund programs have lost as much as 40 percent
in buying power over the last 20 years (Figure 1). These reductions
have been exacerbated by differential budget cuts to Agriculture
Experiment Stations and Extension in many states. Simply put the same
or new innovations cannot be provided with fewer funds.
Figure 1 (Data Provided by NIFA, constant 1993 dollars)
NIFA Appropriations in Constant 1993 Dollars, 1993-2012

The top Federal funding priority for State Agricultural Experiment
Stations and Cooperative Extension organizations is maintaining steady
increases in capacity funds, ideally at least recovering lost buying
power. There are few other Federal programs where limited funds have
been leveraged at least five to six times with state funds annually
over a period of decades, in this case to yield ongoing positive
impacts on the nation's food and fiber system, as well as related
issues such as alternative fuels, environmental sustainability,
economic development, and health and well-being of our citizens in both
urban and rural settings.
While there have been marginal increases in Agriculture and Food
Research Initiative competitive program, the current level of $243
million is woefully short of the authorized $700 million and is
insufficient to meet current demand. The most recent AFRI Annual
Synopsis for 2010 indicates that there were over $2.6 billion in highly
meritorious proposals that would have been awarded if funds were
available. Unfortunately, only 403 proposals could be funded from the
available $232,649,478. Inadequate funding of NIFA competitive and
capacity programs jeopardizes the world's most productive and
successful Agricultural Research and Cooperative Extension system.
We are thankful that Congress has long agreed with the land-grant
systems' proposition that strong Hatch Act funding is critical to
maintaining vibrant food and agriculture sector, strong national
emergency response capability and research infrastructure required to
meet both U.S. imperatives and global food security requirements.
Investments in agricultural research have a huge impact on agricultural
productivity. From 1970-2004, the marginal rate of return on investment
was approximately 50 percent annually. Today's farmers also grow twice
as much food as their parents--using less land, energy and water--while
promoting environmental stewardship.
Predicted world population growth, higher incomes and energy
demands will require a further doubling of global food supply by 2050.
Investing in agricultural research pays off in home-grown jobs:
agriculture is one of the nation's largest employers, with more than
two million farmers and some 19 million in allied industries--and where
the jobs pay $2,600 more per year than other private sectors.
National Endeavors
The USDA's flagship competitive grants program--Agriculture and
Food Research Initiative--benefits the nation by providing America's
farmers and foresters with genomic data and biotechnology tools to
expand good and fiber production, processing and international trade;
healthcare professionals with insight into the relationships between
diet and health; farmers, landowners and ranchers with expanded
knowledge about soil and water quality; university funding to train new
generations of food, agriculture, natural resource scientists and
cooperative Extension educators.
The U.S. has been able to adopt policies promoting the production
of renewable fuels and other bioproducts to improve national energy
security. This is an area that continues to need additional funding to
assess the effects on water use, soil fertility and other environmental
conditions. Economic analyses are needed to better understand how food,
feed and fuel prices are interrelated.
As the U.S. struggles with obesity and diabetes epidemics, expanded
research is necessary to more scientifically inform nutrition education
and guidance programs and improve the nutritional value and
availability of crops, fruits and vegetables and other food.
There is an urgent need to educate and support more young men and
women--especially those from diverse backgrounds and ethnic
communities--to conduct agricultural research and outreach, and to lead
public and private sector organizations. Today, there are two jobs
available for every qualified candidate in many fields of agriculture.
We need people who want to serve the nation as the next farmers,
foresters, ranchers and bioenergy producers.
More funding is also urgently needed to fight plant and animal
diseases that threaten public health and agricultural output and food
security. Many important challenges exist for managing and protecting
our water resources as well.
Moving Forward
A new national center is being established on the campus of
Michigan State University. The Center for Research on Ingredient Safety
(CRIS) is a partnership between the food, beverage and consumer
products industries, in association with the Grocery Manufacturers
Association and MSU. This independent, academic, science-based center
will serve as a reliable and unbiased source for information, research,
training and analysis on the safe use of chemical ingredients in
consumer packaged goods including foods, beverages, cosmetics and
household consumer products.

Ensuring the safety of food products--and maintaining the
confidence of consumers--continues to be a top priority at MSU.
We continue strong collaborative efforts like this one that
combine our leading programs in packaging and food processing
to agricultural economics and toxicology.

CRIS will work to achieve the following goals:

Expand the opportunity to conduct basic and applied research
on the safety and toxicology of ingredients in food, packaging,
cosmetics and household care products.

Develop and validate testing methods and strategies for
evaluating the safety of ingredients in food, packaging,
cosmetics and household care products.

Establish a graduate training program that prepares
scientists for a career in assessing the safety and toxicology
of ingredients in food, packaging, cosmetics and household care
products that includes training in risk assessment and U.S. and
international regulatory policies.

Inform the public, health professionals, regulators and the
scientific community on research matters reflecting the state-
of-the-science pertaining to the safety and toxicology of
ingredients in food, packaging, cosmetics and household care
products.
Maintaining the Momentum
Like other agricultural universities, we look forward to continuing
to generate and disseminate new knowledge and educate young people to
work in the ever-important areas of food production. As the world
population is expected to reach nine billion within the next few
decades, our work is more important than ever.
While we have been incredibly successful for many decades, the
system faces major challenges. The declining buying power of
appropriations referenced earlier in this document make it difficult to
maintain the long-term programs essential to addressing many
agricultural issues. The cost of research is rising and funding
limitations not only slows progress of scientists in traditional areas
of agricultural research, but it also impedes our ability to bring a
broader array of scientists to address agricultural problems. Low
levels of funding in competitive grants programs has resulted in
extremely low funding rates, leaving meritorious projects undone and
discouraging young scientists from entering the field. In short, it is
creating a system that is not welcoming to the best and brightest young
scientists. If this continues, it will erode our ability to respond to
the challenge of feeding the world.
We look forward to continuing our tradition as a strong land-grant
university--educating future generations to meet the growing demands
and discovering and sharing advancements that will benefit our state,
the nation and the world. Agriculture is America's oldest career, and
today it is arguably one of the most complex, technology-driven,
knowledge-based industries in the world. We've come a long way, but
there continues to be so much more to do.
Thank you for this opportunity and your support.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Buhler.
I am going to follow a practice that has become standard in
this hearing room. I am going to ask one question, and then I
can get back to my follow-up questions so that we can get to my
fellow Members that much more quickly.
My question, obviously, is for Dr. Hauser. Thanks again for
coming in from Champaign-Urbana.
According to the U.S. Census, the average age of a farmer
is 58, despite large participation in positive experiences in
programs like 4-H, and it just seems the passion for ag begins
to dip as kids grow older. Why do you think that is, and why
aren't there more young people choosing ag as a profession?
Dr. Hauser. Well, fewer and fewer students come from the
farm, the demographics are clearly in that direction, but what
isn't recognized, regardless of where they come from, is the
breadth of what we have to offer in colleges that are
represented here. We are talking about food production and
feeding the world, and that is much more than cows and plows
and things that the ``kids'' tend to think about these days
when they think about programs. That is particularly related
now, we fear, to crop sciences, the focus of my remarks. There
is just not that much that is sexy about crops and plants and
things that involves--until they get there and they learn there
are jobs. And as soon as they start learning there are jobs is
when we start seeing transfers come in and getting those seats
filled.
The Chairman. So they may be going less to the farms and
more to the agribusiness sector to----
Dr. Hauser. Agribusiness, processing, distribution, trade,
policy.
The Chairman. Yes. One quick follow-up question before I
turn it over to the Ranking Member. When Congress created NIFA,
the clear construction intent was for an independent scientific
policy setting agency for the good and ag sciences sector. Do
you believe this intent, Dr. Hauser, has been achieved?
Dr. Hauser. It has been achieved. We continue to do the
scholarship that that legislation had in mind when it was
created. I think that the difference is that we now do it in
much more of a partnership than we did when it began.
The Chairman. Great, thank you, Dr. Hauser. I will yield
back, and I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all of
you for your testimony.
Dr. Moyer, you mentioned gathering genomic data and gene
sequencing, and how critical that was, and I wondered if you
could elaborate a little bit more about really why this
information is so important and what it is used for.
Dr. Moyer. Well, the plant genome is foundational to all of
the information that makes up a productive variety. And we know
that the pressures that are being placed on our agricultural
production, particularly as we look forward in the demands
between now and 2050, we are going to have to produce more
abundant yields than we ever have before. For rapid advances,
we have to have the technology to identify the specific genes
in the genome that are responsible for the traits that we are
breeding for, and then we have to have the efficient tools to
use that information in order to rapidly integrate and reduce
the time that it takes to make a variety that is adopted by the
farmers.
Ms. DelBene. Okay. And then you also talked about the
research being done on biodegradable plastic fabric, and that
it led to a second project on non-woven polymers to help
manufacture biodegradable mulch. Do you find regularly that one
project leads to another, and that that is how research builds
on itself?
Dr. Moyer. Yes. I think it is extremely important. I
wouldn't say it is rare, but it is certainly a hallmark of a
successful project when it receives a second round of funding.
It shows the success. That is why it is even a measure of
success of the SCRI Program, bringing together teams that are,
in fact, actually contributing to the solutions of complex
problems.
Ms. DelBene. Yes.
Dr. Moyer. And so, like I said, it is a winnowing process,
but getting that second round of funding is a hallmark of
something that really is truly having impact. And also this is
just not peer reviewed, but in order to get the call back from
a preproposal, it undergoes stakeholder review. So this is a
two-tiered process. The rigor is pretty--the bar is pretty
high, and yes, that is a very positive sign.
Ms. DelBene. Okay. Thank you. This is a question for all of
you. There have been multiple studies that have looked at the
need for more agricultural research funding or making changes
in how we actually fund agricultural research, and as someone
on the frontlines, what are your experiences in addressing the
funding question, as well as the best type of funding mechanism
for competitive awards? And by funding mechanism, I am
referring to whether collaborative, long-term, larger grant
funding is the way to go, or if, given the amount of ag
research funding, whether smaller grants, not just focused--
whether smaller grants might be helpful, not just focused on
multi-institution work. What do you think is the best bet, or
what feedback would you give all of us on how to best structure
funding? And anyone who wants to respond.
Dr. Heithaus. I will jump in, coming from a somewhat unique
position of being a non-land-grant institution. And the answer
is a mix. I think that having these large, multi-institution
grants are very beneficial, especially long-term as we are
facing changing conditions. And we really need to be projecting
what the needs are going to be 5 or 10 years from now, rather
than reacting to what worked best last year. And I think that
the collaborative grants do allow us to bring expertise from
multiple institutions, and help catalyze that collaboration
that I think would help bring in expertise from outside the
traditional land-grants while really teaming it up. But I think
that you do still need those mix of the small, more targeted
grants that don't require collaboration as well because so many
of these challenges are very local, and you don't want to kind
of throw the baby out with the bathwater on that.
Dr. Hauser. May I speak on behalf of my friend from
Michigan State?
Ms. DelBene. I guess that is a question for him.
Dr. Hauser. He made the point at the end of his remark,
which is an excellent one, and that is, agricultural research
often involves very land-intensive, capital-intensive
infrastructures that have to be maintained, regardless of what
kind of projects you are doing. It is like farming; you have to
have land, you have to have capital, you have to have
equipment, regardless of what you are doing, and that for us is
often the most challenging part of maintaining the operation
that we need to do the scholarship that is expected of us. And
so it is a combination of competitive grant running the right
way, plus the ability to be at the right capacity level.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you.
My time has expired. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member DelBene.
The gentleman from Georgia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Lacy, I will be stepping out after my questions because
I have an Armed Services Committee as well at the same time,
but I do want to thank you for being here and I appreciate your
kind comments. My professors might take issue with you at the
University of Georgia. But we are the leading producer of
poultry in the U.S., and as you testified in your opening
statement, a serious outbreak of avian influenza would be
devastating to our state's economy, and especially to certain
regions of our state and our food supply. This avian influenza
has been around a long time. It is something that we just now
seem to be coming to grips with that it is here in our country
and a major risk for us. Can you explain in more details the
work that you are doing to help the producers to help protect
the poultry flocks from avian influenza, and what other
potential diseases are there that we see in other countries
that have not yet made it to America?
Dr. Lacy. Thank you. The avian influenza is a disease that
has been around, I think it was identified in the early 1900s,
and we have had outbreaks of avian influenza in the United
States. I remember in Virginia and Pennsylvania in the 1980s,
and Texas a few years ago. But our industry is so sophisticated
and so on top of being able to diagnose avian influenza that we
are able to stamp it out quickly in the past. This particular
year we weren't able to stamp it out as we have in the past. It
caught us by surprise. So our efforts have been to educate
growers, to educate the industry on the seriousness of the
present situation, and to redouble our biosecurity efforts to
try to keep the virus from entering the commercial chicken
houses, commercial chicken production.
Other diseases that cause us problems in poultry production
are, actually, mostly respiratory diseases, as avian influenza
is; infectious bronchitis, laryngotracheitis, those are two
particular diseases. Those we can control by vaccine. Avian
influenza, because of trade implications, we have chosen not to
vaccinate for avian influenza in the United States.
Mr. Scott. What is the difference this year and in prior
years? Why did it get ahead of us this year instead of us
controlling it the way we had in the past?
Dr. Lacy. Another really good question, and again, the
importance of that Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory in
Athens, Georgia. They have been able to determine that this
particular variant of the avian influenza virus is different
than what we have encountered before. Like the human flu virus,
it is a flu virus, it changes each year. So this particular
strain of high-path avian influenza is unusual, it is
definitely more of a problem in our turkey and layer flocks
than what we have experienced before, and I think that that
coupled with the fact that we haven't had an avian influenza
outbreak in some time, again, caught us a little bit by
surprise.
Mr. Scott. Have you been able to partner with the ARS
facilities and other universities on this, or did you speak to
potentially CDC and other government agencies, and how you are
able to coordinate and work together?
Dr. Lacy. We are--it is amazing in Georgia, and I can't
speak for other states, but the response there has been superb.
The response of all state agencies; USDA, CDC, and our state's
Department of Natural Resources, Department of Agriculture,
Environmental Protection, all of those agencies have come
together, FEMA, come together to plan for a worst case scenario
that we hope never happens, but the amount and the
effectiveness of that state and Federal collaboration has been
amazing.
Mr. Scott. Well, I want to thank all of you for being here.
And, Mr. Chairman, this just reemphasizes the value of not only
research in agriculture, but extension, that protects the food
supply of the United States and, quite honestly, the largest
food supply in the world.
So thank you all for what you do. I certainly appreciate
you being here, and I hope to see you in Athens.
The Chairman. Thank you to my colleague from Georgia. And I
also want to give him a thanks because he is my predecessor in
this chair for this Subcommittee, and did a great job during
the last Congress too, so thank you.
I tried to avoid the next questioner by going to Mr.
Peterson, but, Jim, he didn't have any questions, so I am going
to you.
Mr. McGovern. Thank you. I appreciate it.
And I really don't have any questions either, other than to
say thank you to the panel. I think it is really important that
you are here and talking about the incredible research that you
are all doing; because, for a lot of Members of Congress,
especially those who are not on this Committee, they don't
quite make the connection between our agricultural colleges and
universities and what they contribute in terms of agriculture,
but in terms of business and in terms of the economy. So I
appreciate you being here.
I have seen firsthand how important our land-grant
universities are and the incredible work they are doing. I am
proud to represent the flagship campus of the five-campus
University of Massachusetts system, the UMass Amherst, in
Amherst, Massachusetts. And over the years, UMass has expanded
into a major research university that covers many areas of
research and education, including cutting-edge research and
advanced materials and manufacturing, applied life sciences and
health data science, and security and many other important
fields, driving economic growth in Massachusetts and across the
country. But through all that transformation, the school has
never forgotten its proud history and roots as an agricultural
institution. And I have seen firsthand some of the most
innovative and exciting projects revolve around agriculture.
Some of you pointed out that some of what you do is unique to
the states and areas that you live in. In Massachusetts I have
seen this incredible cutting-edge research on cranberries out
of UMass. But what is equally exciting to me is the work that
they are doing to help, not only protect our food here in the
United States, but help find ways to feed the hungry around the
world, and to deal with plant diseases and animal diseases, and
all the kinds of stuff that oftentimes result in catastrophes.
So I am just here to say thank you. I support our
investment in all of you, and it is important that we brag
about it a little bit more because I am not always sure that
people get it. When you think of agriculture, oftentimes people
don't automatically think about colleges and universities; they
think of people working on a farm. But, like I said, I have
seen firsthand in my own state, and you have all talked about
it here today, unbelievable research. It is worth every penny.
And it is cost-effective and you have saved lives in the
process too. So anyway, I just wanted to say thank you.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. And I echo the comments from my
colleague, Mr. McGovern. And thank you for those comments too.
Mr. Moolenaar, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also want to
thank all of you as panelists for being here, and especially
appreciate Dr. Buhler from Michigan State University. We are
very proud of Michigan State.
And I wanted to just direct some of my questions to you if
that is all right, and then maybe have one question for the
entire group. But first of all, thank you for testifying. And
Michigan State has really played a lead role in our country,
and especially in our state, in agricultural research. And I
had a few questions for you based on the understanding I have,
and these are kind of technical questions, but one of the
questions would be on the Hatch Act, requiring dollar-for-
dollar matching funds from state-appropriations. Also requires
each state to use 25 percent of its Hatch Act funds to support
multi-state or regional research. Do you believe those
percentages should be modified at all, or is that the right
approach?
Dr. Buhler. Well, I am very comfortable with the
percentages as they stand because one of the things that we
need to do, and we are doing much more effectively, is working
across state boundaries. One of the positive impacts that we
have had in recent years over some of our tough budget times
has really driven us to speak more seriously about how we work
across state-lines, how do we move information back and forth.
So the requirement to use a sizeable portion of the money that
way makes a lot of sense, and it is really on the backs of
people like us to make sure that we are working with each
other. As a matter of fact, the meeting that I left, and I am
going back to, is our annual meeting of the directors of
research at the land-grant universities, and one of the things
that we do at that meeting is talk about how we can more
effectively collaborate. So I believe that continuing to put an
emphasis on the collaboration--you heard many examples here of
how we already work with each other, we need to do more of
that.
Mr. Moolenaar. And then in your comments you also mentioned
working across agencies. Could you speak to that a bit more
also?
Dr. Buhler. Yes. I believe that we are quite fortunate in
Michigan is that we have very good relationships with our
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. For example,
the Department of Environmental Quality, as well as the
Department of Natural Resources. And so we have very good
interactions there. We also have many very strong commodity
groups that we interact with very closely. Many of those groups
have their own research funding programs that we work with
collaboratively. Actually, most of those programs are actually
administered through my office, and so we provide that
assistance to those groups.
We also have a state-funded program called Project GREEEN,
which is specifically a grassroots program that provides
funding annually for mostly applied research, with support of
the plant and agriculture industries of Michigan, and it is
very much integral with the commodity groups. They sit on our
review panels, they provide priorities every year, and it has
been a very, very successful program, and it is a very, very
good example of how universities and industries and state
government can work together in an effective manner.
Mr. Moolenaar. Along those lines, USDA recently began
implementing a two-stage review process for competitive grants,
that relevancy is considered under that as well as peer review.
Do you think this emphasis on relevancy can improve the
producers' support for these programs?
Dr. Buhler. I very much believe that it can, and I really
come from the experience that I just referenced in terms of
working with this Project GREEEN Program. The fact that we have
the producers at the table in every stage of the process, and
they are actually there in the room and understand the
interaction of their priorities with strong science, and
balancing all of the different priorities of all of the
different industries is really critical. So I think it is
really important maybe more how it is done. I am more in favor
of maybe an integrated program where everybody is kind of
reviewing things together so that the science and the relevancy
are reviewed together, but the bottom line is I support it,
particularly as it relates to programs that relate to applied
research, and then moving those results into our community.
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay. And then I want to ask you a little
bit about cooperative extension, improving communications to
constituents involving our food supply. One of the things I
wanted to ask all of you is, as we did this GMO labeling bill,
it was clear to me that a lot of the advances in biotechnology
are being viewed with fear or suspicion, and I just wonder what
your universities' role or cooperative extension might play in
that.
Dr. Buhler. Well, just real quickly, we are working very
hard to try to get our arms around that. For me personally, we
have really gotten the confusion of the technology of genetic
modification with some of the discomfort, with some of the
specific products that have come from that, and we have really
got to figure out how we help people understand. We are talking
about new ways of doing it because we don't feel that we are
being effective with where we are. So we have to step back and
be honest with ourselves, and relook at some of the things we
are trying to do.
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I know we are out of time, I don't know if
any of the others wanted to comment on that topic, or if you
have additional questions.
The Chairman. Let's get to some of the other Members----
Mr. Moolenaar. Okay.
The Chairman.--and we can go back to that----
Mr. Moolenaar. Thank you very much.
The Chairman.--if possible.
Dr. Buhler. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Yoho.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate you all
being here. And, Dr. Heithaus, I appreciate you being a fellow
Floridian and doing the research you guys do.
Working off Congressman Moolenaar here, aside from the
communications on the success of ag research, how do you
believe we can help elevate the importance of ag research? You
guys are doing incredible research. I mean it is phenomenal. I
look at what we have done in Florida, like on the Papaya
Ringspot Virus. It was done over 10 years ago but yet we
haven't been able to market it because of the threat of GMO.
And, to do the research is great, but if we can't market that--
I would like to hear from you guys. What are your thoughts on
how we can do that better, because we are constantly being
bombarded, and there is a lot of false science out there and a
lot of fear, and, of course, there are people that are fueling
that, and it is crippling the end-use of what you guys have
created. So I will start with you, Dr. Heithaus.
Dr. Heithaus. Well, I think that the first thing is that,
unfortunately, a lot of scientists like to put their head down,
do the work, and get the satisfaction of knowing that they have
helped the industry and helped solve a problem. And we need to
be very intentional about how we market and communicate about
these issues. I think that it is really important that we do
this. In south Florida, a lot of people don't know how
important ag is, even as an industry. I mean they just think of
beaches and tourists, but the ag industry is critical to the
success of south Florida, and is really important nationwide.
So I think that we need to be very intentional and targeted in
how we talk to not just the local agricultural community, but
the wider consumer community about what we are doing. And as we
build this agribusiness incubator with the University of
Florida, one of the components that we are going to be working
to train community members in and farmers that work there is in
the marketing of their products and how do we talk about this
specifically.
Mr. Yoho. Dr. Moyer, did you want to weigh-in on that?
Dr. Moyer. Yes. I think one of the things that we really
need to do, and one of the things we have learned from the GMO
situation that has now been going on for over 25 years, is that
the importance of involving the social scientists in the
integration of new technology, and the push on--or the
suggestion--strong suggestion of many of these grants of having
that multidisciplinary team and involving the social scientists
in the project, and then conducting those studies that will
hopefully anticipate some of the problems that might arise, and
thereby facilitate the integration of new technologies. And
that is something that we have to do.
Mr. Yoho. I agree. And it needs to be a concerted effort
that when a new product comes out, we need to blast that
throughout the media and not have a television personality
coming out and saying, ``Oh, this is bad,'' and it just starts.
Dr. Hauser?
Dr. Hauser. So that raises an interesting communication
issue. The emotion associated with biotech and a lot of things
in agriculture is communicated how? It is mostly through social
media. So while it is good to get social scientists involved,
and I am one of those, I am glad to hear that suggestion, it is
also good to start thinking about how we communicate, and we
are not very good in academia, of getting it out into the forum
that people are paying attention to.
Mr. Yoho. Well, and you bring up a good point there because
last week, we had a discussion on the Freedom of Information
Act----
Dr. Hauser. Yes.
Mr. Yoho.--how these researchers are doing the research,
and then these groups are going after them, making them look
like the devil not even in disguise. And they are squashing the
researchers' desire to go out and do that.
Let me move on to something else. Dr. Lacy, you were
talking about the vaccines that we are not using for avian
influenza. I am a veterinarian by trade. I have been around ag
pretty much my whole life. Are you guys doing anything in
conjunction with NIH about the avian influenza or--not the
avian influenza, but the DNA recombinant vaccines that are
multivalent? They are using a fraction of the inside cell code
to glycoprotein to produce that. Are we working on that with
the avian species?
Dr. Lacy. There are veterinarians that are working on that.
The issue with trade is that if you vaccinate a chicken for
avian influenza, you can't really tell whether----
Mr. Yoho. Right.
Dr. Lacy.--whether they had the disease----
Mr. Yoho. If they are a carrier or not----
Dr. Lacy.--or whether they just have the----
Mr. Yoho.--yes.
Dr. Lacy.--antibodies from the vaccine. So there is work
going on to try to be able to show that, okay, this chicken is
protected from avian influenza but it is not because it had
avian influenza.
Mr. Yoho. Okay. And, Dr. Brashears, I just wanted to give
you a shout-out for your great research on probiotics. I mean
it has been--it has changed the whole industry and I commend
you for doing that, especially cutting down the E. coli., the
incidents with 90 percent in humans, it dropped it down to
about \1/2\ as far as infection. So I thank you for your
research. And if the Chairman will let you respond, that would
be great. Nothing like being put on the spot. And if not, I am
sure he will later.
The Chairman. Go ahead. Make it quick. I will----
Dr. Brashears. Okay.
The Chairman. I will take it out of Mr. Newhouse's time.
Dr. Brashears. Okay, great. Yes, well, thank you. We have
invested quite a bit in developing the cattle probiotic, and
like I said, we have found that it does reduce E. coli in
cattle by up to 50 percent, which obviously doesn't eliminate
it, but through the food processing system, it is an
elimination or reduction of risk----
Mr. Yoho. Yes.
Dr. Brashears.--from each step. And that is the importance
of taking a farm-to-table approach, whether it be with an
animal product or a fruit and vegetable product, every segment
of the industry counts with regard to reducing the risk, all
the way down to the consumer. And we have to get that
information to the consumer so that they know how to properly
handle foods, and to ensure public health. But thank you. We
have done a lot of work in that. Like I said, it is
commercialized and we are very happy with the outcome of that
research.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Brashears. My colleague, Mr.
Yoho, takes advantage of our niceness all the time. No, no
problem, Ted.
And Mr. Newhouse is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
having Mr. Yoho in my debt for over 1 minute, let the record
show. But thank you very much for having this hearing. I want
to welcome Dr. Moyer and his participation here today. As a WSU
alumnus myself, I have a soft spot for Washington State
University, and really appreciate your being here to
participate today.
Some of the--I don't know if you even know this, but some
of the research that is happening at WSU is--there is a small
project on my own farm where Dr. Michelle Moyer and--I don't
think any relation, and her research team, part of which is my
own daughter, Jensina, is working on some wine grape projects
on our own farm. So I am very much personally aware of the
importance of ag research. As the former director of
agriculture for the State of Washington, also very happy to
have been a great partner, our agency and--as Washington State
University, and so appreciate everything that you do. With all
of our representatives here from research universities around
the country, I don't understand why the line isn't out the door
this morning to listen to some of the exciting things that are
happening in agricultural research. Every one of us, as
Americans and citizens of the world, are a part of agriculture
at least three times a day, and this is very exciting, the
important stuff that we are working on.
Dr. Moyer, you talked a little bit about the Specialty Crop
Research Initiative Program, and I helped to administer that,
was responsible for making sure that projects that were worthy
were selected, and important enough to get the funding. I
wanted to give you a little bit of an opportunity to elaborate
on the importance of that, maybe help explain to some of my
colleagues who may not be as informed on what the Specialty
Crop Program does and can do?
Dr. Moyer. Well, first of all, the Specialty Crop Research
Initiative is a relatively recent addition to the farm bill,
and it targets those crops that may have been, or were, under-
served. I think the--a lot of the research--the federally
funded research was at--either at the very basic pioneering
discovery end of the spectrum, or it tended to focus on the big
three; wheat, corn, soybeans, and there was this whole body of
other crops that were languishing because there was not a
vehicle to get that pioneering research into practice. And so
with the Specialty Crop Research Initiative, it really fills a
unique void. It is that gap, some called it the valley of
death, between pioneering research and the day-to-day real
world immediate needs of the commodity groups we are funding.
And so to get new innovations into practice, there needed to be
a vehicle. And I think the insight then to get this done was a
very high level of involvement from the stakeholders, as well
as targeting these groups. And the groups were ready to do
exactly what I described, because it took these teams to really
tackle the complex problems. It is a unique project----
Mr. Newhouse. Yes.
Dr. Moyer.--program and it is great.
Mr. Newhouse. Well, thank you. I agree. It is very
important. It has been very significant in some of the things
that resulted from that. Could you also help us understand the
National Clean Plant----
Dr. Moyer. Yes.
Mr. Newhouse.--Network?
Dr. Moyer. The National Clean Plant Network, also
relatively new, it is part of the effort to make germplasm
available to users. It is a program that facilitates the
storage--it is like a germplasm repository for cultivars.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes.
Dr. Moyer. There are several centers around the nation;
Cornell, Davis, Washington State. They each have
responsibilities for specific crops. Again, they are
vegetatively propagated crops, as opposed to seed crops. Again,
this was a void. There really wasn't----
Mr. Newhouse. Yes.
Dr. Moyer.--Federal funding to support vegetatively
propagated crops. And so they provide the grower with pathogen-
tested, true-to-type varieties that they can rely on. They know
that the variety is what they say it is, and that it is void of
harmful pests.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes.
Dr. Moyer. And so this is a national network. And again,
these vegetatively propagated crops tend to be specialty crops.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes. Very important part of the economic
fabric of agriculture.
Dr. Moyer. Extremely critical.
Mr. Newhouse. Yes. Well, thank you very much. And again, I
thank all of you this morning for being here with us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Well, now Mr. Yoho only owes you 20 seconds.
Okay, Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks to all of you on
the panel. This is a very important topic. The research that
you do, or universities do. I have to do a shout-out to my
university where I graduated, Penn State University, their
agricultural sciences. What you all do is about national
security. I would say it is one of the number one important
things we have for national security, but it is also about
combating hunger.
And so my first--Dr. Brashears, is there an estimate in
terms of the work from biotechnology of essentially--I mean
just cut to the quick, how many lives that have been--how many
people have been prevented from starvation because of the
result of biotechnology being applied in agriculture? Are there
any estimates at all?
Dr. Brashears. I don't have an exact number of how many
lives have been saved, but we do know that biotechnology does
save lives. It increases our ability to produce crops and more
abundance in certain environments where, in the past, we could
not have done that because of the resistance to disease. It
allows us to feed animals and provide protein to the different
groups of people that need it. So the number of lives saved is
tremendous.
As you know, this week there were some new goals set forth
of zero hunger, zero poverty over the next several years. And
do I believe that that is achievable? Yes, because I don't
think that you should set a goal--or you should set your goals
very high, and that you can do things to achieve it. And that
can be done through research. We do have the issue of dealing
with public perception and getting that knowledge to the
individual who doesn't understand science. And I am guilty as
well of looking at the consumer and thinking, well, here is the
data, how come they don't believe that. But this involves
engaging our social scientists and understanding what motivates
them to make that decision. And it becomes more of
understanding the knowledge and having it, and understanding
that person as an individual and what motivates them to make
those decisions. It becomes a part of their belief system. And
we are gaining more information on that through research on
vaccines and why people choose to vaccinate their children or
not. One of the classic examples we use is raw milk. People
perceive that raw milk is healthier, but it can contain deadly
pathogens. If you feed it to your children they can get sick
and even die. And that is the bottom line. Getting that message
out becomes difficult because parents think I am doing
something healthy, something better for my children, and which
piece of scientific information do I believe.
So yes, biotechnology saves lives. We need to continue to
develop technologies to improve crop production, animal
production, around the world in order to achieve these new
goals of zero hunger, zero poverty around the globe.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. The rest of the panelists, is
there any research that has made an attempt to quantify kind of
a ballpark of lives impacted by technology anybody is aware of?
Dr. Lacy. I am not aware of any. There should be if there
is not. But, in addition to saving lives, one of the great
things about genetically modified organisms and biotechnology
is the decreased impact that we have had on the environment----
Mr. Thompson. Right.
Dr. Lacy.--in order to reduce the amount of pesticides
used, the amount of water, fertilizer inputs, that type of
thing, that is just huge. To me, we ought to label everything
as genetically modified because everything has been genetically
modified since the first time we planted a corn kernel or a
wheat kernel, we have been doing it for thousands and thousands
of years. I would argue that we actually know more about what
we are modifying now than we did previously, which should be a
positive thing from a safety standpoint.
Mr. Thompson. I have run out of time on this, one of the
things that Dr. Brashears--to come back, how do you get the
outcomes, your findings, how does that get disseminated into
research so that the end-users; the consumers, the producers,
the processors, can actually use that information?
Dr. Brashears. We take multiple approaches. A lot of our
work is directly applicable to the food industry. So we work
through our commodity groups, such as AMI or NAMI and NCBA,
they have been very supportive of our work, and they can help
us reach our stakeholders, either through workshops that we can
do at Texas Tech or on-site for different companies or
organizations, or even cattle producers. So workshops, our
website, social media. As I said, I have a social media page
where I try to convey information to producers as well as
consumers. So we utilize these different resources we have in
order to get our research results to the public, and we work
with our communications group to put those messages, to tailor
those in a way where they understand, so we are not too
scientific and going over their heads where we are going to
turn them off, to make the message appealing to the general
population and our stakeholders.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Thanks to the panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you charging any overtime
I have to Mr. Yoho.
The Chairman. Gladly. Done. Hey, actually, I want to thank
the Ranking Member, Ms. DelBene, too. Traditionally, we go back
and forth, back and forth, but she wanted to make sure
everybody here on our side that was still here got a chance to
ask questions in case they had another hearing to go to, and
because of that, I want to say thank you, and I am going to
recognize you for 5 minutes for follow-up questions.
Ms. DelBene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I just actually
had one general question for all of you, which is, the impact
from the recent farm bill on funding for your institutions and
for the work you are doing, any feedback that you have for us,
positive and negative, on how that has gone so far? And anyone?
Dr. Moyer?
Dr. Buhler. I--if nobody--I guess I would say that----
Ms. DelBene. Okay.
Dr. Buhler.--we are very pleased that the Specialty Crop
Research Initiative, was reauthorized with the new farm bill.
That was very, very critical, and I see a nod down there
because I believe Washington State, Michigan State, and
University of Florida have probably gotten more money than
anybody else. So for us, it really is a good complement to some
of our state funding, and so we really appreciate that because
that has really been an important tool for us to advance our
specialty crop work. So we are very thankful for that.
Ms. DelBene. Okay, thank you.
Dr. Moyer. Yes. Eighty percent of our Federal funding in
our college comes from USDA. So having the farm bill funded, we
are very reliant on those competitive funds. So we are highly
dependent on our agricultural and natural resource research on
the funding that is authorized by the farm bill.
Ms. DelBene. Any other feedback? Dr. Lacy, I see you trying
to turn on the microphone.
Dr. Lacy. Didn't want to jump in too quickly. We are very
grateful to the support that the Agriculture Committee has
given to research through formula funds and through competitive
research. And I mentioned the Section 1433 funding. We were
really grateful that that was authorized at $5 million. We were
hoping that maybe, if there were more research funds available
in the future, that that might jump up to $10 million in the
future. And there is a formula there where a certain percentage
of that goes to formula funds, and then the rest goes to
competitive funds. That would be a huge help to that shortfall
in animal agriculture research.
Dr. Hauser. Just one particular, like the others, we were
grateful for what was--the general outcome for research, but
the farm bill also allowed us to take the lead on educating
producers about the new farm bill and the new policies, and
that was a huge success. Translating the farm bill is often a
challenge, to say the least, and with Congressman Davis' help,
we were able to get a structure and a process set up to very
much do that across--in our case, across the Midwest.
Ms. DelBene. Yes.
Dr. Heithaus. And I would say there are lots of successes
in there. As you have heard, the return on investment in
research is really high, so what we see in south Florida is a
general need for greater investment in research. Also I would
just kind of like to echo that comment that the Hispanic-
serving agricultural colleges and universities have multiple
programs that were authorized but haven't been funded. So
funding those would certainly help us maximize our impact and
add to what is going on in the land-grant institutions.
Ms. DelBene. Great, thank you very much. And I will also
say, having that long-term visibility I know is critically
important because when we make sure that farm bill is in place
and that we have it for multiple years so you can plan, and
researchers know--those researchers are going to be available.
I know is very, very critical. We can't start and stop research
very easily, and so that is something else I know is important
for all of us to keep in mind for you to be able to do that
great work.
So thank you again. And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. She yielded back time, Ted. Wow. No, thank
you, Suzan.
Since we are starting our second round of questions, I am
going to go ahead and go.
I had one for you, Dr. Heithaus, in regards to the
Hispanic-servicing ag colleges and universities. The
establishment of the Capacity Grant Program, when first
authorized, the number of institutions qualifying was expected
to be relatively low. That number has increased dramatically so
that now approximately 100 institutions would divide the
funding. Should the eligibility criteria be amended so that
funding, if appropriated, would have a significant impact on
the institutions that receive it?
Dr. Heithaus. Well, I think that, yes, at the base level,
yes, funding this, and even if it has to be divided many ways,
it would have an impact. A lot of our universities are very
used to making very efficient use of funds, and so it would
have a real impact. However, the designation level for what
qualifies might be something that we need to create a new
funding mechanism, or multiple criteria, so that the allocation
of those funds is done in such a way that it will maximize its
impact in terms of the areas where there is the greatest need.
But there certainly is that need for capacity funding, and
there are also some of the unintended consequences of this
designation where we can't qualify for certain non-land-grant
funding unless we give up that designation. So I think that we
do need to do some tweaking on it to make sure that these
universities are able to access funding, and that it is
allocated in a mix of competitive grants and then capacity-
building funding.
The Chairman. Great. Thank you, Dr. Heithaus.
Dr. Hauser, you mentioned that you had to cut budgets at
four research centers recently. Can you expand on that a little
bit as to why and what you did?
Dr. Hauser. It is related to a point that I made about
capacity funding, and that Doug made as well. Facilities such
as that require a lot of investment, they are fixed costs, and
so competitive grants do not help to recoup those costs. As
funding has gone down at the state level for us in particular,
we have had to reduce expenditures, and reduce expenditures,
and reduce expenditures over the last 5 to 10 years, actually.
We have not gotten to that point where we are actually taking
away research fund capacity, until now. But now we are here.
And it is unfortunate, but it also speaks to, again, the need
that we have heard several times today expressed which is the
capacity and an infrastructure that has to really be emphasized
when you are thinking about research in the food and
agricultural area.
The Chairman. Thank you. And you also emphasized the
importance of partnerships with the private-sector in doing
crop research. When is that appropriate?
Dr. Hauser. Wow, that is a question that could take the
rest of the afternoon.
The Chairman. We will charge Mr. Yoho.
Dr. Hauser. There are a lot of gaps, if you will, in the
private research arena that can be addressed by the public and
by research institutions represented here, whether it relates
to market incentives, such as profits in the short-run that
they are dealing with, whether it relates to public goods,
there are lots of partnerships. And 20 to 30 percent of our
research portfolio in my college is in partnership with
corporations and the private-sector, and it is very, very
useful as long as you can be extremely transparent about
everything you do, as long as you are very objective, and as
long as you apply the best science and scholarship, if you have
those three things, that partnership with the private-sector
and corporations works out wonderfully, and we hope to do even
more.
The Chairman. Great. Dr. Hauser, thank you.
I will yield back the balance of my time, and recognize the
gentleman from Florida for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. And before my time
starts, how is your dog doing, Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. Mr. Yoho has----
Mr. Yoho. Thank you.
The Chairman.--utilized his veterinary services to help me
solve a problem with my Yorkie. So thank you, Mr. Yoho----
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman.--publicly.
Mr. Yoho. Getting back to some of the stuff we were talking
about. Of course, George Washington said that you can't have a
secure nation if you don't have a secure food source. And I
commend again all the research you guys do that you bring to
market. And the question comes up, how much is GMO--how many
lives has it saved, and all we need to do is look at Dr.
Borlaug with the genetic GMO wheat. Billions of people have
been saved in the world because of that, and that is a
marketing campaign we could do a retrospective study and just
look at the results of what we had. But what I wanted to ask
you three questions. One is, the funding mechanism, you have
the formula and competitive grants, you guys have all
experienced both of these, if you could rewrite how
universities get their money, do you have ideas that you would
just like to throw off, or write a response to us and give us
ideas? Dr. Brashears?
[The information referred to is located on p. 63.]
Dr. Brashears. I want to jump in just real quick. Texas
Tech University does not get the traditional agriculture
formula funding because we are not land-grant. I think that not
at the expense of other universities, the land-grant
institutions, I do think that there are many large agricultural
universities who do not qualify for the formula funding that
could benefit from a program that provides some sort of
baseline funding for the work that we do. In the words of our
Dean, Dr. Mike Galyean, he says that Texas Tech has a much
larger research footprint than many of our land-grant
counterparts, and it would be very beneficial for us to move
ahead in the research arena if the non-land-grant ag-related
programs could have some type of program to support them on a
very basic foundational level. And I just wanted to jump in and
give that before everyone else makes their comments.
Mr. Yoho. I was just curious because, I don't want to take
anything from the land-grant, coming from the University of
Florida----
Dr. Brashears. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Yoho.--and IFAS, we are very proud of what we get and
the research they do, but yet if there is a better mechanism
where we think outside of the box about how we can get the
money to the researchers and take that research again to the
marketplace, if you have thoughts on that, feel free to contact
our office or anybody on the Agriculture Committee.
The other thing is biosecurity research, this is
something--there are a lot of people that don't like our
lifestyles of liberty and freedom and it is something with the
conflicts going on in the world and the unstable political
structure of today's world that we have always have to be
vigilant about that. Are you guys doing research on somebody
contaminating our water supply or our food supply, grain
elevators, is there any active research--anybody doing that,
and if not, is that something you would be interested in doing,
sounds like crickets.
Dr. Lacy. We--this is something that we have thought long
and hard about after 9/11, and there were meetings and studies
done in terms of trying to identify those critical industries
in Georgia, and I am sure across the country, that needed to be
protected, that we needed to think about what we would do from
a security standpoint. And in Georgia, the poultry industry was
definitely one of those things that we took a long, hard look
at. I don't think that there have really been any research
studies done that I am aware of. It has been more on the
practical side, trying to determine where the weaknesses were
in those security issues and address those.
Dr. Buhler. Just to add real briefly, there is a network,
it is a Plant Diagnostic Network though, it is not quite as
striking as some of the animal issues, but there is the Plant
Diagnostic Network that does work on issues that would look at,
for the example, of purposeful release of plant pathogens to
destroy food production, things like that. So that actually
came out after 9/11, and continues today in Michigan State as
one of the regional hubs in that system.
Mr. Yoho. Okay, thank you. And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Yoho.
Any questions, Chairman Conaway? Are you good?
Well, again, I want to say thank you to all the witnesses
here. I hope you understand how important ag research is to all
of the Members of this Subcommittee. Many of us have land-grant
universities in our districts. We have grown up around some of
the progress that land-grant universities have given us. And it
was great to hear other stories about universities getting
similar designations, and working in areas that may not be like
mine in central Illinois.
I want to thank Chairman Conaway for allowing us to have
this hearing to talk about this important subject. And again,
each and every one of you deserves our thanks for spending the
time and the energy it takes to get out here to Washington,
D.C., and talk about agricultural research and its importance
to America's ag economy. So the Ranking Member DelBene has
left, but she wanted me to also echo her thanks for you all
being here today.
And I have to say, under the rules of the Committee, the
record of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days
to receive additional material and supplementary written
responses from the witnesses to any questions posed by a
Member.
This Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and
Research hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Supplementary Material Submitted by Robert J. Hauser, Ph.D. and Douglas
D. Buhler, Ph.D.
Mr. Yoho. Getting back to some of the stuff we were talking
about. Of course, George Washington said that you can't have a
secure nation if you don't have a secure food source. And I
commend again all the research you guys do that you bring to
market. And the question comes up, how much is GMO--how many
lives has it saved, and all we need to do is look at Dr.
Borlaug with the genetic GMO wheat. Billions of people have
been saved in the world because of that, and that is a
marketing campaign we could do a retrospective study and just
look at the results of what we had. But what I wanted to ask
you three questions. One is, the funding mechanism, you have
the formula and competitive grants, you guys have all
experienced both of these, if you could rewrite how
universities get their money, do you have ideas that you would
just like to throw off, or write a response to us and give us
ideas? Dr. Brashears?

As a follow up to last Tuesday's (September 29, 2015) Subcommittee
hearing, attached please find a supplemental statement jointly prepared
by the Dean of Urbana's College of Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences as well as the Senior Associate Dean for
Research at MSU's College of Agriculture and Natural Resources. The
statement is in response to a question posed by Representative Ted Yoho
regarding funding mechanisms for formula and competitive grants.
attachment
Supplement to Statements Submitted to the U.S. House of Representatives
Agriculture Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and
Research
Robert J. Hauser, Ph.D., Dean, College of Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Science, University of Illinois; and
Douglas D. Buhler, Ph.D., Senior Associate Dean for Research, College
of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Michigan State
University; Director, MSU AgBioResearch
At the conclusion of the Committee hearing held last Tuesday,
September 29, 2015, Representative Ted Yoho of Florida posed a question
about the funding mechanisms for formula and competitive grants
[administered by USDA's National Institute of Food and Agriculture]. He
asked the panelists for suggestions concerning the existing mechanisms
and how they could be rewritten in future legislation [for increased
effectiveness].
Based on our respective experiences within the land-grant
university system, and on behalf of the University of Illinois and
Michigan State University, we would like to offer a few relevant
thoughts.

Capacity [formula] funding is critically important to the
land-grant universities in each state, because it serves as a
stable source of revenue, upon which universities and their
state agricultural experiment stations can base long-term
decisions about their research infrastructure needs, which have
substantial fixed cost components. This is particularly
relevant in the food and agriculture sector, where significant
investments are needed to build and maintain research
infrastructure, ranging from fundamental bench science to
applied field research and development, and where a large
number of producers and firms are involved across multiple
value chains. In such a fragmented industry environment,
notable gaps in scientific knowledge exist, creating
opportunities for substantial returns on public good
investments.

Inherent in the Federal-state partnerships that underpin the
USDA's formula support of state agricultural experiment
stations, it is important to insure that Federal capacity
funding is used appropriately--to support long-term investment
in the fixed costs of research infrastructure and programs.

For these reasons and to sustain our highly successful model
for progress in agriculture and related sciences, Congress
should maintain the current level of research capacity funding
for state agricultural experiment stations.

Beyond that base level of Federal formula funding for
research capacity, it is imperative that competitive funding
levels be increased, commensurate with the indispensable
requirements for an abundant and safe food supply and proper
stewardship of our resources. Criteria for competitive research
funds should direct resources to opportunities for the highest
returns on investment and to selectively address the most
strategically important problems in the scientific domains that
are aligned with the missions of USDA, state agricultural
experiment stations, and eligible universities.

The relationship between the Federal Government, the states, and
their universities has proven to be extraordinarily effective for
advancing science in agriculture and related subject areas. We suggest
that Congress build upon that firm foundation and give incentives to
our most ingenious minds to solve the problems we face in the future.

[all]
