- RECOGNIZING THE CONTINUING CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE 1890S LAND-GRANT UNIVERSITIES ON THE 125TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE PASSAGE OF THE SECOND MORRILL ACT

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RECOGNIZING THE CONTINUING
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE 1890S LAND-GRANT
UNIVERSITIES ON THE 125TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE PASSAGE OF THE SECOND
MORRILL
ACT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 15, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-22

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

95-605 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JEFF DENHAM, California              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETE AGUILAR, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MIKE BOST, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

______

Scott C. Graves, Staff Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Fudge, Hon. Marcia L., a Representative in Congress from Ohio,
submitted report...............................................    57
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     4
Scott, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from Georgia.....     5
Submitted memorandum.........................................    57

Witnesses

Wright, Ph.D., George C., President, Prairie View Agriculture and
Mechanical University, Prairie View, TX........................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Bailey, Ph.D., Jessica M., Interim President, Fort Valley State
University, Fort Valley, GA....................................     9
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Martin, Sr., Ph.D., Harold L., Chancellor, North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, NC....    15
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Submitted question...........................................    86
Mangum, Ph.D., Elmira, President, Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University, Tallahassee, FL.........................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    22
Johnson, Ph.D., Brian L., President, Tuskegee University,
Tuskegee, AL...................................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Bell, Ph.D., Juliette B., President, University of Maryland
Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD...............................    27
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Rome, Sr., Ph.D., Kevin D., President, Lincoln University,
Jefferson City, MO.............................................    33
Smith, Jr., Ph.D., Kent J., President, Langston University,
Langston, OK...................................................    51
Alexander, J.D., Ph.D., Laurence B., Chancellor, University of
Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, AR, prepared statement.....    71
Belton, Dr. Ray L., President and Chancellor, Southern University
and A&M College System, Baton Rouge, LA, prepared statement....    73
Burse, Raymond M., President, Kentucky State University,
Frankfort, KY, prepared statement..............................    76
Hammond, Ph.D., Pamela V., Interim President, Virginia State
University, Petersburg, VA, prepared statement.................    78
Hugine, Jr., Ph.D., Andrew, President, Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University, Huntsville, AL, prepared statement......    81
Rankins, Jr., Ph.D., Alfred, President, Alcorn State University,
Lorman, MS, prepared statement.................................    83

RECOGNIZING THE CONTINUING
CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE 1890S LAND-GRANT
UNIVERSITIES ON THE 125TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE PASSAGE OF THE SECOND
MORRILL ACT

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 15, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
1300, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. K. Michael Conaway
[Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Conaway, Lucas, Rogers,
Thompson, Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia, Crawford, Gibson,
Hartzler, LaMalfa, Davis, Yoho, Allen, Rouzer, Abraham,
Newhouse, Kelly, Peterson, David Scott of Georgia, Walz, Fudge,
McGovern, DelBene, Vela, Lujan Grisham, Kuster, Nolan, Bustos,
Aguilar, Plaskett, Adams, Graham, and Ashford.
Staff present: Carly Reedholm, Haley Graves, Jackie Barber,
John Goldberg, Mary Nowak, Mollie Wilken, Scott C. Graves, John
Konya, Keith Jones, Liz Friedlander, and Nicole Scott.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS

The Chairman. Well, good morning. This is hearing of the
Committee on Agriculture to recognize the continuing
contributions of the 1890s land-grant universities on the 125th
anniversary of the passage of the Second Morrill Act, will come
to order. I have asked David Scott to open us with a prayer.
David.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May we
bow our heads, please.
Dear Heavenly Father, we come before your throne of grace
to give thanks. We have so much to be thankful for. We want to
thank you, dear Heavenly Father, for the leadership of this
Agriculture Committee under the leadership of Chairman Mike
Conaway and Ranking Member Collin Peterson, for their
stewardship, for their care, and for the consideration of our
1890s African-American colleges and universities. We thank you
for that.
And now, dear Heavenly Father, in our prayer to you this
morning, we lift up those magnificent words, the words that
were spoken by that famed and wonderful scientist, an
agricultural pioneer and American legend, George Washington
Carver, when he said to Booker T. Washington, ``Mr. President
of Tuskegee Institute, I pledge to you that I will do
everything through God and Christ that strengthens me to better
the condition of our people.''
Dear Heavenly Father, we are here to carry on that mighty
work that these extraordinary founders of the 1890s established
to improve and better the condition of all of the American
people. We thank you, dear God, for this day, this historic
day, to have the 19 African-American Presidents of 1890s land-
grant universities to testify before the Congress of the United
States.
Oh, thank God Almighty for this extraordinary blessing you
have given to us this morning, and all we can say is thank you,
God. Amen.
The Chairman. Amen. Thank you, David.
Well, I want to welcome our panelists, as well as the other
Presidents who are here today. The Committee on Agriculture
will shift its focus from legislation and oversight to one of a
less political nature, but of significant importance
nonetheless.
Land-grant institutions are often characterized as 1860,
1890, and 1994 institutions based on the date of legislation
that designated most of them with land-grant status. August 30
marks the 125th anniversary of the enactment of the Morrill Act
of 1890, commonly referred to as the Second Morrill Act. This
law authorized additional direct appropriations for the land-
grant colleges of agriculture that had been established under
the Morrill Act of 1862.
The most significant feature of the Second Morrill Act was
that the 1862 schools could receive the additional funds only
if they admitted blacks into their programs or if they provided
separate but equal agricultural higher education to black
students.
In the period following the Civil War, 16 southern states
established separate land-grant colleges of agriculture for
black students under this Act. Congress designated Tuskegee
University an 1890 institution at a later date. Today in honor
of the continuing contribution of these important institutions,
we would like to hear directly from their leaders regarding not
only the successes of the individual institutions, but
likewise, the successes of the 1890's in general.
This hearing is a result of David Scott's vision or dream
to have this happen. When it became apparent that I was going
to be the Chairman of the Agriculture Committee for this term,
David came to me and said, ``I have a terrific idea for a
hearing, a full Committee hearing, in which we would highlight
and show the American people the impact that the 1890 schools
are having on production agriculture and all the jobs
associated with agriculture, but more importantly, the students
that go through those schools and then become responsible
citizens in this country.'' And so I said all right let's do
that.
I came down the hall a second ago with David and Collin; I
have never seen a crowd as big as this one of folks trying to
get into this hearing this morning. And we have folks in the
overflow audience. So this is a direct result of David's work.
If it goes really well, he and I will get the credit. If it
goes really bad, he gets the blame. But this is a great, great
day for the Agriculture Committee, and we appreciate everybody
being here.
In the coming months, we will further evaluate the land-
grant system looking for ways to strengthen their capacity to
improve our agriculture research extension and educational
programs. While six of the 1890s Presidents will testify this
morning, we are fortunate in that the Presidents from 18 of the
universities are in attendance today, and they also are
prepared to answer questions should any Member ask them. That
is a little unusual. Normally our questions are asked of just
the folks at the table, but given the significance of all the
Presidents who are here, Members are advised that they may ask
any of the university Presidents in the room questions during
the questioning.
In addition to our witnesses joining us today, we have Dr.
Andrew Hugine from Alabama A&M in Normal, Alabama. We have Dr.
Alfred Rankins, President, Alcorn State University, Lorman,
Mississippi. We have Dr. Cynthia Jackson-Hammond, President of
Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio. We have Dr.
Harry Williams, President of Delaware State University,
Wilmington, Delaware. We have Dr. Raymond Burse, President of
Kentucky State University from Frankfort, Kentucky. We have Dr.
Kent Smith, President of Langston University from Langston,
Oklahoma. We have Dr. Kevin Rome, President of Lincoln
University in Lincoln City, Missouri.
We have Dr. W. Franklin Evans who is President of South
Carolina State University in Orangeburg, South Carolina. We
have Dr. Ray Belton, President, Southern University System,
Baton Rouge, Louisiana. We have Dr. Laurence B. Alexander,
Chancellor, University of Arkansas, Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff,
Arkansas. We have Dr. Pamela Hammond, Interim President,
Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia. And finally we
have Dr. Brian Hemphill, President of West Virginia State
University, Institute, West Virginia.
If there are others in attendance and I didn't mention your
name, please know that the Committee values your contributions,
and we will get your name if you are not here, and I will
recognize you later in the program.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conaway follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas
Good morning.
Today, the Committee on Agriculture will shift its focus from
legislation and oversight, to one of a less political nature, but of
significant importance nonetheless.
Land-grant institutions are often categorized as 1862, 1890, and
1994 institutions, based on the date of the legislation that designated
most of them with land-grant status.
August 30th marks the 125th anniversary of the enactment of the
Morrill Act of 1890, commonly referred to as the Second Morrill Act.
This law authorized additional direct appropriations for the land-grant
colleges of agriculture that had been established under the Morrill Act
of 1862.
The most significant feature of the Second Morrill Act was that the
1862 schools could receive the additional funds only if they admitted
blacks into their programs or if they provided separate but equal
agricultural higher education to black students.
In the period following the Civil War, sixteen southern states
established separate land-grant colleges of agriculture for black
students under this Act; Congress designated Tuskegee University an
1890 institution at a later date.
Today, in honor of the continuing contribution of these important
institutions, we would like to hear directly from their leaders
regarding not only the successes of the individual institutions, but
likewise, the successes of the 1890's generally.
In the coming months, we will further evaluate the land-grant
system looking for ways to strengthen their capacity to improve our
agricultural research, extension and educational programs.
While six of the 1890's Presidents will testify this morning, we
are fortunate in that the Presidents from 18 of the universities are in
attendance today and are prepared to answer Members' questions:

In addition to our witnesses, we have joining us:

Dr. Andrew Hugine, Jr., President, Alabama A&M University, Normal,
AL.
Dr. Alfred Rankins Jr., President, Alcorn State University, Lorman,
MS.
Dr. Cynthia Jackson-Hammond, President, Central State University,
Wilberforce, OH.
Dr. Harry L. Williams, President, Delaware State University,
Wilmington, DE.
Dr. Raymond M. Burse, President, Kentucky State University,
Frankfort, KY.
Dr. Kent J. Smith, Jr., President, Langston University, Langston,
OK.
Dr. Kevin Rome, President, Lincoln University, Jefferson City, MO.
Dr. W. Franklin Evans, President, South Carolina State University,
Orangeburg, SC.
Dr. Ray Belton, President, Southern University System, Baton Rouge,
LA.
Dr. Laurence B. Alexander, Chancellor, University of Arkansas Pine
Bluff, Pine Bluff, AR.
Dr. Pamela V. Hammond, Interim President, Virginia State
University, Petersburg, VA.
And finally, Dr. Brian O. Hemphill, President, West Virginia State
University, Institute, WV.
If there are others in the audience that I didn't mention by name,
please know that the Committee values your contributions.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member for any
comments he wishes to make.

The Chairman. So with that, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member, Collin Peterson, for any comments he may wish
to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good morning
everybody. I am glad to be here today to celebrate the
anniversary of the enactment of the Second Morrill Act. And I
am pleased that our 1890 land-grant university Presidents could
join us today, including the President of the newest land-grant
university, Dr. Cynthia Jackson-Hammond, from Central State
University in Ohio. Thank you all for the good work that you
do.
As the Chairman said, the land-grant universities play an
important role in agricultural research, extension, and
educational programs. Research, as we know, is vital to
agriculture. USDA's research, education extension programs help
increase productivity, prevent plant and animal disease,
improve human nutrition and health, and discover and utilize
new technologies.
So I look forward to hearing from all of you today and look
forward to future hearings on agriculture research. Again,
welcome to today's witnesses and all the other folks that are
here. I look forward to the testimony and yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman.
The Chairman. It is now my pleasure to recognize the
gentleman from Georgia, David Scott, and the instigator of all
this madness today. So, David, any comments you would like to
make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM GEORGIA

Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes I would Mr. Chairman. The
first comment I would like to make is just a tremendous thank
you for your help on this. It may have been a germination of a
seed coming from me, but its growth, its development, and to
make sure this happened, comes from you.
And it is very important for everybody to know that this
extraordinary, historic hearing today would not have happened
if it were not for the hard work and the help, tremendous help,
and the leadership of Mike Conaway, our distinguished Chairman.
I wish you would join me in giving him a round of applause.
And, of course, it would not be possible if we did not have
an extraordinary Chairman on the Democratic side, who for many
years has toiled in the vineyards and have helped us on this
Committee and throughout this nation in putting the interests
of African-American 1890s land-grant colleges at the forefront,
and I am speaking of who is now our Ranking Member, Collin
Peterson, who is a former Chairman and provided so much
leadership; and as he just mentioned to me, everything I did,
David, I just did what the colleges wanted me to do, and that
is Collin Peterson. Why don't you give him a hand.
It is so important for us to recognize, ladies and
gentlemen, that this is a bipartisan effort. You see before you
Democrats and Republicans who care about our 1890s. That has
been the history of it. It was through bipartisanship,
Republicans and Democrats, if you all remember the Senator, I
believe, Morrill, who started this first. And then he came back
during the time when there was the Separate But Equal Doctrine
and made sure that it was written into the law. As a United
States Senator, he did that to say that the funds going into
the 1890s would not be separate nor discriminate against and to
make sure that there is funding for these 1890 institutions.
And so we stand here, Democrats and Republicans, looking
out at this wonderful audience, and as the Chairman has said, I
have never seen such a crowd. And that is important for they
understand how important the education of all of America's
people is.
And so, Mr. Chairman, I am delighted to be here, and I want
to thank your staff, who did an extraordinary amount of work.
And I want to thank my staff and Arthur Tripp. Arthur, are you
here? Fantastic. Why don't we give our staffs a hand. Thank
you.
And so I close with this reminder. I want everyone to know
that there are hundreds of thousands of African-American
successful contributors to this nation and the world who would
not have achieved that success if they did not have that way
out towards education, that the 1890s provided for us African-
Americans. And so we thank you for carrying on this
extraordinary pilgrimage and honor and distinction of carrying
forth and making sure that deep in our hearts those words that
I mentioned in my prayer is echoing through this room.
The words of George Washington Carver rang true when he
spoke to Booker T. Washington; and let us remember them today
when he told Booker T. Washington that, ``Mr. President, I
pledge to you that I will do everything I can through the
strength of Christ who strengthens me to better the condition
of our people.'' We are here to carry that charge. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, David. I appreciate those
comments.
I also, too, want to thank our staffs. You and I make
decisions; Collin and I make decisions, but our staffs are the
ones who do all the work and put this together. The chair
requests that other Members submit their opening statements for
the record so that our witnesses may begin their testimony and
to ensure there is ample time for questions.
Now, turning to the witnesses at the table. I did not leave
you all off the list of Presidents who were here. We just had a
different time to introduce you.
First off is Dr. George C. Wright, President, Prairie View
Agriculture and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas. Dr.
Jessica Bailey, Interim President, Fort Valley State
University, at Fort Valley, Georgia. I have asked Ms. Alma
Adams to introduce our next witness.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As the Chancellor of
America's largest historically black university, and my alma
mater, North Carolina A&T State University, Dr. Harold Martin,
Sr., has dedicated his career to helping students succeed in
higher education.
He is a native of Winston-Salem, North Carolina. He
received his Bachelor's and Master's of Science in electrical
engineering from North Carolina A&T, and Ph.D. from Virginia
Polytech Institute and State University. He has held numerous
positions in university administration at North Carolina A&T,
at Winston-Salem State University, and the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.
President Obama named Chancellor Martin to the Board of
International Food and Agricultural Development, a board that
advises the United States Agency for International Development
on agriculture and higher education. Dr. Martin leads this
premier 1890 land-grant university with passion and purpose
promoting global and cultural competency and social awareness.
Today A&T is growing both in terms of student enrollment
and in investment. And since 1999, A&T has expanded its
investments in facilities and infrastructure, transforming the
campus into one of Greensboro's main economic engines.
Today we recognize the importance of 1890 land-grants and
all that it has done to create and sustain historically black
colleges and universities. In April, North Carolina A&T
celebrated the 125th anniversary of the Second Morrill Act of
1890, established the funding mechanism and framework for
providing access to education.
As a two-time alumnus of North Carolina A&T, and as Mr.
Scott has said, I did my later work, my terminal degree, at the
Ohio State University because of the North Carolina A&T. So I
welcome my distinguished fellow Aggie to the Committee today to
share more about this amazing institution and his experiences
with us this morning. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you to the gentlelady. I ask the
gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Graham, to introduce our next
witness.
Ms. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am so honored to
have here today my dear friend, Dr. Elmira Mangum, President of
Florida A&M University, located in my district. Go Rattlers.
Under Dr. Mangum's leadership, FAMU and other 1890 institutions
are leading the way in innovative research that will keep
American farming practices at the forefront of the industry.
FAMU has a history of excellence in agriculture, research,
and development; and today the university boasts programs that
span a wide range of issues that impact farmers and farm
practices in the U.S. and worldwide. And I have been very
honored to have an opportunity to be with Dr. Mangum on
multiple occasions to hear about all of those.
FAMU hopes to secure a land transfer agreement with USDA
that would provide 3,800 additional acres for the university to
expand its critical work. The land would be a training tool
where new and beginning farmers will learn the latest in farm
practices in biotechnology.
I am so proud to have you here today, Dr. Mangum, to share
FAMU's accomplishments with my colleagues on this Committee. We
owe it to our farmers to continue supporting the institutions
that keep American farming practices competitive. Thank you for
being here, and I look forward to hearing your testimony. I
yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back. We also have Dr.
Brian Johnson, President, Tuskegee University, in Tuskegee,
Alabama; and Dr. Juliette Bell, President of the University of
Maryland Eastern Shore in Princess Anne, Maryland.
So, thanks to everybody for being here. Dr. Wright,
whenever you are ready to begin, the microphone is yours.

STATEMENT OF GEORGE C. WRIGHT, Ph.D., PRESIDENT,
PRAIRIE VIEW AGRICULTURE AND MECHANICAL
UNIVERSITY, PRAIRIE VIEW, TX

Dr. Wright. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
address you today. I am George C. Wright, President of Prairie
View A&M University.
Prairie View A&M University is the second oldest public
institution of higher learning in Texas. On August 14, 1876,
the Texas Legislature established the Agriculture and
Mechanical College of Texas for Colored Youths and placed
responsibility for its management with the Board of Directors
of the Agriculture and Mechanical College of Bryan, present day
Texas A&M University, linking the 1862 and 1890 universities
together.
Prairie View A&M will have some 9,000 students this fall.
During its 139 year history, some 60,000 academic degrees have
been awarded. Prairie View A&M University's agricultural
program prepares students to enter careers in the human
sciences, animal, crop, and environmental sciences, and
agriculture and resource economics. Students work with PVAMU
faculty who are actively engaged in research that includes but
is not limited to: increasing the shelf life of dairy products,
protecting fruits against sun rays, advancing knowledge in the
use of medicinal plants to improve health, securing water
resources, and developing strategies to enhance watershed
functions in a sustainable way.
Because of the large population of Texas, and with the
state having the largest number of farms, Prairie View receives
the largest funding portion of any of the 1890 institutions for
its various programs. For an example, in the past year, Prairie
View received some $11 million from USDA. Over the past 10
years, Prairie View received $42 million for agriculture
research, $35 million for agricultural extension, and $14
million to construct new facilities. Federal funding has
enabled Prairie View to be involved in a number of programs
that benefit young people not just in rural Texas, but in urban
Texas as well. For instance, our program for 4-H Youth
Development works with some 200,000 students throughout the
State of Texas in a wide range of areas.
I will conclude by saying that I am honored to have this
opportunity to testify before you today, and on behalf of the
faculty, staff and above all, students of Prairie View, thank
you for this wonderful opportunity; and we appreciate all the
support we have received from you over the years. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wright follows:]

Prepared Statement of George C. Wright, Ph.D., President, Prairie View
Agriculture and Mechanical University, Prairie View, TX
The History of Prairie View A&M University as a Land-Grant University
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to address you today. I am George C. Wright,
President of Prairie View A&M University. For those not familiar with
Prairie View, please allow me to share a brief bit of our history.
Prairie View A&M University is the second oldest public institution
of higher education in Texas. On August 14, 1876, the Texas Legislature
established the ``Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas for
Colored Youths'' and placed responsibility for its management with the
Board of Directors of the Agricultural and Mechanical College at Bryan
(present day Texas A&M University, linking the 1862 and 1890 land-grant
universities).
The University's original curriculum was designated by the Texas
Legislature to be that of a ``Normal School'' for the preparation and
training of teachers. This curriculum was expanded to include the arts
and sciences, home economics, agriculture, mechanical arts and nursing
after the University was established as a branch of the Agricultural
Experiment Station (Hatch Act, 1887) and as a land-grant college
(Morrill Act, 1890). Thus began the tradition of agricultural research
and community service, which continues today.
The University's enrollment now exceeds 8,000 including more than
1,500 graduate students. Students come from regions throughout the
United States as well as many foreign countries. During the
University's 139 year history, some 60,000 academic degrees have been
awarded.
Prairie View A&M University's Agriculture Program
Prairie View A&M University's agricultural program prepares
students to enter careers in the human sciences, animal, crop and the
environmental sciences, and agricultural and resource economics. The
University has a deep sense of responsibility and is committed to using
its talents and resources to apply knowledge that will help advance the
State of Texas in the global economy. PVAMU faculty are actively
engaged in research that includes but not limited to: increasing the
shelf life of dairy products, protecting fruits against sun rays,
advancing knowledge in the use of medicinal plants to improve health,
removing allergens from peanuts, securing water resources, and
developing strategies to enhance watershed functions in a sustainable
way. For instance, researchers at PVAMU are developing a set of
management tools to enable watershed managers, regulators and other
stakeholders to predict various short- and long-term land management
scenarios and the impact of extreme weather conditions. Additionally,
PVAMU researchers are developing water management strategies to
optimize crop water use and minimize excess water losses. Funds
allocated to PVAMU have resulted in nine patents being granted over the
past 17 years to agricultural researchers in the food and plant
sciences. Three of the patents deal with infusing fish-oil-based food
emulsions into foods (milk and milk products, apple sauce, tomato
sauce, and salad dressings) to increase oxidative stability and
consumer acceptability of omega-3 fatty acids that are essential for
maintaining human health.
Currently PVAMU extension agents are located in thirty-five
counties in Texas with plans in place to expand to sixty additional
counties. PVAMU agents work primarily with limited-resource Texans. In
2010, USDA established a StrikeForce Initiative for Rural Growth and
Opportunity to address specific challenges associated with rural
poverty. There are 96 counties in Texas considered by USDA as
StrikeForce counties. PVAMU proposed expansion is directed toward
working with citizens of those counties.
Over the last decade, the Community Economic Development Program
(CED) has reached 25,000 rural residents, helping to create 800 new
jobs, which have in turn infused over $30 million into Texas' economy.
Last year, the CED worked with thirty-eight Texas families to apply for
home ownership or rehabilitation funding through USDA and $2.5 million
was approved.
Support from the United States Federal Government
Because of the large population of Texas and with the state having
the largest number of farms, Prairie View receives the largest funding
portion of any 1890 Institution for its programs. In total, PVAMU
receives about $11 million annually from USDA. Over the past 10 years,
Prairie View received $42.2 million for agricultural research, $34.5
million for agricultural extension and $14.1 million to construct new
facilities or renovate existing ones in the College of Agriculture and
Human Sciences.
Impact
With its Federal financial support, the PVAMU 4-H Youth Development
Program since 2012 has, over the last 5 years, reached more than
181,000 youth in both rural and urban counties across the state through
educational programs and activities focused on increasing Science,
Technology, Engineering, Agriculture, and Mathematics (STEAM)
awareness, civic participation, and healthy living habits. The PVAMU
Family and Consumer Sciences Program, along with the 4-H Program, have
created a core of 622 youth ambassadors who reached more than 35,000
other youth and family members. Also, the Agriculture and Natural
Resources Program conducted workshops and assisted 54 small and
limited-resource Texas farmers in submitting applications for loans
totaling up to $7.8 million, and to date $4.9 million have been
approved.
Major Challenge
Securing the total state match continues to be a major challenge
for PVAMU to receive the full USDA allocation. Each biennium PVAMU has
to work assiduously with the State Legislature to secure the match.
Unfortunately over the years the University has not been successful in
securing the match and has had to request a waiver from USDA to receive
its full allocation.
Concluding Statement
I will conclude by saying that I am honored to have had this
opportunity to testify before you today and on behalf of faculty, staff
and students associated with the agriculture program at PVAMU thank you
for your continuous support.

The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and the chair
recognizes that he left 2 minutes on the clock. So, Doctor, I
thank you very much for that. We appreciate that. Those of you
that are just new to this process, that is a big deal. So thank
you, Dr. Wright.
Dr. Bailey, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA M. BAILEY, Ph.D., INTERIM
PRESIDENT, FORT VALLEY STATE UNIVERSITY, FORT
VALLEY, GA

Dr. Bailey. Thank you. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. My
name is Jessica Bailey, and I serve as the interim President of
Fort Valley State University. I would like to just highlight
some of the wonderful work that is being done at Fort Valley
State University.
Fort Valley State is supporting USDA Strategic Goal 1 by
researching renewable energy and biobased products. In
particular we are doing research on the Paulownia elongata
tree, forestry woods, and switchgrass. In addition, biodiesel
processing basics have been introduced to over 500 4-H and FFA
students in Georgia.
Through Project GREEN, Fort Valley State has been able to
save Georgians thousands of dollars through energy audits,
equipment efficiency savings, and weatherization upgrades. We
are also involved in the process of recruiting and training a
new generation of agricultural and food scientists. For
example, young people come to our institution to receive
communications and professional skills training. We have
programs that reach out to K through 12 levels of students and
give them hands-on experience in molecular biology techniques.
Also, all of these programs serve as a pipeline to our
stellar programs in veterinary technology and agricultural
biotechnology. We are also diligent in supporting USDA
Strategic Goal 2, because we collaborate with other entities to
support minority forest landowners. We increase the overall
knowledge through training and money management skills, estate
planning, marketing, and other necessary skills, and by doing
so, we have contributed to the efficient distribution of
millions of dollars.
We support Strategic Goal 4 by promoting healthier diets
and reducing the risk of foodborne illnesses. More than 12,000
youths in Georgia have been given training in food education.
Also, the university conducts world-renowned research on sheep
and goat herds, as well as the development of healthier
livestock products.
We have done groundbreaking research in peach trees,
identifying factors that contribute to tree survival and fruit
production. We also have programs that do training to educate
farmers and ranchers about the offerings of the USDA. We have a
mobile information technology center that assists the elderly
and shut-ins.
Last year it is estimated that we were able to save
Georgians more than $5\1/2\ million. We appreciate the support
that we have received in the past, and we know that increased
funding can enable us to become a unique demonstration farm for
resource-constrained small farmers and ranchers.
Producers must become environmental stewards, and so we
envision that we can create a dynamic nutrient-cycling system
for sustainable, organic, small-scale production. It can save
costs. We can produce food to be consumed on our campus, and
also we can assist in helping the United States fortify its
position as the world leader in food production.
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to report on what
Fort Valley State University has done and can do. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bailey follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jessica M. Bailey, Ph.D., Interim President, Fort
Valley State University, Fort Valley, GA
Testimony on the request to the Task Force for $37 Million Each
Year for Five Years in the Areas of Motivating and Educating Students
for Achievement; Innovative and Sustainable Small Farmers, Ranchers and
Landowners; and International Engagement and Development before the U.
S. House of Representatives for the Committee on Agriculture July 13,
2015.
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the House
Committee on Agriculture. My name is Jessica Bailey and I serve as the
Interim President of Fort Valley State University.
It is indeed an honor to be here along with my fellow colleagues to
testify on the impact of United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
funding on the 1890 land-grant universities. Fort Valley State
University was established in 1895 and was designated a land-grant
university pursuant to the Second Morrill Act of 1890. The school's
College of Agriculture, Family Sciences and Technology offers
undergraduate programs in eight areas and graduate programs in Animal
Nutrition, Reproductive Biology, and Animal Products Technology, Plant
Biotechnology, Animal Biotechnology and Applied Biotechnology.
Thank you for the opportunity to share our work and offer insights
into how USDA funding received via Evans-Allen Program, 1890
Institutions Extension, 1890 Capacity Building Grants, McIntire-Stennis
Cooperative Forestry, Cooperative Extension, Teaching Grants, and other
research grants has been impactful and how, if enhanced, we could be
even more effective.
With regards to USDA Strategic Goal 1, assisting rural communities
to create prosperity so they are self-sustaining, re-populating, and
economically thriving, FVSU has supported development, production and
consumption of renewable energy and biobased products. The National
Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) states the importance of
sustainable bioenergy describing it as ``valuable to the nation's
ability to create new jobs and promote rural prosperity''. USDA Federal
funding has helped FVSU address the challenges in the production of
sustainable bioenergy.
Additionally, FVSU researchers have been working on developing a
sustainable bioenergy system using Paulownia elongata trees as an
alternative fuel. Our current research indicates that there is immense
potential for Paulownia as a bioenergy crop for farmers and growers in
the southeastern United States. Our preliminary studies indicate that
Paulownia can be harvested as a short rotation tree crop after 18-20
months for the production of ethanol or bio-gasoline and for timber in
a 7-8 year rotation.
FVSU and Oklahoma State University are also evaluating sweet
sorghum as a potential renewable energy crop for ethanol production.
This high carbohydrate producer crop can be cultivated on marginal
lands, has low input requirements and is adapted to nearly all
temperate climates.
Several power generation companies have visited our experimental
research farm to see the potential application of our bioenergy
research in moving toward biomass-based power generation. We have
introduced biodiesel processing basics to over 500 4-H and FFA students
in Georgia with one high school student winning a county-wide science
fair and competing in an international science fair.
Fort Valley State University has been able to educate over forty
low to moderate income families on Energy Audits and to distribute
energy related publications to over 240 Georgians through its Project
GREEN, which stands for Georgia Residential Energy Efficiency Network.
Through the GREEN Project, residents received 12 free energy audits
providing for an additional savings of $4,800.00, 14 free energy kits
that provided an energy efficiency saving of $20,007.68, and 484 CFL's
were distributed to Georgia residential homes resulting in a $32,525.00
energy efficient equipment cost savings. FVSU also partnered with the
Middle Georgia Community Action Agency to perform weatherization
upgrades valued at more than $10,000 for eligible senior citizens.
Additionally, FVSU has initiated an investigation on the use of
forestry woods and energy crops (switchgrass) as renewable energy
sources for power generation through combustion for greenhouse heat. In
fulfilling Objective 1.1 of enhancing rural prosperity, including
leveraging capital markets to increase government investment in rural
America, FVSU has provided Stronger Economies Together training to
Georgia's designated SET teams. As a result of the SET training both
teams received approximately 40 hours of technical assistance to aid
them in the development of their high quality plans to address an
aspect of their region's community and economic development
deficiencies. The teams' coverage area encompassed 24 counties, of
which approximately 96% are designated as StrikeForce counties.
Another objective of USDA Strategic Goal 1 is to protect the
foundation of the Agricultural System. In order for this to happen, the
nation must recruit and train a new generation of agricultural
scientists and also increase the number and diversity of students
entering the agricultural and food sciences fields. Fort Valley State
University is involved in this effort in many ways.
Through one grant, FVSU has increased awareness of career
opportunities in food and agriculture among high school students in
Georgia and increased the number of minorities in the agricultural
economics professional workforce by providing undergraduate
agricultural economics students the opportunities for professional
development which translates into higher retention rates and higher
graduation rates. Results of this program included one FVSU
agricultural economics major being on the second place team at the
Southern Agricultural Economics Association quiz bowl. Additionally two
FVSU students won second and third places at the Biennial Research
Symposium of the Association of 1890 Research Directors student paper
competition.
Under another grant, FVSU is enhancing the number and quality of
underrepresented populations in agricultural economics to satisfy the
demand for highly qualified personnel in the workforce and in graduate
education. Results during the first year included an enhanced
appreciation for the scope of agriculture and participation in the
MANRRS National Conference to further develop communication and
professional skills and an enhanced understanding of the scope of
agriculture.
A separate grant had as its objective to enhance the quality of
animal science undergraduate and graduate degree programs by
incorporating hands-on experience in molecular technologies in
instruction. An additional goal is to expose K-12 students to
agricultural biotechnology through mini-projects and workshops. Such
students with practical experience in molecular technology will be
better prepared to (a) make career decisions, (b) pursue graduate
studies and, (c) seeking employment in industry, academia and
government agencies. As a result of this program, an 8th grader from
Fagan Mill Middle School in Houston County conducted a research project
entitled, ``Plasmid DNA transformation in E. Coli: effect of microwave
on transformation efficiency''. The student received first prize for
his project in a regional science fair and was selected for the Georgia
State Science Fair at the University of Georgia where he also received
two prizes. Workshops have been conducted at local high schools to
inspire students to major in Ag biotechnology.
A grant whose goal is to empower youth by assisting them in
developing leadership, career and interpersonal skills will include a
summer weeklong tour of agribusiness firms, government agencies, and
1862 research institutions. After completion of the 8 month program
students will be expected to apply for summer research internships with
1862 and 1890 institutions, governmental agencies or industry.
Another of FVSU's projects aims to increase recruitment and
retention of minorities in veterinary medicine at all levels. FVSU
offers the only accredited Bachelor of Science degree in veterinary
technology in the University System of Georgia, and the only accredited
Veterinary Technology Program at a Historically Black College and
University.
In an additional future grant, FVSU aims to enroll and graduate at
least 15 students in agricultural biotechnology at FVSU through
systematic and proven outreach to local high schools focusing on
underrepresented students. The project will advance the institution's
and NIFA's missions to recruit, retain and graduate higher numbers of
professionals in plant biotechnology.
FVSU has submitted and been permitted to develop a proposal for a
Food Science BS program. While we are awaiting final approval, the
establishment of this new Food Science program was recommended by the
project evaluation committee at the beginning of this funded teaching
project.
Our U.S.-Honduras partnership has the goal of strengthening global
competence of students and faculty in food and agricultural sciences,
expanding their global awareness in a Central American culture, and
introducing them to a new global vision through collaborative
partnerships with Honduran institutions.
As a result of all of these grants FVSU has been ranked No. 11 in
producing agricultural undergraduate degrees; No. 28 in producing
electronic engineering technology undergraduate degrees; and No. 47 in
producing family and consumer science undergraduate degrees for persons
of African-American descent. FVSU is also ranked No. 34 in producing
agricultural undergraduate degrees for all minority races. In graduate
programs, FVSU is ranked No. 25 in producing graduate degrees for
persons of African-American descent, in the biological and biomedical
sciences programs, which would include our graduate programs in public
health, animal science and biotechnology.
With regards to USDA Strategic Goal 2, to ensure our National
Forest and private working lands are conserved, restored, and made more
resilient to climate change, while enhancing our water resources, one
of the objectives that helps accomplish this goal is through the
improvement of the health of the nation's forests, grasslands and
working lands by managing natural resources. Of Georgia's 24.7 million
acres in forestland, nearly 18 million acres are owned by private non-
industrial landowners. Timber is the highest valued vegetative crop in
Georgia. Georgia's forest resource creates a $12.7 billion direct
economic impact in the state.
FVSU's Cooperative Extension Program is collaborating with the
University of Georgia Cooperative Extension Service, USDA Rural
Development, USDA Forest Service and other agencies to address the
issues of minority forest landowners not receiving any technical
assistance and/or information that will assist them in their operation
of maintaining and managing their forestlands to maximize their
operation's income. The impact of this program is an increase in the
overall knowledge of 350 landowners in the following topic areas: wills
and estate planning, timber management and marketing, USDA cost-sharing
programs, wildlife management, and land management including surveying.
Additionally, factsheets on the Tree Assistance Program have been
developed and distributed throughout the FVSU Extension 30 county area.
Landowner Initiative for Forestry Education or (LIFE) Program
resulted in twenty workshops being conducted for more than 1,300
landowners. FVSU hosted ten estate planning clinics, which resulted in
45 estate plans saving Georgians over a quarter of a million dollars
and succession plans involving $33 million in homes and assets.
In relation to USDA Strategic Goal 4, which is to ensure that all
of America's children have access to safe, nutritious, and balanced
meals, FVSU has promoted healthy diets, physical activity, and the
improvement of access to nutritious food. A key priority of NIFA is
addressing the causes of obesity and finding effective interventions.
We believe that if we can address the obesity problem in children, then
we will have healthier adults. FVSU, as part of the Expanded Food and
Nutrition Extension Program (EFNEP), is helping parents feed their
children healthier meals and snacks, save money on food and reduce the
risk of foodborne illnesses. Nutrition education is also provided to
youth ages 4 through 18. USDA Evans-Allen Funding has helped FVSU
develop economically viable nutritional strategies that result in
healthier goat products and sustainability of small goat farms. The
impact of this work is that dairy goat farmers can replace a large
amount of corn with smaller amounts of soybean oil in goat diets to
produce milk with a healthier fatty-acid composition.
The FVSU 4-H program has engaged 3,000 youth in healthy living
activities resulting in improvement of dietary choices, improvement of
attitudes toward and understanding of healthful foods, increased
willingness to try new nutritional foods, increased understanding of
the elements of sound nutrition and daily caloric need versus physical
exercise, and increased participation by the family in eating together.
In 2014, the FVSU 4-H program also engaged 12,543 youths in
experiential learning opportunities in an effort to increase their
knowledge, skills, competencies, and experiences. The impact of the
Program resulted in raising enough money to contribute to rebuilding a
fire damaged local library and gaining national recognition. Also, FVSU
is in the process of creating a Mobile Food and Nutrition Unit that
will expand our food safety, nutrition and health education outreach
programs. This is in addition to our on campus facility that supports
teaching, research and extension programs.
Fort Valley State University works with farmers in order to reduce
infection by gastrointestinal nematodes that threaten the economic
viability of the farmer and the health of the sheep or goat. Because of
the work of Fort Valley State University and a consortium of others,
farmers have greatly improved the sustainability of their sheep and
goat production systems through the use of Sericea lespedeza and other
condensed tannin-containing plants. This has helped farmers reduce
synthetic drug usage by up to 90 percent which saves approximately
$150-$200 per 100 animals per year and identify and retain parasite-
resistant breeding stock. Anemia detection has also been made easier
for sheep and goat producers because of work of the consortium.
Fort Valley State University researchers have demonstrated the use
of non-thermal technology for the destruction of E. coli on goat
carcasses and continue to evaluate cost-effective pathogen reduction
strategies and food safety training for small and very small meat
processors in Georgia. The impact of this project to Georgia's
agriculture is the enhanced safety and marketability of meat products
through the improvement of processing intervention treatments or a
combination of treatments applicable to small and very small processors
and an increased knowledge of food safety practices.
Fort Valley State University is researching the sustainability of
the dairy goat industry and limited resource dairy goat farmers through
the development of goat milk infant formula, reduced fat and reduced
cholesterol goat cheeses and yogurts, iron fortified and CLA enhanced
goat cheeses. Additional Federal funding is allowing the development of
nutritionally enhanced small ruminant meat and dairy products with high
levels of antioxidants and longer shelf stability.
FVSU Agricultural Research on winter cover crops based dryland and
irrigated farming systems for the production of field and vegetable
crops has contributed to increased use of winter cover crops in the
cultivation of important cash crops, such as cotton and corn in
Georgia. More than 35 years of FVSU research on peach tree short life
and rootstock has accomplished a wider understanding of biotic and
abiotic stress factors responsible for reducing tree survival, orchard
longevity, and fruit production. FVSU's biotechnological
investigations, involving development of in vitro plant regeneration
protocols amenable to genetic enhancement, indicates that peach is a
highly recalcitrant species.
To provide support to beginning farmers and ranchers in agriculture
and to improve outreach and communication to military veterans about
farming and ranching opportunities, FVSU has conducted three quarterly
workshops impacting Georgia's StrikeForce counties that have engaged
245 participants on USDA programs, GAP/GHP certification, organic and
sustainable food production, conservation and assistance available from
USDA and local farm support agencies. FVSU has several agreements with
USDA agencies to assist beginning farmers and small and limited
resource farmers. FVSU also provides technical assistance to under-
served farmers in the development of farm conservation plans.
Additionally, the 2014 Farm Bill provides support for conservation
practices. FVSU research has demonstrated that cover crops improve soil
quality by increasing soil organic nitrogen and carbon composition, and
can also enhance spring soil microbial activity essential for release
of nutrients for a subsequent summer cash crop. County extension agents
serving 34 counties (primarily StrikeForce Counties) assist small and
limited resource farmers, as well as veterans and ranchers in a variety
of ways. Family and Consumer Science Agents afford homeowners
opportunities relating to safety, food preparation, and nutritional
planning.
FVSU has an 18 acre organic farming system where farmers are
exposed to organic tree, shrub and vine fruit growing, organic barrel
gardening, organic small plot gardening, organic hoop house gardening,
and organic animal production. We have year-round breeding of goats,
genetic manipulation in goats that can lead to production of goats with
larger muscle mass, year-round marketing of dairy goat products and
recognition from the American Dairy Science Association. Sheep breed
evaluation resulted in the establishment of additional flocks of sheep
in the Southeast. Meat/goat/buck performance testing by our researchers
in studying growth and muscle development, internal parasite tolerance,
behavior, and reproductive capacity of bucks of different breeds has
created an awareness of the importance of using scientific data, in
addition to physical appearance of animals, in selection programs. FVSU
work has helped producers understand the extent of genetic differences
within a herd and its relationship to performance.
The Georgia Small Ruminant Research and Extension Center (GSRREC)
at Fort Valley State University (FVSU) is the largest such facility
east of the Mississippi River and is recognized as a national leader in
goat research. Small ruminant scientists, producers, and individuals
interested in goat production visit the facility from all over the
world.
Our Mobile Information Technology Center educates communities on
record-keeping and accessing USDA information on the web. It is also
used to assist in providing services to veterans and others who need to
utilize technology to access government services via the web.
Additionally, working with the State Health Insurance Assistance
Program and the Senior Medicare Patrol, we have saved Georgians more
than $5\1/2\ million.
Life on the Farm (LOTF) is a live animal mobile exhibition
providing firsthand knowledge of farm life and how it affects each
person on a daily basis. The Life on the Farm educational program is
presented throughout the state at locations such as schools, daycare
centers, public libraries, churches, town festivals, fairgrounds and
other public meeting places. Life on the Farm completed 50 visits to
sites in 18 different cities. Across Georgia, 6474 youth and 1154
adults participated in the Life on the Farm experience.
We appreciate the long-running support that this Committee has
shown for agricultural research, extension, and higher education at
Fort Valley State University. A continuation of funding for Fort Valley
State University will allow the university to (1) contribute
significantly to the United States being a world leader in the
production of bioenergy and at the same time provide a source of
revenue for small and limited resource farmers and ranchers, (2)
improve the economic viability of rural families through reducing
energy consumption and an diversification of agricultural products, (3)
increase the number of students of color into the agricultural industry
while also offering these students the global knowledge and skills
necessary to operate in today's global economy, (4) increase the
nutrition, diet and health of limited-resources families with an
emphasis on reducing obesity, (5) enhance 4-H and youth skills in
science, technology and math, (6) improve technology proficiency for
farmers, senior citizens, youth and other rural Americans, and (7)
provide education opportunities for landowners in sustaining and/or
increasing their land productivity. These are things we have done and
will continue to do.
But our service to the State of Georgia and to this nation can
expand with your increased assistance. It will enable Fort Valley State
University to become a unique showplace as a demonstration farm for
small farmers and ranchers who are resource constrained. Small and
limited resource farmers make up a majority of the farms in the United
States. In the Southeast, many of these farmers are former tobacco
producers, interested in growing other high-value crops for better
long-term economic stability. Many farmers, both organic or
conventional, are concerned about energy costs, fertilizer costs, soil
management, water use and quality, invasive species management,
alternative pest control methods, climate change, and the production of
crops on their farms. Developing integrated agriculture production
systems (plant and animal) which address these factors for small-scale
producers and entrepreneurs would greatly benefit farmers in rural and
economically depressed regions of the United States. FVSU's goal is to
develop an integrated plant and animal agriculture production system as
a model for small-scale producers and entrepreneurs to improve
sustainability in these regions.
With increasing fertilizer costs and environmental consequences of
nutrient runoff, developing low cost sustainable nutrient management
systems is important for limited resource farmers not only for cost
savings, but for environmental stewardship. In order to create a
dynamic nutrient cycling system for sustainable/organic small farm
production integrating plant and animal systems, FVSU could establish a
50 acre demonstration farm to (1) identify agricultural waste for
compost and feeding for soil nutrient management and animal production,
(2) develop safe and sustainable effluent and aquaponic systems with
vegetable crops and an aquaculture species, (3) develop a sustainable
forage-based small ruminant management practice, and (4) assess the
economic sustainability of the proposed integrated system of
production. By combining plant and animal systems, agro-diversity and
profitability will be optimized by creating year-round income for small
producers, dynamic food webs, and nutrient systems with high-value
crops in economically depressed regions. Additionally, food produced on
this model farm will be served at our campus dining establishments,
which will contribute to developing a campus culture that promotes
sustainable foods and environmental stewardship. Last, FVSU will be
making a contribution to helping the U.S. incrementally fortify its
status as the world leader in agricultural innovation.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Bailey.
Dr. Martin, your 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HAROLD L. MARTIN, Sr., Ph.D., CHANCELLOR, NORTH
CAROLINA AGRICULTURAL AND TECHNICAL STATE UNIVERSITY,
GREENSBORO, NC

Dr. Martin. Good morning, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. With
special recognition being given to Congressman David Scott for
his commitment to 1890 land-grant institutions, Congressman
David Rouzer of North Carolina, and North Carolina A&T
University graduate, Congresswoman Alma Adams, who has served
as a Representative and advocate for more than 20 years, both
in the North Carolina General Assembly, and now in the U.S.
House of Representatives.
I am Harold Martin, Chancellor of North Carolina A&T State
University; and, Mr. Chairman, I am absolutely pleased to be
here to testify before this Committee today.
Today's hearing provides 1890 land-grant institutions the
opportunity to highlight the innovative research being
performed by our outstanding faculty, discuss the return on
investment we provide to our local, state and regional
economies through the education, research, and outreach we
provide, and I will offer recommendations for ways the Federal
Government can further support the 1890 community.
Established in 1891, shortly after the passage of the
Second Morrill Act, North Carolina A&T State University is a
university with a variety of academic and research programs,
serving approximately 10,700 students. Provides throughout its
history ladders of opportunity to high-achieving students
seeking a superior education and ensuring the betterment of
under-served communities in North Carolina and beyond.
In an era when family farms and farmland are rapidly
disappearing from the American landscape, farm Census data
shows that African-American farms in North Carolina are on the
rise. Despite these successes challenges still loom for the
small and minority farm communities. The A&T provides these
farmers opportunities to enhance their success through
dedicated and knowledgeable extension agents, deploying new
science and innovative farming techniques, developed by faculty
and other institutional partners.
Three examples illustrate the outstanding work that our
faculty and staff do. First, the Piedmont Triad region where
the university is located was ranked one in the nation for food
insecurity by the Food Research and Action Center. USDA has
also designated 24 food deserts in the City of Greensboro. In
recognizing that need, A&T has partnered with the City of
Greensboro to establish the city's first urban farming
enterprise to serve residents of longstanding food deserts.
A&T is now training those residents in best practices for
urban farming, providing communities with nutritional
programming aimed at reducing obesity, diabetes, and other
chronic diseases. The expectation is that this site will become
a model for other communities across the state.
Second, in October 2014, National Geographic published an
extensive expose on North Carolina's persistent hog waste and
the challenges it created for fisheries and water resources.
Heeding the call to action, A&T's swine unit used research,
supported by the Evans-Allen program, developed new
technologies to attack this problem.
As a result, the Bioadhesive Alliance, an A&T spin-off
company, was established to market technology for hog-waste
derived bioasphalt and bioadhesives that performs better and is
produced at a fraction of the cost of petroleum-derived
asphalts and adhesives. This product, which has been named
PiGrid, has the potential to convert North Carolina's 15.5
million tons of hog waste from a costly environmental issue
into a green source of revenue for our state and our farmers.
Such innovative research underscores A&T's relevance to
North Carolina's economy where agriculture is the largest
industry, contributing $78 billion to the state's economy.
And finally A&T's USDA federally-funded research has
resulted in notable success important to allergy sufferers.
Food scientists in our School of Agriculture have developed a
post-harvest process for reducing the major allergens in
peanuts. This research has produced the University's newest
spin-off company, AlrgnBio, which is now marketing
hypoallergenic peanut technology to technologies for food
companies. The same A&T research team hopes to expand its
research to allergen-reducing processes for soy, wheat, and
tree nuts for the benefit of millions of Americans who suffer
from these dangerous food allergies.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Committee, as you can
see, the investments made to A&T through USDA National
Institute of Food and Agriculture funding have led to
scientific breakthroughs and innovations in agriculture that
have created a real return on investments for our taxpayers. To
sustain the level of innovation I have described, competitive
funding is essential.
A&T fully supports President Obama's Fiscal Year 2016 NIFA
budget request which includes an increase from Fiscal Year 2015
to support Central State University, the newest 1890 land-grant
university, and encourages Members of Congress to continue to
make overall NIFA funding a high priority.
A&T and its fellow 1890 institutions have always about done
more with less. However, it has never been by choice. Secretary
of Agriculture Thomas Vilsack recently cited studies that show
that every dollar invested in agriculture research returns $20
to the nation's economy. Unfortunately, each year \1/2\ or more
of the 1890s do not get the full match from the states they
serve, and most are required to complete burdensome waiver
documentation to become eligible for at least a portion of
Federal funds allocated. A&T requests that Congress provide
additional oversight to ensure that states meet their
obligation for providing the one-to-one match, a requirement to
encourage states to provide eligible formal funding to each
land-grant university in each state.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee,
thank you for this opportunity to testify before the Congress.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Martin follows:]

Prepared Statement of Harold L. Martin, Sr., Ph.D., Chancellor, North
Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, NC
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the House
Committee on Agriculture; with special recognition being given to
Congressman David Scott for his commitment to 1890 land-grant
institutions and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University graduate--Congresswoman Alma Adams, who has served as a
representative and advocate for our university for more than 20 years,
both in the North Carolina General Assembly and now in the U.S. House
of Representatives.
I am Harold L. Martin Sr., Chancellor of North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University (N.C. A&T) in Greensboro,
North Carolina. Mr. Chairman, I am pleased to submit my written
testimony for the official hearing record.
Mr. Chairman, today's hearing provides 1890 land-grants the
opportunity to highlight the innovative research being performed by our
outstanding faculty, discuss the ``return on investment'' we provide to
our local, state and regional economies through the education, research
and outreach we provide, and offer recommendations for ways the Federal
Government can further support the 1890 community.
Background: N.C. A&T and the Second Morrill Act of 1890
Yesterday
In 1890, Congress passed the Second Morrill Act, which included the
stipulation that African-Americans be included in the U.S. land-grant
higher education system without discrimination. With southern and
border states unwilling to admit African-American students to their
universities, many of states established second land-grant
institutions. The Agricultural and Mechanical College for the Colored
Race--now N.C. A&T--was established as that second institution in the
State of North Carolina by an act of the General Assembly, ratified on
March 9, 1891. Originally operating in Raleigh as an annex to Shaw
University, the college made a permanent home in Greensboro. In 1915,
state legislators changed the college's name to the Agricultural and
Technical College of North Carolina; and in 1967, they elevated it to
university status. A&T became a constituent university of the
University of North Carolina in 1972.
Today
N.C. A&T is a learner-centered community that develops and
preserves intellectual capital through interdisciplinary learning,
discovery and engagement, and is committed to fulfilling its
fundamental purposes through exemplary instruction, scholarly and
creative research, and effective public service and engagement. A&T is
dedicated to providing ``ladders of opportunity'' to high-achieving
students seeking a superior education and is committed to creating a
campus climate that fosters student satisfaction and a sense of
community. The university's academic and outreach efforts illustrate
how campus and community collaborations enhance the quality of life for
the citizens of North Carolina, the nation, and the world. Through the
years, A&T has adapted its curriculum to strengthen science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)--its academic core and
foundation. Riding the crest of the technological revolution, A&T has
moved rapidly to blend its academic and research programs with the
needs of society and industry, forming a symbiotic relationship.
A&T is ranked by the Carnegie Classification System as a
``doctoral/research university'' and, for the past 9 years, has ranked
third among The University of North Carolina system's member
institutions for sponsored research funding. With an enrollment of
nearly 11,000 students, A&T is recognized as the largest among the
nation's historically black colleges and universities, and the School
of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences at A&T is the largest school
of its kind among the nation's HBCUs. A&T ranks No. 1 in the nation for
the number of baccalaureate degrees in engineering awarded to black or
African-Americans (American Society for Engineering Education) and is
the top producer of African-Americans with undergraduate degrees in
STEM disciplines, arts and humanities, and education. Notably, the
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching selected A&T for
its 2015 Community Engagement Classification.
Tomorrow
A&T considers the social, economic and global challenges facing
higher education as opportunities for a new 21st century renaissance.
The goals established for its future, recognize the importance of
embracing diverse populations of students and pursuing research agendas
that focus on the solutions to critical world issues such as poverty,
health care, adequate and secure foods, clean water and other problems
that challenge global sustainability. Educational delivery
methodologies will continue to transcend older limitations imposed by
time and space. As laid out in our strategic plan, ``A&T Preeminence
2020,'' A&T is a university committed to embracing the history,
traditions and outstanding accomplishments of its rich past and
creating a future as a global driver of technology-enhanced
scholarship, teaching, learning, and engagement.
A&T's Commitment to Under-Served Communities
In an era where family farms and farmland are rapidly disappearing
from the American landscape, North Carolina farm Census data shows that
African-American owned farms in North Carolina are on the rise, having
increased in number from 1,491 in 2007, to 1,637 in 2012. Overall
acreage under cultivation in these enterprises has increased by nearly
20,000 acres. Despite these successes, challenges loom for North
Carolina's small farming community, and particularly, for new farmers.
According to North Carolina farm Census data, 86 percent of African-
American farms had gross sales of less than $50,000 and 51 percent of
those farmers' sole source of income is farming. Small farmers of all
races are also aging and nearing retirement and unfortunately, only
three percent are under 34 years old. A&T is committed to providing the
education and training needed to attract and retain the next generation
of farmers and has done so through effective community outreach and
innovative undergraduate and graduate programs.
A&T is striving to make small farming in North Carolina more
profitable and more attractive, while continuing its unique mission to
serve minorities in rural communities. Through new ideas like our Small
Farms Collaborative and Local Foods and Health Initiative (funded
through the 1890 Facilities Program), A&T plans to use its 492 acre
farm as a strong community education resource for local food
production. Elements of the farm plan mentioned include a food
processing facility to teach entrepreneurs how to add value to North
Carolina agricultural products, a pasture-based dairy and creamery
producing A&T-branded yogurt, ice cream and artisanal cheeses for
revenue production, an organic vegetable production research and
demonstration site, a student-run farm, and land for community gardens
that will be available to residents of the surrounding communities.
A&T's Commitment to the Piedmont Triad Region
The Piedmont Triad where A&T is located, was recently ranked No. 1
in food insecurity in the nation by the Washington-based Food Research
and Action Center. USDA has designated 24 food deserts in the city of
Greensboro and many more than that exist across the state. In
recognizing a need, A&T has partnered with the city of Greensboro to
establish the city's first urban farming enterprise to serve residents
of long-standing food deserts. The city has already provided land and
committed additional resources, and A&T has engaged several
enthusiastic and well-established community groups, which the
agriculture school will train in best practices for urban farming. The
expectation is that this site will become a model for other communities
across the state.
A&T's School of Agriculture faculty have also been active in
getting a new Guilford County Food Council chartered, which is
dedicated to strengthening the local food system by supporting local
farms, growers and other food businesses to create access to healthy
food to all communities.
In addition to assisting small farms with newly created agriculture
technologies, A&T's Cooperative Extension service is also helping
families and communities, particularly in impoverished rural counties,
with nutrition programming aimed at: reducing obesity, diabetes and
other chronic diseases; parenting classes for troubled families;
financial literacy training; and youth development through 4-H
programs. Cooperative Extension specialists at A&T have also partnered
with Wal-Mart for research and farmer education on organic
strawberries. In addition, the Cooperative Extension Program is
developing organic vegetable production technologies and conducting
research to serve small-scale meat producers with assistance from 1890
extension program funding.
A&T's Commitment to North Carolina
In October 2014, National Geographic published an extensive expose
on North Carolina's persistent hog waste problem and the challenges it
creates for North Carolina's fisheries and water resources. Heeding the
call to action, A&T's swine unit used preliminary research supported by
the Evans-Allen program to develop solution oriented technology. As a
result of those efforts, The Bioadhesive Alliance--an A&T spin-off
company--was established to market the technology for hog-waste derived
bioasphalt and bioadhesives that perform better and can be produced at
a fraction of the cost of petroleum derived asphalts and adhesives.
This product, which has been named PiGrid, has the potential to convert
North Carolina's 15.5 million tons of hog waste from a costly
environmental issue into a profitable, green source of revenue for our
state and our farmers, and will create savings for Departments of
Transportation and industries that rely on adhesives.
A&T's Commitment to All
A&T's USDA federally-funded research has resulted in notable
success important to allergy sufferers. From the university's Carver
Hall, a building named after agricultural researcher George Washington
Carver, who is renowned for his work with peanuts, A&T food scientists
are continuing his legacy. They recently developed a post-harvest
process for reducing the major allergens in peanuts by 98 percent or
more. This research has produced the university's newest spin-off
company, AlrgnBio, which is now marketing the hypoallergenic peanut
technology to food companies. This same A&T research team hopes to move
on to research allergen reducing processes for soy, wheat and tree
nuts, for the benefit of millions of people who suffer from these
dangerous food allergies. Such innovative agricultural research
underscores A&T's relevance to North Carolina, where agriculture is the
largest industry, contributing $78 billion to the state's economy,
accounting for more than 17 percent of the state's income, and
employing 16 percent of the workforce.
FY 2016 Budget Request
1890 land-grant universities provide much of the research and
education that sustain U.S. food production and delivery, while
addressing many urgent and important local, regional, and national
needs. Financial support for this global innovation comes from both
public and private sources, but the most significant funding source is
the Federal-state partnership managed by the National Institute of Food
and Agriculture (NIFA).
A&T fully supports President Obama's FY 2016 NIFA budget proposal
request (which includes an increase from FY15 to support Central State
University--the new 1890 land-grant university) and encourages Members
of Congress to continue to make overall NIFA funding a high priority
and specifically requests funding for the six core NIFA priorities
(Agriculture and Food Research Initiative, Smith-Lever 3(b)-(c) Hatch
Act, Evans-Allen, 1890 Institutions Extension, McIntire-Stennis
Cooperative Forestry, 1994 Institutions Research and Extension) that
support research, education, and extension efforts at America's land-
grant universities.
Evans-Allen One-to-One Match Oversight
A&T and its fellow 1890s institutions have always done ``more with
less.'' However, it has never been by choice. Since being signed into
law in 1977, the Evans-Allen Act and the National Agricultural Research
Extension and Teaching Policy Act (NAREPTA) of 1977 have provided
critical base funding for agricultural research and Extension programs
at 1890 institutions. The investments made in 1890 universities by
Evans-Allen and NAREPTA funding have led to scientific breakthroughs
and innovation in agriculture that has created a real return on
investment. Secretary of Agriculture Thomas Vilsack recently cited
studies that show that every dollar invested in agricultural research
returns $20 to the economy.
Unfortunately, each year \1/2\ or more of the 1890s do not receive
the full match from the states they serve. This shortage means that
each year, \1/2\ or more of the 1890 institutions are confronted with a
burdensome need to produce waiver documentation in order to become
eligible for at least some of the Federal farm bill funds allocated
over the 50 percent threshold. According to the Association of Public
and Land-grant Universities' (APLU) policy briefing entitled Land-Grant
but Unequal: State One-to-One Matching Funding for 1890 Land-Grant
Universities; ``From 2010 to 2012, 56 percent of the 1890 land-grant
institutions did not receive 100 percent of the one-to-one matching
funds from their respective states for either extension or research.
The loss of funding to 1890 land-grant universities due to states not
meeting the one-to-one match requirement for between 2010 and 2012 is
nearly $57 million.''
At this time, A&T requests that Congress provide additional
oversight to ensure that states meet their obligation for providing the
one-to-one match requirement and to encourage states to provide
equitable formula funding to each land-grant university within each
state.
Conclusion
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to be one of six 1890
university Presidents and Chancellors to testify before you today. It
is my hope that the opportunities for improvement and recommendations
mentioned today are considered as you move forward with budget
negotiations.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Martin.
Dr. Mangum, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ELMIRA MANGUM, Ph.D., PRESIDENT,
FLORIDA AGRICULTURAL AND MECHANICAL UNIVERSITY, TALLAHASSEE, FL

Dr. Mangum. Good morning, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and distinguished Members of the House Committee on
Agriculture. Thank you, Representative Graham, for the kind
introduction and also for your service to Florida and the
nation.
On behalf of our board and 10,000 students, 3,000 faculty
and staff, and 70,000 alumni, including the Honorable David
Scott, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this invitation.
The strength of Florida's $120 billion agricultural
industry is due in part to the strength of the state's two
land-grant institutions, Florida A&M University and the
University of Florida. With the research of these institutions,
we have been able to improve our methods of production. Our
extension services share the technologies and techniques born
in the labs and classrooms with Florida urban and rural
communities. One beneficiary of Florida A&M's research is
Jasmine Hall, a recent graduate. Federal funding allows FAMU to
foster early research experiences to undergraduates like
Jasmine. Working with Professor Violeta Tsolova at our Center
for Viticulture and Small Fruit Research, Ms. Hall has earned
public recognition as the first young scientist to clone a gene
from the muscadine grape. Identifying and using grape's
antioxidants as a dietary supplement will help to reduce
cancer, obesity and improve human health overall.
FAMU holds nine patents in agriculture, including one for
the distinct cultivar of the muscadine grape plant, the Majesty
Grape. The vines of this cultivar are vigorous, productive, and
disease resistant.
Our research programs through our four research centers
contribute to the advancement of new knowledge and scientific
discoveries that have national and international implications
through a variety of initiatives, including developing
biological strategies to control invasive pests and plants like
the honeybee mite. These invasive species interrupt
agricultural production, as you know.
Our researchers are also working on developing best
management practices for efficient use of fertilizers in
tomatoes and field corn that reduce water contamination and
enhance farm profitability. Partnering with agencies such as
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service and the USDA
Animal Health Inspection Service, FAMU is poised to play a more
prominent role in helping to promote agriculture in Florida,
the nation, and the world.
Our Vet Tech Program and Biological and Agricultural
Systems Engineering Programs are just two examples of this
partnership. At FAMU, the NRCS has been the lifeblood of the
base program, and APHIS has been the lifeblood of the
Veterinary Medicine Technology Program.
BASE is a biologically-based engineering discipline that
integrates agricultural, biological, chemical, environmental,
life, and engineering sciences. It focuses on solving problems
and designing systems related to the preservation and
enhancement of natural resources and the environment, as well
as biological and agricultural production and processes.
Approximately 65 percent of all African-American doctorates
in BASE programs are graduates of two ABET accredited programs,
North Carolina A&T University and Florida A&M University. The
Cooperative Extension Program at the College of Agriculture and
Food Sciences serves as the outreach arm of FAMU. This program
provides services throughout the entire State of Florida.
A few examples of these programs include the Farm to School
Program, FAMU Statewide Small Farm Program, School and
Community Gardening, and the Family Resource Management
Program. These programs have reached approximately one million
children in Florida and adjacent states, improved sales,
developed community gardening and farming skills and assisted
approximately 300 individuals with home ownership.
The transfer of the 3,800 acres in Brooksville, Florida by
the USDA Agricultural Research Service to Florida A&M will be
the single largest land transfer to a historically black
college in history. The transfer will enable FAMU to develop
educational training and developmental programs for new and
beginning farmers and ranchers and to teach them the latest
biotechnical innovations.
With your continued and enhanced support, we will continue
to use these resources to expand our teaching, research, and
extension programs to serve the increasing needs of our state
and our nation.
We have adopted a university wide commitment to advancing
agricultural innovations, drawing on the strengths of our many
colleges and institutes. To realize this vision, FAMU will
leverage its research across the State of Florida, including
extension programming at satellite locations and research and
development at the Brooksville property.
FAMU is well-positioned to help Florida and the nation meet
the agricultural demands of the 21st century and beyond. And,
again, on behalf of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University, I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Committee for this
opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Mangum follows:]

Prepared Statement of Elmira Mangum, Ph.D., President, Florida
Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, FL
Introduction
Good morning. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and
distinguished Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. Thank you,
Representative Graham, for your kind introduction and your service to
Florida and the nation.
On behalf of our more than 10,000 students, 3,000 faculty and
staff, and 70,000 Alumni, including the Honorable David Scott, the
Honorable Corrine Brown, the Honorable Alcee Hastings, and the
Honorable Al Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this invitation.
Founded on October 3, 1887, we are proud of our 127 year legacy of
providing access and opportunity for thousands who but for FAMU would
never have had the opportunity to fulfill their dream of getting a
college degree. More than 65 percent of our students are Pell Grant
recipients and come from households with income below $40,000 annually.
Agriculture, as you know, is a critical component of Florida's and
America's economy. Data provided by your former colleague Commissioner
Adam Putnam of the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer
Services show that Florida has 47,000 commercial farms, encompassing a
total of 9 million acres, and contributes more than $120 billion to our
state's economy and supports two million jobs.
The strength of Florida agriculture is due, in part, to the
strength of the state's two land-grant institutions--Florida A&M
University and the University of Florida.
With the research of these institutions, we've been able to improve
our methods of production. Our extension services share the
technologies and techniques born in the labs and classrooms with
Florida urban and rural communities.
One such beneficiary of FAMU's research is Jasmine Hall, a recent
graduate. Federal funding allows FAMU to foster early research
experiences to undergraduates like Jasmine. Working with Professor
Violeta Tsolova at our Center for Viticulture & Small Fruit Research,
Ms. Hall has earned public recognition as the first young scientist to
clone a key gene from muscadine grapes. Identifying and using the
grape's antioxidants as a dietary supplement will help to reduce
cancer, obesity and improve human health overall. Ms. Hall's
breakthrough work will appear in an upcoming issue of the Journal of
Biotechnology & Biomaterials.
FAMU holds the patent for the distinct cultivar of the muscadine
grape plant, the Majesty Grape. The vines of this cultivar are
vigorous, productive and disease resistant.
Our research programs through our four research centers contribute
to the advancement of new knowledge and scientific discoveries that
have national and international implications through a variety of
initiatives, including developing biological strategies to control
invasive pests and plants like the Tropical Soda Apple, Japanese
Beetle, Asian Longhorn Beetle, Asian Black Carp, Hydrilla and many
others that interrupt agricultural production, tourism, recreation, and
commercial fishing. These invasive species also diminish local property
values and threaten our $15 billion honeybee industry.
Our researchers are also working on developing best management
practices for efficient use of fertilizers in tomatoes and field corn
that reduce groundwater contamination and enhance farm profitability.
Partnering with agencies such as the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service--the NRCS, and the USDA Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service, or APHIS, FAMU is poised to play an even bigger
role in helping to promote agriculture in Florida, the nation, and the
world.
Our Vet Tech Program and Biological and Agricultural Engineering
Systems (BASE) Program are just two examples of this partnership. At
FAMU, the NRCS has been the lifeblood of the BASE Program and APHIS has
been the lifeblood of the Vet Tech Program. I will talk briefly about
BASE.
BASE is a biology-based engineering discipline that integrates the
agricultural, biological, chemical, environmental, life, and
engineering sciences. It focuses on solving problems and designing
systems related to the preservation and enhancement of natural
resources and the environment, as well as biological and agricultural
production and processes. Because of this diverse background, BASE
students are uniquely qualified to understand the many different facets
of a project from an engineering perspective. This diverse background
also enables them to function exceptionally well on multidisciplinary
teams.
Approximately 65 percent of all African-American doctorates in BASE
programs are graduates of two schools--North Carolina A&T University
and Florida A&M University. Forty-five (45) percent of all BASE
graduates have gone on to pursue graduate degrees at over 21 different
colleges nationwide; most were on undergraduate scholarships provided
by the NRCS.
The Cooperative Extension Program at the College of Agriculture and
Food Sciences serves as the outreach arm of FAMU. This program serves
the entire State of Florida. A few examples of these programs include:

Farm to School Program.

FAMU Statewide Small Farm Program.

School and Community Gardening.

Family Resource Management Program.

These programs have reached approximately one million children in
Florida and six adjacent states, improved sales, developed community
gardening and farming skills and assisted approximately 300 individuals
with home ownership.
The transfer of 3,800 acres in Brooksville, Florida by the USDA
Agricultural Research Service to Florida A&M University will be the
single largest transfer of land to a historically black college or
university in history. The transfer will enable FAMU to develop
educational training and developmental programs for new and beginning
farmers and ranchers and to teach them the latest biotechnological
innovations and other key initiatives.
With your continued and enhanced support, we will continue to use
these resources to expand our teaching, research and extension programs
to serve the increasing needs of our state and nation.
We have adopted a university wide commitment to advancing
agricultural innovations drawing on the strengths of our Colleges of
Agriculture and Food Sciences, Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
the Schools of Business and Industry and the Environment, and the
Institutes of Public Health and Sustainability.
To realize our vision, FAMU will leverage its reach across the
State of Florida, including extension programming at satellite
locations and research and development at the Brooksville property.
With additional funding to support our research and outreach
initiatives, we can help to provide solutions to our food security and
safety, energy and water resource problems, increase agriculture output
through new and improved farming techniques and biological pest control
and management, improve local economies by training small ranchers and
farmers, and address health issues by providing nutritional training
and growing healthy food in our community gardens.
FAMU is well positioned to help Florida and the nation meet the
agricultural demands of the 21st century and beyond.
Again, on behalf of Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Mangum.
Dr. Johnson, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN L. JOHNSON, Ph.D., PRESIDENT, TUSKEGEE
UNIVERSITY, TUSKEGEE, AL

Dr. Johnson. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson,
Members of the Congressional Committee, on behalf of Tuskegee
University, I am very pleased to report to you on this day
regarding Tuskegee University and its work with 1890s.
Tuskegee University is pleased to report that funding
received from the agricultural research and extension have
resulted in innovations in science, education, and economic
development of importance to the State of Alabama, the southern
region and the nation. Agricultural programs, as Congressman
Scott pointed out, began in Tuskegee in 1896 when George
Washington Carver joined the Tuskegee faculty and pledged to
serve alongside of Booker T. Washington. Carver contributed
significantly to southern agriculture through his research and
extension activities.
Now there are roughly 3,100 students at Tuskegee
University; 2,100 of these students are in STEM or STEM-related
fields. Research and extension programs at Tuskegee University
focus on fruit and vegetables and food animals produced by
small farmers with emphasis on profitability. This program is
important because it is a partnership of socially disadvantaged
and under-served farmers working together in clusters with Wal-
Mart, Lipman, Pura Vida, W.P. Rawls and other commercial
marketers to provide fresh, locally grown fruits and vegetables
to commercial retailers.
Importantly, Tuskegee University assisted the farmers in
passing farm audits for the GAP, Good Agricultural Practices
Harmonized Food Safety Standards required by commercial
markets. This partnership has demonstrated potential for
bringing jobs and economic development to persistent poor
counties in Alabama and other states. The results are an
excellent illustration of effective use of 1890 land-grant
capacity funds to support farm and agribusiness based on
economic development in rural communities.
Tuskegee University scientists continue work on peanuts
through genome analysis focused on disease resistant gene
identification and mapping; sweet potatoes through breeding new
varieties, enhancing nutrition through plant biotechnology, and
developing new crop uses for food and fuel. Tuskegee
researchers have targeted reduction in parasites in meat
animals by using molecular and genetic-based technologies and
through a patented system that uses a plant bark as an
effective natural feed supplement.
A patented chemical treatment enhances reusability for
poultry litter for application to land by reducing excess
phosphorous levels by 90 percent. Another patent Tuskegee
researchers have developed detects foodborne pathogens in
poultry in hours versus days or weeks, thus potentially
preventing human illness.
Agroforestry research is assessing the dual impact of pine
stand control, caprine parasite control, and related economic
viability of long leaf and loblolly pine stands. And diet,
nutrition, and exercise programs are focused on intervention
strategies to reduce obesity and cancer and improve the overall
health of youth and adults.
One project targets 8 to 15 year old children in multiple
counties to determine food preferences and influence the food
access and food quality in rural counties.
We are pleased that recent data indicates Tuskegee
University ranks number 1 in the nation in African-American
graduates in agriculture, agriculture operations, and related
sciences, number two in African-American graduates in natural
resources and conservation, number 1 in graduating African-
Americans in veterinarian medicine and is among top producers
in African-American engineers.
Our funding challenges and opportunities: Our work with
small farmers is important because they represent 90 percent of
all farmers, control more than 50 percent of the land, and have
the potential to increase jobs and economic development across
many rural communities, especially if they work together. The
models we are developing can be duplicated in other states and
regions of the United States, especially in areas with
persistent poverty. This would simultaneously assist the
commercial markets and consumers because of savings in energy
and transportation costs and the increased local product
quality and freshness can be passed on to consumers.
One final remark, in 1998 and 1999, Congress made
provisions for an 1890 land-grant university to obtain one-to-
one matches from states for Capacity Research and Extension
Grants. Fifteen years later, this is a work still in progress
for many states. For Fiscal Year 2015-2016, Tuskegee University
will be at a .87-to-1 ratio, the highest ratio obtained since
the required match inception, and we are grateful to all
involved.
Once again, we thank Congress for its support of not only
Tuskegee University, but its sister 1890 institutions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Brian L. Johnson, Ph.D., President, Tuskegee
University, Tuskegee, AL
Historical Perspective
Tuskegee University is pleased to report that funding received for
Agricultural Research and Extension has been instrumental in developing
agricultural research programs of importance to the State of Alabama,
the ``Southern Region, and the nation.'' Tuskegee University's
agricultural programs began in 1896 when famed scientist, George
Washington Carver joined the Tuskegee University faculty and pledged to
Booker T. Washington to do ``all I can through Christ who strengthens
me to better the condition of our people.'' Carver contributed
significantly to southern agriculture, through his research and
Extension activities on peanuts, cotton, sweet potatoes, southern peas
and other commodities. His testimony before Congress in 1921 was well
received and helped to protect U.S. farmers. Carver's Bulletin #43
Nature's Garden for Victory and Peace published during World War II
helped provide nutrition information during times of scarcity and his
design of the first ``Wagon on Wheels'' led to the Jesup Wagon and
selection of the first demonstration agent, Thomas Campbell in 1906, a
forerunner of the Cooperative Extension, which was formally established
in 1914 by Congress. Carver's work set the tone in the south for using
science based information to improve agricultural production by
farmers, including African-American farmers who were struggling to
survive and make a living during challenging times.
Carver, the scientist and humanitarian never lost sight of his
mission for going to Tuskegee . . . ``to help his people,'' and in so-
doing helped the entire south through promotion of peanuts and other
legumes as rotation crops for cotton and (2) introducing sustainable
agricultural practices that permitted small (mostly tenant) farmers to
survive. It was not until 1967 that the 1890 land-grant universities
received their first funding for agricultural research from USDA. This
amount was increased slowly by Congress over many years. During this
time Tuskegee University developed areas of research and Extension that
focused on counties with persistent poverty, commonly called Black Belt
Counties, both because of its dark, Prairie soils and also the
relatively high African-American populations. This strategic selection
of geographic and demographic foci complemented and did not duplicate
research and Extension activities by other institutions in the state.
Current Research and Extension Successes
In recent times integrated Extension and research programs at
Tuskegee University have focused on fruit and vegetables and food
animals produced by small farmers with emphasis on profitability. This
important program has developed into a partnership of socially
disadvantaged and under-served farmers working together in clusters
with Wal-Mart, Lipman, Pura Vida, W.P. Rawls and other commercial
markets to provide fresh, locally grown fruits and vegetable to
commercial retailers. Importantly, Tuskegee University assisted the
farmers in passing farm audits for ``Good Agricultural Practices (GAP)
Harmonized Food Safety Standards,'' required by commercial and other
markets. This relatively new partnership of small farmer clusters and
commercial markets has demonstrated great potential for bringing jobs
and economic development to persistent poor counties in Alabama and
other states. The current progress is based upon many years of Tuskegee
University's research and Extension staff working with small farmers
and rural communities because of Capacity Research and Extension funds.
The results are an excellent illustration of effective use of capacity
funds to support farm- and agribusiness-based economic development in
poor rural communities.
Today Tuskegee University scientists continue work on: peanuts
through genome analysis focused on disease resistant gene
identification and mapping; plant breeding of sweet potatoes to produce
new varieties; enhancing crop nutrition through plant biotechnology and
developing new uses of crops for food and fuel. Research by Tuskegee
scientists has targeted reduction in parasites in meat animals such as
goats and sheep using two approaches: (1) molecular and genetic-based
technologies are being used to find effective solutions and (2) a
system was patented that uses plant bark as a natural feed supplement.
Another recent patent is a chemical treatment that makes reusable
poultry litter better for application to the land by reducing excess
phosphorus levels by about 90 percent, while retaining the other
essential elements needed for plant growth. Still another patent by
Tuskegee scientists detects different foodborne pathogens in poultry in
hours versus days or weeks. This time-saving invention can be used to
rapidly find out which pathogens may be present in poultry samples and
prevent human illness.
Agroforestry research is uniquely assessing the dual impact of pine
stand control and caprine parasite control on economic viability and
fire suppression on long leaf and loblolly pine stands via controlled
foraging by food animals. Integrated Research and Extension Programs
are assessing the impact of diet, nutrition and exercise on youth and
adult obesity and cancer. One project targets 8 to 15 year old children
in multiple counties to determine food preferences and influence the
food access and food quality in rural counties. The goal is to develop
effective intervention strategies to reduce obesity and improve their
overall health.
Innovations and Successes in Education and Service
We are pleased that recent data indicates Tuskegee University ranks
number one in the nation in African-American graduates in
``Agriculture, Agriculture Operations, and Related Sciences'', number
two in African-American graduates in Natural Resources and
Conservation; number one in graduating African-Americans in Veterinary
Medicine and is among top producers of African-American Engineers.
We are pleased to report that eight USDA agencies joined with
Tuskegee University to form the Carver Integrative Sustainability
Center at Tuskegee University that brings together faculty and staff
from all disciplines to work on problems systemically associated with
small social disadvantaged and under-served farmers and rural
communities. We are learning to work together across agency and
university department lines to better serve the public and protect our
natural resources. Students of all levels (K-12, community college,
undergraduate and graduate levels) are integrally involved and receive
invaluable ``hands on'' experiences and other programs. A benefit of
such partnerships is that students are gaining interest in agriculture,
including seeking food and agricultural careers such as agronomy,
horticulture, animal science, food science, natural resources and
agribusiness. There is high demand for food and agriculture majors by
the food and agriculture industry and recent data indicates the need
for such majors is increasing. Universities such as Tuskegee University
and other 1890 land-grant universities provide much needed talent and
diversity for such industries.
We take special note of our successful integrative graduate
programs and their success in producing outstanding scientists,
engineers and health professionals. In particular our Materials
Sciences and Engineering Ph.D. Program and leadership were cited by
both President George Bush and President Barack Obama for its long-term
research and student development that have served our nation and
industry well. The Integrative Biosciences Ph.D. students address
agriculture, and related environmental and health problems from multi-
disciplinary approaches; these students serve as great role models for
undergraduate students and the Integrative Biosciences graduates are
serving our nation in key government, academic and private sector
positions. Newer graduate programs in Interdisciplinary Pathobiology,
Agricultural and Environmental Sciences Engineering, and Integrative
Public Policy and Development will produce well-trained agricultural
scientists, engineers and policy specialists needed by our nation to
address challenges of the future, including preparing for a global
world population increase from seven billion to a nine billion
population by 2040. Enhanced funding for such innovative programs will
strengthen the diverse undergraduate and graduate pipeline needed by
the private sector, government, academia other sectors as documented in
recent reports.
Funding Challenges and Opportunities
Our work with small farmers is important because they represent 90%
of all farmers, control more than 50% of the land and have the
potential to increase jobs and economic development across many rural
communities, especially if they work together for optimum volume,
scale, efficiency, sustainability of operations and marketing. Most
socially disadvantaged farmers gross under $10,000 and very small
farmers make a profit. This is contrasted with the top 15% of farmers
classified as large farmers who make 90% of the profit. The models we
have developed can be duplicated in other states and regions of the
United States, especially in areas with persistent poverty. If funds
are enhanced we could reach more small farmers and impact more
communities in a positive way. This would simultaneously assist the
commercial markets and consumers because of reduced transportation and
storage costs associated with distance based supply of perishable goods
like fresh fruits and vegetables. These savings in energy and
transportation costs and the increased product quality and freshness
can be passed on to consumers. There are many gaps along the supply
chain that require integrated research and Extension solutions. We have
the momentum and passion to get the job done and have presented a plan
to USDA that involves all states with 1890 land-grant universities
working together. We look forward to your support.
As a final note, in 1998-99 Congress made provisions for 1890 land-
grant universities to obtain 1:1 matches from states for Capacity
Research and Extension Grants. Fifteen years later this still is a work
in progress for many states. For FY 2015-16 Tuskegee University will be
at a 0.87:1 ratio, the highest ratio attained by Tuskegee University
since the inception of the required match and we are grateful to all
involved. We look forward to next year going ``over the top''!

The Chairman. Thank you Dr. Johnson.
Dr. Bell, 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JULIETTE B. BELL, Ph.D., PRESIDENT,
UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND EASTERN SHORE, PRINCESS ANNE, MD

Dr. Bell. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and
Members of the Committee, good morning. My name is Juliette
Bell. I am the President of the University of Maryland Eastern
Shore, and I also have the pleasure of serving as the chair of
the Council of 1890 Universities and the co-chair of the USDA
1890 Task Force established by the Secretary of Agriculture.
On behalf of the 1890 universities, thank you for this
great opportunity to testify before this Committee as we
celebrate our 125th anniversary of the Second Morrill Act which
established the 1890 universities. Today the 1890 universities
continue to focus on teaching of practical agriculture,
science, and mechanical arts to improve and uplift our
communities. Collectively the 1890s have led the way in
innovation, discovery, and outreach and have provided access to
educational opportunities for countless thousands of students
across this country.
For more than a century, the University of Maryland Eastern
Shore has embraced and advanced the land-grant mission. The
funding we received has enhanced the university's capacity to
deliver practical education and training for our students.
There are three critical areas where the funding has had the
greatest impact. These are in workforce development, research
and innovation, engagement and outreach.
Today the challenge of developing an educated, diverse,
highly-skilled, and innovative workforce remains a top
priority. With 67 percent African-American students, UMES is
one of the most diverse campuses of the University System of
Maryland, ensuring access to all students. We offer eight
baccalaureate degrees, four master's, and three Ph.D. degrees
in Critical Science, Technology, Engineering, Agriculture, and
Mathematics areas.
Our role in providing access and opportunities for many who
otherwise may not have had the opportunity to attend college is
critical. UMES and the other 1890 universities face great
challenges compared to our 1862 counterparts in providing a
quality education for many students who are first-generation,
economically disadvantaged, and often under-prepared for
college, and we do this with less funding.
UMES has leveraged its annual Federal research capacity
appropriation of about $1.5 million to establish nationally
recognized programs in key areas such as food security and
safety, obesity prevention, forestry, and conservation of
coastal and marine living resources. Our unique geographic
location between the Atlantic Ocean and the Chesapeake Bay on
the Delmarva Peninsula has positioned the university to
strategically provide critical research and serve as an
economic engine for our region. For instance, given the
importance of food and water security, our scientists are
exploring how unmanned aerial vehicles, UAVs, can be used in
precision agriculture to improve the efficiency of water use
and the application of nutrients to large farm plots.
Given our location in the heart of Maryland's billion
dollar poultry industry, our faculty and students have been
invaluable in generating knowledge on food safety. Our
extension faculty are working directly with the seafood
industry, another important sector in Maryland, to support the
safety of seafood products.
Through our strong extension and outreach programs, we
continue to address the challenges related to rural poverty and
health services of under-served populations in urban areas. For
many years UMES has conducted a small farms outreach initiative
for farmers in the region with the goal of improving the
economic conditions of small-scale, limited-resource, and
socially disadvantaged farmers to provide educational programs
that improve their farm management skills and expedite their
participation in USDA farm programs.
Continued strategic investment in the 1890s at the state
and the Federal level will allow us to carry on our mission.
Greater investment will allow us to be more competitive and
effective at producing a diverse workforce to engage in the
research and outreach that addresses the many issues facing our
world today and tomorrow.
As we celebrate this momentous 125th anniversary of the
signing of the Second Morrill Act of 1890, we look back with
pride on our accomplishments and forward to the many challenges
that our 1890s universities can and will address with your
continued support. Strategic investment in the 1890s is
investment in the future.
Again, I thank you for your continued commitment and
support of the University of Maryland Eastern Shore and all of
the 1890s universities. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Bell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Juliette B. Bell, Ph.D., President, University of
Maryland Eastern Shore, Princess Anne, MD
Meeting 21st Century Challenges for Innovation in Agriculture, Science,
Engineering and Technology
To each of you, the Members of the United States House of
Representatives, good morning/afternoon.
My name is Dr. Juliette B. Bell and I am honored to bring you
greetings not only as President of the University of Maryland Eastern
Shore, but also as the Chair of the Council of 1890 Universities of the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities, and as Co-chair of
the USDA/1890 Taskforce, established by the U.S. Secretary of
Agriculture.
Congressman Justin Morrill, one of the founders of the Republican
Party, authored the Land-Grant College Act of 1862, ``in order that
colleges be established for the endowment and support of the education
of the ``sons of toil;' '' that they should be educated not only in
classical studies and military drill, but also in the mechanical arts,
and agriculture, which Morrill described as ``the foundation of all
present and future prosperity.''
Enacted in the midst of the Civil War, The Morrill Act, as this
legislation would become known, did not provide for the education of
the African-American citizenry, as segregation of races prohibited the
admission of African-Americans to these land-grant colleges.
Following the Civil War, in the years of reconstruction, Senator
Morrill continued his advocacy for the ``sons of toil'', this time
seeking to include those citizens of color who were not provided for
under the original Act.
Thus, in 1890, with the enactment of the Second Morrill Act, funds
from the sale of public lands were set aside for ``the more complete
endowment and maintenance'' of land-grant colleges except that no funds
would be distributed to states where there was a ``distinction of race
or color'' in admissions. However, the Act did stipulate that ``the
establishment and maintenance of such colleges separately for white and
colored students'' would be considered compliant with the Act provided
the state ``equitably divided'' those funds between the institutions.
And so, in Alabama, Arkansas, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky,
Ohio, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina,
Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Virginia, and West
Virginia, 19 universities, founded primarily for the education of
African-American ``sons and daughters of toil'', were designated land-
grant institutions, with the notion that educational opportunity was
not reserved for an elite few, but available to all, regardless of race
or class.
Today, these 19 universities celebrate the 125th anniversary of the
Second Morrill Act, which made it possible for each of these
universities to fulfill Senator Morrill's mission.
Indeed, the land-grant mission, established more than a century
ago, remains as relevant today as it was in 1890. Today, the 1890
universities continue to focus on the teaching of practical
agriculture, science and mechanical arts to improve and uplift our
communities in a time when race and class remain obstacles for so many.
Collectively, the 1890s, as these universities are called, have led
the way for innovation, discovery, and outreach and have provided
access to education and opportunities for countless thousands of
students across the country.
Founded in 1886 as the Delaware Conference Academy with a mission
focused on educational opportunity for former slaves and freemen, the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore was designated as Maryland's
``1890'' university.
For more than a century, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore
has embraced and advanced the land-grant mission.
At this time, I would like to take a few moments to introduce you
to the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, our programs and our
accomplishments as a result of the funding we receive to advance the
land-grant mission.
Statistical Information

Located on more than 1,100 acres on Maryland's Delmarva
Peninsula.

Over 4,200 students.

270 full and part-time faculty.

14:1 student to faculty ratio.

78% of our students are Maryland residents, with a
significant number from others states and some 30 nations.

67% African-American, 33% other race students.
Our Programs

38 undergraduate majors including: Agriculture and
Agribusiness.

22 graduate programs including masters and doctoral degree
programs in Food and Agricultural Sciences, Food Science and
Technology and Marine and Estuarine Sciences, Natural Resource
Sciences and Quantitative Fisheries and Resources Economics.
Funding
The university's annual operating budget is approximately $141
million.
For FY 2015, UMES received $3,861,253 in Federal capacity support
for research, extension, facilities and forestry while our sister
institution received $6,867,792 for its capacity programs.
Impact of Funding
The funding we receive has enhanced the university's capacity to
deliver practical education and training for students, particularly in
areas of innovation in science, engineering and technology. But,
perhaps most critical have been the developments in agriculture, food
and natural resources sciences.
In the next few minutes I would like to address three critical
areas where the funding has had the greatest impact. These areas are:

Workforce Development.

Research and Innovation.

Engagement and Outreach.
Workforce Development
Clearly the nation's emphasis on the development of human capital
has been the most essential ingredient in ensuring continued growth.
Today, the challenge of developing an educated, diverse, highly
skilled, and innovative workforce remains a top priority. The foresight
of Senator Morrill was truly inspired.
As an 1890 institution, UMES' role in providing access and
opportunities for many who would otherwise not have had a college
education is critical. Today, UMES is one of the most diverse campuses
in the University System of Maryland, as we continue to focus on our
core mission, while ensuring access to all. We offer eight
baccalaureate degrees, four master's, and three Ph.D. degrees in
critical Science, Technology, Engineering, Agriculture, and Mathematics
(STEAM) areas.
In many ways institutions such as ours face even more hurdles in
comparison to our 1862 counterparts in ensuring that we provide quality
education to many students who are often under-prepared for college.
Such students often require greater attention and support--a challenge
we have embraced by being innovative in our educational approaches.
Research and Innovation
UMES has leveraged its annual Federal research capacity
appropriation of about $1.5 million to establish nationally recognized
programs in key areas such as food security and safety, water security,
obesity prevention, forestry, climate change mitigation, and
conservation and use of coastal and marine living resources. Using our
unique geographic location between the Atlantic Ocean and the
Chesapeake Bay on the Delmarva Peninsula, we have positioned ourselves
strategically to provide critical research and serve key constituents
in our region.
Our scientists have continued to position themselves at the cutting
edge of new innovations. For instance, given the importance of food and
water security, our scientists are exploring how unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) can be used in precision agriculture to improve the
efficiency of water use and application of nutrients to large
commodities such as corn with very promising results.
Just over a decade ago we established a state of the art research
facility with Federal and state support. This facility and its
nationally recognized faculty have become a nucleus for critical
research on poultry and seafood safety and quality, Dr. Salina Parveen,
one of our food safety specialists, serves on the Secretary of
Agriculture's National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria
for Foods.
Given our geographic location on the Eastern Shore, in the heart of
Maryland's $8.5 billion poultry industry, our faculty and students have
been invaluable in generating knowledge on food safety. Our extension
faculty are working directly with the seafood industry, another
important sector in Maryland to support the safety of seafood products.
More recently and in collaboration with USDA ARS and FDA, UMES is at
the heart of critical research on fresh produce safety, as well.
Our research enterprise extends to a number of other important
areas, and the potential for growth is immense.
Engagement and Outreach
It is critical for us as a land-grant university to address the
many national challenges and one of these has to do with rural poverty
and health. Through strong extension programs, we have over the years
strengthened our services to small farms and rural communities as well
as the under-served in urban areas.
Thus, recognizing the importance of providing a firm foundation for
our children, our youth development programs provide a supportive
setting for all youth to reach their fullest potential. Through 4-H and
STEAM initiatives, youth learn beneficial cognitive and life skills
through community-focused, research-based experiential educational
programs.
UMES participates in the Expanded Food and Nutrition Education
Program (EFNEP), with initiatives targeting both youth and adults and
thus achieving the primary goal of improving the diets of limited
resource families and thus enabling them to enjoy better health, an
improved quality of life, and increased productivity.
For many years, UMES has implemented a Small Farm Outreach
Initiative for farmers in southern Maryland and along the Delmarva
Peninsula with the primary goal of improving the economic conditions of
small-scale, limited-resource, and socially disadvantaged farmers by
providing educational programs and training that improve their farm
management skills and expedite their access to and participation in
USDA farm programs.
The Future
We continue to seek ways to enhance our ability to deliver
solutions in key areas. Indeed, this year we have initiated a process
of consolidating our capacity in key areas where we can deliver
meaningful outcomes. To this end we have recently launched four
centers.

Chesapeake Water Quality Center,

Center for Obesity Prevention,

Center for Agribusiness and Economic Development, and

International Center for Personal Protective Equipment.

These centers will allow us to form strong and enduring
partnerships to deliver solutions for the people of Maryland, the
nation and world.
Continued strategic investment in the 1890s at the state and
Federal levels will allow us to continue carrying on the mission that
was envisioned by Senator Morrill. Greater investments will allow us to
be even more competitive and effective at producing an educated and
diverse workforce to address the many issues that face our world today.
As we celebrate this momentous 125th anniversary of the signing of the
Second Morrill Act of 1890, we look back with pride on our
accomplishments and we [look] forward to the many challenges that our
1890 universities can and will address, with your continued support.
Strategic investment in the 1890s is investment in the future.
Again, thank you for your continued commitment and support of the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore and all of 1890 universities.

The Chairman. Well thank you, Dr. Bell.
I want to thank all our witnesses. Great stories across all
six institutions. I know if the other 12 Chancellors and
Presidents could have made an opening statement, they would
have similar stories. The record of the hearing will be open
for 10 days for any of the other universities who want to make
a statement. We will include those in the record as if you had
actually testified.
The chair will remind Members they will recognized for
questioning in order of seniority for Members who were here at
the start of the hearing. After that, Members will be
recognized in order of arrival. I appreciate the Members'
understanding.
We do have all 18 Presidents with us today, so if Members
would like to ask a President who is not seated at the witness
table a question, they will be welcome to do so.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. Again thank you very
much, each of you, for being here.
Dr. Wright, could you talk to us a bit about how Prairie
View A&M works with the other institutions, the other A&M's, as
well the other institutions in Texas, to coordinate and not
duplicate and not overlap each other?
Dr. Wright. Okay. Prairie View is a member of the Texas A&M
system, and as such, we are fortunate in being located no more
than 40 miles away from Texas A&M University. Therefore, some
of the facilities they have, world class facilities, our
students go there and use those facilities in meat processing,
dairy activities, and the like.
Also, Tarleton University, West Texas A&M University, other
system universities, our agriculture deans and faculty meet on
a regular basis, and so they interact. If you look at the
Hispanic-serving institutions of Texas, Prairie View often
works with those institutions when it comes to research
projects; and so consequently there are instances where Prairie
View may be the lead, other times one of the other
institutions, whether it is Texas A&M or one of the other
Hispanic-dominated schools will as well, so we find it very
important.
And I would also add that Langston University in Oklahoma
and Prairie View were involved in a goat and sheep project in
Ethiopia for 5 years where we introduced in seven different
regions of that massive country--which is twice the size of
Texas, to give you a sense--that we introduced tens of
thousands of new goats and sheep, which were \1/3\ larger than
the animals there in Ethiopia, which made a big difference
there.
I would close on this point by saying, with the fellow HBC
institutions, we compete against them in athletics, but when it
comes to other activities, we work closely with them on various
research projects.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. Dr. Martin, you and I were
having a brief conversation about the way you link in with
small farmers and the production, you mentioned a pretty great
success story on hog waste and the impact--excuse me, Dr.
Davis, or Mr. Davis--the hog waste issue that you talked--can
you flesh out that about how you get the ideas, how you link in
with what is actually needed on the farm to what you are doing
at your university?
Dr. Martin. Thank you, Chairman Conaway. One of the things
that our university does, first, is we brand extension
activities collaboratively with our colleagues at NC State, the
1862 in North Carolina.
We also spend an inordinate amount of our time deploying
members of our faculty and staff and administration and
extension agents out into the communities where there is the
greatest need throughout our state to meet with community
leaders, to meet with the farmers of those communities on their
land. Assessing with them what their greatest needs are,
whether it be soil-related issues, business planning models, or
whether it be transitioning from one set of crops to a new set
of crops, to understand what those farmers' needs are. We
invite them to our campus to understand what their greatest
needs are as well.
And through those interactions, we frame strategies for a
collective group of the farmers in a particular region and
particular singular plans for a particular farmer to meet that
farmer's needs, quite frankly.
And so this is an ongoing, regular conversation with our
constituents so that we are better understanding the needs of
our farmers; and through the research we do in working
collaboratively with our partners, we deploy best science, best
technology.
The Chairman. I appreciate that. Dr. Rome, would you mind
stepping up to a microphone and answering a question real
quick?

RESPONSE OF KEVIN D. ROME, Sr., Ph.D., PRESIDENT, LINCOLN
UNIVERSITY, JEFFERSON CITY, MO

Dr. Rome. Yes.
The Chairman. Yes, sir. Could you visit with us about what
is the top success story at your institution?
Dr. Rome. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for asking that. We
pride ourselves in organic farming, and so all of our farms,
everything we do is organic, and we have a commitment to
maintaining that.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you. I yield back the
balance of my time. The gentleman from Minnesota is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Dr. Johnson, you mentioned in your testimony
the need for additional funding to reach out to small farmers?
Dr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Peterson. Are you receiving funds through the
Agriculture and Food Research Initiative or through the smaller
programs like the Section 2501 outreach grants and the
beginning farmer and rancher development programs?
Dr. Johnson. Yes. The last part of your question I could
not quite----
Mr. Peterson. All right. The Section 2501 outreach grants,
which is tied to the beginning farmer-rancher development
programs, are----
Dr. Johnson. I am not quite familiar with that particular
section, but I will certainly follow-up with both you and your
staff immediately following.
Mr. Peterson. Are you getting funds through the Agriculture
and Food Research Initiative programs?
Dr. Johnson. Yes, we are.
Mr. Peterson. Okay. The other thing I noticed in your
testimony is that you are the number one producer of African-
American veterinarians in the country. That is something in
Minnesota we have prided ourselves in and we have a tremendous
veterinary school. It is, however, a real challenge in getting
enough, especially large animal veterinarians, to fulfill the
need. Your veterinarians, are they large animal, small animal
practitioners?
Dr. Johnson. Well, I am not exactly sure of the percentage,
but certainly we have a number of students who have graduated
and have gone into large animal work. I would be happy to give
you the exact percentages of who is involved with small animal
versus large animal.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you. Dr. Wright, you mentioned the
challenge of getting state matching funds. Can you walk me
through what parts of this require state matching funds and how
that all works exactly and what the problem you are having with
it?
Dr. Wright. Okay. Okay. Years ago--I am in my 12th year as
President of Prairie View--there was no match requirement, but
eventually it became a 25 percent, so the State of Texas would
have to put up X amount for us to then get Y amount. So if we
were getting $10 million, the state would have to match with
$2.5 million.
Mr. Peterson. Do you know what year that happened?
Dr. Wright. It has been over, I would say over a 10 year
period. It has gone from 25 to 50 to 75, and now it is at 100.
Well, what USDA has done fortunately is that when we have not
made the match--we have not made the match the last two times--
they have given us a waiver whereby they look at our effort to
receive the match, and then they have the discretion to waive
it.
Mr. Peterson. So they are up to 100 percent now?
Dr. Wright. Yes.
Mr. Peterson. So in other words, whatever we are going to
provide, the state has to come up with 100 percent?
Dr. Wright. Right. That is my understanding. So our
legislature has finished, and if my memory is correct, we are
something like $3 million short. This time we needed $11
million, and we received more like $8 million, so we are in the
situation now where we will contact USDA and ask again for the
match.
Mr. Peterson. Are these on all the grants, or are these on
some specific areas?
Dr. Wright. It is on our research and extension area.
Mr. Peterson. Is this required--I should know this, but is
this required of the other land-grant universities throughout
the whole system?
Dr. Wright. Yes, it is. And the Texas A&M for instance, in
our system, they have a much larger operation, and so they
receive various pools, and so consequently they are able to
make their match in that regard, from a number of different
things. We just don't have as large a pool.
As you may know, Texas A&M is one of the largest public
universities in the country with some 55,000 students, and they
are located in every county in Texas. Prairie View is not, but
we have 8,000, almost 9,000, and we are located in only 30
counties.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Scott from
Georgia, 5 minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. All right. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I have a memo I would like to insert
for the record and have passed out just for point of
discussion.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The information referred to is located on p. 57.]
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you very much. I will
pass this to the Members and to the college Presidents.
And it addresses a concern. I have read all of your
testimonies, and there is such a concern about additional
funding, particularly as we grapple with the issues of
beginning farmers, the average age of the farmer.
And so basically the first part of my 5 minutes I want to
spend with just going through this. Currently, the 1890 land-
grant institutions received the majority of the United States
Department of Agriculture funding through the farm bill every 5
years, and these funds are to be used for three general
purposes, research, education, and extension.
As a result of the current farm bill, on February 9, 2015,
the United States Department of Agriculture Assistant Secretary
for Civil Rights, Joe Leonard announced the availability of
more than $18 million for the 19 historically black land-grant
colleges and universities in an effort to recruit, educate, and
train African-American students for careers in agriculture.
What I am proposing in this memo is just a small language
addition. The proposed language addition would be to add one
additional use to the current funding structure because in
order to encourage, recruit, and train more African-American
students for careers in agriculture, farming, and agribusiness,
this additional use of the funds would be helpful and necessary
to help achieve Assistant Secretary Joe Leonard's and our
objective, which is to recruit, educate, and train more
African-American students for careers in this very important
critical and growing fields of agriculture, farming, and
agribusiness.
So the proposed new uses of funds, if we are able to add
this language, will read as follows. These funds will be used
for the following purposes, teaching, research, extension. The
new addition would be ``student scholarships and student loan
forgiveness.''
Now let me give you the rationale for this proposed
language addition. Knowing that the average age of agricultural
farmers in the United States is 60 years of age, ladies and
gentlemen, this is a national security issue. Agriculture is
the food we eat, it is the clothes we wear, it is our energy,
it is our whole financial growing system through commodities
exchanges. Lord knows when we have a commodities exchange like
ICE that has purchased the New York Stock Exchange, you know
agriculture now is the single most important industry in the
world. It is leading part of the economy of 44 of the states in
the United States now.
So, in addition to knowing that we face this challenge of
the farmers' age going up towards 60 and knowing the difficult
challenges facing beginning farmers and knowing the critical
need to increase the number of African-American students
seeking careers in agriculture and farming, therefore the
United States Congress recognizes that we, the United States
Congress ourselves, must play a critical role in reducing the
average age of farmers, providing greater assistance for
beginning farmers, and provide financial scholarships and loan
forgiveness to bring more African-Americans into the
flourishing careers of farming and agricultural business.
In conclusion, thus through this language addition, that
funds can now also be used for student scholarships and loan
forgiveness for 1890 students, we are also helping to bring
down the average age of farmers over time and open the door of
opportunity for more beginning farmers.
I submit this memo, and I appreciate your allowing it to be
a part of the record as a point of discussion for us to move
forward as something we collectively, as 1890 institutions, and
in the bosom of this House Agriculture Committee, to discuss
and to see how we might be able to make this additional
language change and provide just this fourth area that funds
may be used.
I guess my time is up.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Rogers from Alabama, 5 minutes.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I take pride in
having Dr. Brian Johnson from Tuskegee University here today.
As you heard earlier, the Tuskegee University and staff have
been continuing the creation of Booker T. Washington and George
Washington Carver, and we are thrilled not only with the
University but with our new President and look forward to
working with him for a long time to come.
One of the focuses of my energy as a Member of Congress in
recent years has been on promoting public-private partnerships.
We have a lot of economic challenges in this country, and I am
convinced that whether it is transportation, our national
defense, telecommunication, security, or agriculture, public-
private partnerships are going to be a creative avenue where we
accomplish a lot of the goals that we need to focus on as a
country.
Tuskegee University is home to an award winning research
program that remains competitive in receiving grants, and given
that Tuskegee, unlike most of the HBCUs here from 1890
legislation are public, Tuskegee is private, so you have some
unique challenges in funding.
So my question, Dr. Johnson, is, how do you see the future
of research changing with regard to private funding as well as
public-private partnerships with universities?
Dr. Johnson. Congressman Rogers, thank you for the
question, and I look forward to working with you as well. I
want to give you a couple of examples. Currently, our wonderful
faculty in the agriculture area is working with the private
corporation, Wal-Mart, working with small farmers so that they
can gain some profitability.
One of the issues that consistently face small farmers is
that they can produce items but they can't generate enough
revenue to sustain their farms throughout the years, and so
essentially what our faculty are doing is working with these
small farmers on the private side. So that is an example of a
private partnership.
With the Federal Government, we are pleased that recently
eight USDA agencies have come together to help form what we
describe as the Carter Integrative Sustainability Center. This
sustainability center will allow members of the USDA to have
offices on a campus, on our campus, and also allow our faculty
researchers to work there alongside of them.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I am curious, anybody who has ever
visited your campus can see that there is a history of
corporate partnership with your university. Do you have an
infrastructure that you are a part of that opens lines of
communication to corporate America to help you familiarize
yourself with what their needs are in a way that you could
possibly be a partner in helping them resolve those concerns,
or is there such an organization? There may not be. I am
asking.
Dr. Johnson. Well, obviously, we rely upon the 1890 Council
for insight into what is happening nationally with corporations
that we can continue to develop more and more partnerships
with, but internally and internal to the institution, frankly,
we work individually, corporation by corporation. Obviously,
increased funding will help us to develop such an
infrastructure that will enable us to do it faster.
One of the things my colleagues and I would agree on is
that we receive a lot of our ideas about how to make these
corporations and partnerships work, but however, we need
additional personnel, we need additional funding, we need the
technology infrastructure to streamline in order to form, as it
were, a clearinghouse whether it be shared by an 1890
institutions or whether it is unique and intrinsic to the
university.
So let me just say that obviously we draw on what available
consortiums we are a part of to note and see what corporate
needs are nationally, but internal to the university, frankly,
we work a partnership at a time to those who are willing to
partner with the institution.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I have the honor of chairing, along with
Gerry Connolly of Virginia, the Public-Private Partnership
Caucus, and we have been in place about 3 years now, and I look
forward to reaching out to your institution as well as all the
institutions here to establish a dialogue as to how we can
better promote your partnership with the private sector in
trying to accomplish some of the challenges we have as a
nation.
But with that I yield back, and thank you all for being
here.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Fudge from Ohio, 5 minutes.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
you all so much for being here today. Mr. Chairman, I ask
unanimous consent to enter into the record an APLU policy brief
which I will be referencing in my remarks today.
[The information referred to is located on p. 57.]
The Chairman. Without objection
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much.
Let me just first congratulate all of the HBCUs, 1890s that
are here today for the remarkable work you do under
circumstances that are not always the best, and I especially
want to thank you for taking a chance on students that most
universities would not take a chance on, especially those who
have low test scores or low GPAs. You, if no other institution
does, recognizes that there is talent in a lot of these young
people and that all they really need is an opportunity to
succeed.
I understand that we have students coming to your
institutions who need some remedial or special work, and let me
just say to you, that is probably going to get worse, and that
is one of the reasons we do need to start giving more resources
to your institutions because I also sit on the Education and
the Workforce Committee, and we just passed out of committee a
bill that is going to cut K-12 funding, which is going to make
this problem worse, as well as they are going to block grant
all title I funding, so it is going to be a major problem for
young people coming into your institution. So again I thank you
and ask that you would continue to invest in young people.
The APLU report that I referenced, Mr. Chairman, indicates
that from 2010 to 2012, only 61 percent of 1890 land-grant
institutions received the 100 percent match from their states.
The totals over that period of time some $57 million that 1890
land-grants did not receive because their states did not give a
match.
Now, there has never been a problem with states giving a
full 100 percent match to 1862s, and it is something that we
need address, and I want to say today that my colleague, Mr.
Davis from Illinois, has been working with me on how we can get
states into a posture by which they could give the 100 percent
match. So bipartisan efforts are going on to make sure that we
can help with that, as well as the fact that we know that since
1890s do not have very large endowments, there are resources
that are needed in these institutions that are not needed in
1862s.
Let me just ask a question to whoever would choose to
answer it. I didn't hear much about the hurdles that are faced
by 1890s as it relates to funding and what happens when you
don't get the funding. Anyone who chooses to answer it, please
feel free. Don't be shy. Okay. Come on, Dr. Bell.
Dr. Bell. Thank you for that very important question. One
of the challenges that our institutions face that has to do
with funding is the lack of adequate personnel to help carry
out some of the extra duties that are required when we serve
the population of students that we serve.
As you indicated, many students do come to our universities
needing remedial help or other kind of attention, and that
takes people to work with them directly as well as to guide
them in the appropriate way to learn those study skills and
other skills that perhaps they did not pick up while they were
in high school.
So one of the challenges is to have adequate personnel so
that we can then use our faculty to engage in the research and
teaching efforts that are necessary to help move the mission of
the 1890s forward. Many of our faculty who are outstanding
researchers have inadequate time to be able to do the high
quality work that is going to help drive the 1890 agenda and
the land-grant agenda forward because of the excessive teaching
loads that they carry. Most faculty are teaching 12 credit
hours per semester at our institutions, which is an enormous
load. So those are just some of the challenges that we face as
a result of inadequate funding.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you, Dr. Bell.
And Dr. Martin, you talk about, in your testimony, of the
burden of documentation when waivers are required, and I know
my colleagues really don't like very much--they hate paperwork,
right, we hear this all the time, so I am hopeful that we can
address that issue for you.
Last, let me just say, again, thank you, and on behalf of
my colleague, our assistant Minority Leader, Mr. Jim Clyburn,
who really wanted to address you today and was not able to do
so, I want you to know how interested he is in what you had to
say today, and on his behalf, I thank you as well for being
here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back. The other Mr.
Scott from Georgia, 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
before I get into the questions, I want to just get a thank you
to an old friend of mine, Lynmore James, who I served with for
14 years in the state legislature. I know my colleague David
Scott knows Lynmore. He was a graduate of Tuskegee, and he was
a tireless advocate for Fort Valley State and certainly worked
very hard on behalf of veterinary programs and other things for
Fort Valley State.
And so I haven't seen him in awhile, but Dr. Bailey, when I
saw you today, it just reminded me of that friendship, and I
actually have just sent him a text to make sure he knew I was
going to be talking about his work on behalf of your
institutions while we had you here today.
I was at Fort Valley State in October of last year and had
an interesting conversation with some of the veterinarians
there. You have a tremendous research facility for ruminants,
we would call those sheep and goats in south Georgia. I hope I
pronounced the other word correctly. But I had a very
interesting conversation with the veterinarian there, and I
know one of your faculty members actually went to Afghanistan
and translated some of the veterinary books into their
languages so that they could understand how to better take care
of their sheep and goats in that part of the world, and that
good will has tremendous impact for America and our
relationships in other parts of the world in helping them do
that.
But if you would just speak to the a program that you have
that is called, Stronger Economies Together that Fort Valley
State has been involved in. Would you be willing to share that
with us on your leadership there and what Fort Valley State is
doing with that?
Dr. Bailey. Yes. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
This particular program, Stronger Economies Together, Fort
Valley State University has taken the lead, and what they do is
they focus on those counties that are most economically
depressed, what we call the StrikeForce counties. And the main
thing that they do is bring rural leaders together so that they
can cooperate, collaborate, and make decisions that will
advance the economies.
And so we have been quite successful in that because we
have been able to get teams out to the eastern part of the
state as well as the southwest part of the state, pulling the
leaders together in order to make progress for the economies of
those areas.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I represent over 20 counties
in that area, and I want to thank you for your work there, and
it is pretty--when we lose one manufacturing facility, the
impact in our area is much greater than certainly if they lose
an individual manufacturing facility in a metropolitan area,
and so certainly bringing manufacturing back is one of those
things that we want to continue to work on.
But the agricultural sector is what has been the bright
spot for the rural parts of the country lately, and I want to
thank you for being there for that in the research, and I want
to thank you for your relationship with 4-H. I now we had a lot
of 4-H students here today. That is a wonderful organization
that does a tremendous amount of good for our country and our
youth.
Any other suggestions that you would have for us, Dr.
Bailey, before we go? I am down to one minute, with regard to
extension? I know Ms. Fudge brought up funding. Any suggestions
on the funding related issues?
Dr. Bailey. Yes. We have done a lot of training, food
education training, especially through the 4-H and as well as
FFA, so we are reaching young people. We need additional
funding so that we can bring their families into the discussion
because we know that it is a long-term investment in eating
right and better healthy behavior, but also it is one that
really permeates the entire culture.
So additional funding will allow us to reach more counties,
more students, more families as we move towards making a
healthier and more economically prosperous state.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, and thank you for
being here, and I look forward to being at Fort Valley State
again, and hopefully my friend Lynmore James can join us there
for lunch one day. Thank you. I yield the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The gentlelady
from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all for
your testimony today. We appreciate having you. I have a very
serious interest in HBCUs. I did my bachelors and masters at
North Carolina A&T. I spent 40 years on the campus of Bennett
College. Clearly it is in my blood.
I did want to touch on something that Dr. Martin and some
of the others talked about, and that is the funding, but since
Ms. Fudge mentioned it, I am not going to pursue it so much,
but just to say that there was a required match to states, and
the states just aren't doing it, and ten southern states in
particular withheld about $57 million, as you said, and so
there is no penalty.
We might need to look at that, not that I want to be
punitive, but when we try to find ways for states to help with
that funding, I think we need to look at that a little more
seriously, so I won't dwell on that. But it has been a lot of
money that our schools have lost, and in terms of the research
and the other kinds of things that they could be doing, we do
need this money, and it is about fairness because the other
schools are getting it, and we want to make sure that
everything is fair.
And Mr. Scott, I want to thank you for the information that
you provided. I think it is a very good suggestion.
But Dr. Martin, let me just ask you, because you mentioned
the food insecurity and food access, and we know that there are
several problems in Greensboro and the Triad. I am pleased that
my alma mater A&T is using its 492 acre farm as a community
education resource in all that you are doing.
And I commend you for that, but you mention barriers to
young and minority farmers, and I guess my question, first of
all, is what challenges do you see for A&T, for new farmers in
North Carolina?
Dr. Martin. Thank you very much, Congresswoman Adams. A
variety of the areas we find are critical to small farmers in
general, certainly minority farmers in particular, include
making a living, a reasonable living from the soil of the land
these farmers own, and what we have sought to do is provide
both significant understanding of business opportunities for
our small minority farmers and helping them find the best use
of their land and crops to grow on those, on their property,
and then connecting them with outlets to market their produce
so that they are able to derive sufficient return on their
investment on their farms as well.
We have endless examples of where we have taken work with a
small farmer who once produced one set of crops, say tobacco,
for example, and help them understand the importance of
transitioning to other opportunities for their land.
For example, using the land to create a set of crops
related to vegetables that are critically important in
connecting the produce derived from that farm to some of the
grocery store chains and outlets and farmers' markets so that
they may then get a greater return on the produce of their
farms. Or transitioning them from growing tobacco to creating
fisheries, for example, to derive profit from growing prawns or
producing catfish, or creating mushroom farms.
We have a world class mushroom expert on our campus who has
developed the technology that has then transferred to some of
the small farmers in our region to help them learn to produce
mushrooms, very important, very high quality mushrooms,
producing these mushrooms, and then selling these mushrooms to
grocery store outlets and chains as well.
And these farmers are now doing better, are more
prosperous, quite honestly, and that is critically important
for us, obviously. That makes a difference in the economy for
those regions of our state as well.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. Before I run out of the
time, I am sure you are aware that the reauthorization of the
Higher Education Act is before the Congress, and can you share
with us any priorities that you think we may not have on our
radar screen that may be unique to North Carolina A&T?
Dr. Martin. Thank you again for that excellent question. We
believe that, obviously, the reauthorization of the Higher
Education Act is critically important to higher education in
general, certainly important to the 1890s and HBCUs in
particular. There are core areas, first and foremost, related
to financial aid, the Pell Grant, and ensuring that there is
consideration given to expanding Pell Grant, the level of Pell
Grant awards.
We lost the opportunity to make Pell Grant awards during
the summer months, which we think are critically important for
our students and students we serve, and so if we could see
opportunities to reintroduce that opportunity.
Title III funding: Title III funding is part of the
Reauthorization Act, critically important to HBCUs in
particular, quite honestly. So restoring fully and expanding
Title III funding, continued funding for the graduate education
component of Title III that runs out this year. We are looking
for another 5 year restoration of that funding, continuation of
that funding, we think, will be critically important for us.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Thompson, 5 minutes.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. Each of the
panelists, thanks to each of you for your leadership, your
leadership marshalling our land-grant universities, pathways to
opportunity, but also our land-grant universities are just
great problem solvers. Some would say traditionally for rural
America, I would say it is raw America, given the types of
problems that our land-grant universities work on, so thank you
so much.
My question is, and I will open this up to whoever would
like to respond. Do you believe that separate funding lines for
the 1890 and 1862 land-grant institutions are still a necessity
or is there a more efficient way to appropriate Federal
agricultural research and extension funding?
Dr. Bailey. Thank you for that question, Congressman. The
idea of the separate funding is still appropriate. We have two
groups of universities, but they have two very different
missions, and the separate funding right now should continue.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. Any other thoughts?
Dr. Wright. I would like to add. George Wright from Prairie
View A&M University. There are instances in our state where
Texas A&M and Prairie View are located in the same county and
in the same office, so you will have Texas A&M and Prairie
View, yet the agents from both of those two institutions will
say that they seem to be touching different constituencies.
And so consequently, even though Prairie View does
everything it can to open its doors to everyone, at the same
time we do see a special need there to work with that
community. I might also add that in many instances, the
situation for Hispanics, many of them are newcomers to this
country, mirror the same situations for African-Americans, and
so if you look at some of the parts of Texas that do not have
emergency care, do not have hospitals, or are missing some of
the youth programs and so forth, then it is Prairie View agents
who are doing it.
I think it is fascinating that people only think about our
program as doing the rural kind of things, but we are very
involved in abuse of women, of bullying, of diet issues, and
things like that, so there are some issues that we do see, yet
at the same time we do understand the need to work
collaboratively
Mr. Thompson. Dr. Johnson.
Dr. Johnson. Congressman, I would also like to echo Dr.
Bailey's remarks. Being situated in Tuskegee, Alabama, I do
recommend that these funding lines remain separate. We are
situated in one of the poorest counties in one of the poorest
states, and obviously, disproportionately African-American.
And so not only would it remain separate but even be
increased because of the unique issues Tuskegee, for instance,
are confronted with, confronted with not only the rural farming
problem but situated with the lack of capacity even within the
city to assist not only our students but even for us to be a
much more vital community partner with our local county and
city.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Dr. Mangum.
Dr. Mangum. Thank you. I would also like to respond to that
question. I do believe that we should have separate lines of
funding for a couple of reasons.
One, mainly because the capacity building funds is
extremely important to our institutions. You probably know, as
many do, that our endowment funds don't nearly match up to the
endowment funds available to many of the 1862s which provide
them with additional resources to be able to address the
agriculture and other issues associated with the agricultural
industry.
So the capacity building funds have continued, and we
certainly hope that they are expanded, would allow us the
opportunity to become more competitive as we build out our
institutions and build out our agricultural programs. Thank
you.
Mr. Thompson. Well, once again, thank you to all the panel.
And Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The gentlelady
from Florida, Ms. Graham, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Graham. Thank you so much. I want to thank everyone who
is here today, and I also believe we have a pretty large
overflow room as well, so thank you to those in the overflow
room for being here.
I would like to just say to Dr. Mangum again what an honor
and a pleasure it has been to get to know you and to work with
you, and as Rattler-in-chief, you are making all of us very
proud, so thank you very much.
My question, you mention the USDA land transfer, and one of
the issues that I am very interested in as well is helping our
veterans with employment opportunities as they come home, and
farming is a natural opportunity, particularly in north
Florida.
What components of the USDA transfer are you thinking about
potentially benefiting those veterans as they transition back
from active duty into veteran status?
Dr. Mangum. Thank you, Congresswoman, for that question.
With the land transfer of the 3,800 acres, we need to partner
with many people to establish the small farms and the ranches
in that region, and the veterans association in our area has
been pursuing us, in fact, when the opportunity became
available.
The idea of establishing small farms and allowing
opportunities for our veterans to establish farms as a way to
transition back into society is a great opportunity for us, and
we are really looking forward to being able to do that.
So we have several partners that we are looking to partner
with to establish those farms in that area and those ranches.
Ms. Graham. Well, thank you, and I just wanted to make sure
that we had that on the record because I am so proud of all
that FAMU is doing, in addition to now working with our
veterans in that capacity, so thank you again. And I yield back
the balance of my time.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back the balance of her
time. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Yoho, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Yoho. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate everybody
being here on the panel and all the other Presidents being
present today. I am a graduate from the University of Florida
land-grant university, and I appreciate Dr. Mangum being here
with your rivalry of FAMU, and it is always good to see another
great Florida school present here in Washington.
What do you see as the biggest challenge getting students
involved in the agricultural sector in your school? What have
you come across?
Dr. Mangum. Thank you for the opportunity to answer that
question as well. I think one of the biggest obstacles is
making agriculture attractive to young people. We need
additional resources to enhance our offerings, enhance the
experiences of our students to be able to become involved in
it, to show them and have them experience the value of
agriculture and show them the value of it in the future.
Food safety, food security, and being able to have food
that is healthy is a very important part of us being able to
tell the story, having the laboratories, the greenhouses, and
the facilities that would attract them to the agriculture
industry is a challenge for all of us in a high-tech world
where technology is taking over, but agribusiness is also
extremely important. For us to be able to turn them onto those
types of opportunities, we need to invest more in their world
and exposing them to agriculture.
Mr. Yoho. And it is such a critical thing that we all do
because, as George Washington said, you have to have food
security to have national security. And when I first came up
here and I shared this story with somebody, they were arguing
the farm bill, and one of the Congressmen from obviously a non-
farming state or not very big one said, what do we need a farm
bill for, why don't we import our food.
I think we tried that with oil, and I don't want to try
that with our food, and so it is so important to get people
involved in that. And it is a fun, and you know, on the
campaign trail, one of my competitors said people don't want
their kids working in the fields anymore, and I am like, heck,
I have been doing that since I was 15 years of age, it is okay,
and it is just something we need to promote more and more.
Dr. Johnson, with your veterinary program--in fact, I had a
classmate of mine, his wife went to Tuskegee, and she graduated
in 1982. I believe it was Cindy Silas. Are you doing anything
to get people to go into large animal medicine because as
doctor--or my colleague, Mr. Peterson brought up, there is a
shortage, and it is hard work. It is great work, though living
there, working on the farms, working with people that make a
living on our farms, feeding America and the world.
Do you have any special emphasis that you are bringing
people in there, knowing that the USDA has a loan forgiveness
program for people that do rural animal medicine?
Dr. Johnson. Sure. Thank you for that question, and in
fact, I wanted to follow up with Ranking Member Peterson that
our graduates are approximately 30 percent within the large
animal field in terms of what areas they go into, and then
approximately 70 percent small animal.
With respect to trying to develop that pipeline, it is
always a difficult challenge. I know that we have two deans,
Dean Walter Hill and Dean Ruby Perry at both of the vet
schools, as well as the agriculture. One of the things that
they are thinking about is developing unique innovative ideas
and partnerships about how to get veterinarian students as well
as agriculture students working together.
Obviously, your cattle, your animals benefit from the
nutrients of the soil that they derive from and the food that
they are eating, and so one of the things that I know that they
are working in cooperation with is applying for more USDA
funding to support that sort of work so that they can create
additional pipelines, but we will certainly follow up and give
you even more information if you need.
Mr. Yoho. That is great. I appreciate it, and my affinity
is that I am a veterinarian, so the more people--large animal,
too. The more people you can put into that, the better off we
will all be.
And if you guys can, weigh in on this. One of the things we
see is the benefit of the GMOs, genetically engineered,
genetically modified, transgenic, whatever you want to call. We
see the benefit. Less fertilizer, more yield, more nutrition. I
assume you are all doing research in that.
What we need to help us in this Committee is to get that
word out, the benefits of GMOs, and to have spokesmen like you
and your colleges that you are representing say it is okay, it
has gone through research, it has gone through the development,
and they are feeding the world, and they are using less
pesticides, and if you guys could weigh in on that, and of
course, I am out of time, but if you will help us do that, it
would be greatly appreciated, and I thank you for your time and
your efforts and all you do. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The gentlelady
from the Virgin Islands, Ms. Plaskett, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning still to all of the Presidents. I want to thank you all
for the tremendous work that you do in educating our young
people and bringing young people to be leaders here in this
country.
Mr. Chairman, if you would allow my indulgence, I wanted to
do a little housekeeping myself. Dr. Lawrence Alexander, I want
to thank you for taking care of my son. I have a son, Ariel
Duffy who is a student at your university. He is the great
nephew for O.C. Duffy. He is doing very well and you all are
treating him very good, but I am watching. He is not the
youngest child in my family, but he is the baby, so he is in
Vespers Choir and really enjoying his time at University of
Arkansas at Pine Bluff where his grandfather graduated and is
an agricultural scientist before retiring, so thank you all for
the work that you have done in that area.
And I wanted to just thank you all for what I think is the
commitment that you all have to the communities as well that
you are in. My oldest son was at the University of the Virgin
Islands, which is also a land-grant university, and did some
work with not just the farmers but the fishermen in our areas
and assisting them in statistical analysis that was needing for
their yields from their fishing.
And this the kind of work that you all engage in is really
being a part of the communities in the land-grant, fulfilling
that mission, and being a part of rural development in many of
the areas that you are in. So I was going to ask you, whomever
would like to answer the question, regarding the farmers and
rural residents. What is the assistance in the work that you
see yourselves really performing the most and the activities
that your, not just the students but the professors in your
extensions have the most need for among the rural farmers in
the areas in which you are working?
Dr. Bell. I would like to start.
Ms. Plaskett. Yes, Dr. Bell.
Dr. Bell. Thank you for that question. On the Eastern Shore
of Maryland, one of the major concerns that our rural farmers
have is on their use of fertilizer and impact on the Chesapeake
Bay, and so helping those farmers to identify ways to modify
their use of primarily poultry litter and to cut down on the
phosphorous runoffs that occur as a result of that so that they
can meet the regulatory requirement is a critical research area
for us.
We have been able to come up with some new technology that
allows the poultry fertilizer to be used in a different way
that does not produce the same level of runoff and odor that
typically violates the regulations, and so it is an educational
program for our small farmers.
We have a poultry association that meets regularly on our
campus to help bring them the latest technology as well as to
help them to manage their farms and to be more competitive for
USDA funding.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Do you see the area of the
students entering into agribusiness to really provide
assistance in this area or how are the students really using
the degree of agribusiness that you find, those that are
engaged in it? Is it being utilized here in the United States,
or I know so many instances where students are using it more in
developing nations and other areas.
Dr. Martin. Thank you very much for the question. Quite
honestly, the demand for our undergraduates by the
agribusinesses we partner with are overwhelming. The demand is
very high, and many of our undergraduates have just incredible
high paying jobs, and many of them are going on into the
marketplace, quite honestly.
What we try to do as part of our educational engagement
with our students is to get them involved in undergraduate
research so that we are enabling and encouraging many of them
to get involved and through their research to go on to graduate
school and getting involved in work related to our extension
activity. They may then see an opportunity to pursue graduate
education, get involved in higher education career
opportunities and then work in our research and connect what we
do in our research laboratories and innovation we discover
there and transitioning that research to the benefits and
betterment of the farmers we work with as well.
The scope of needs of our small farmers are quite varied
across areas including limiting use of pesticides, developing
crops where there is limited need for irrigation, and enhancing
the use of a different set of more resilient seed in producing
more abundant crops and capturing those crops and connecting
our small farmers to outlets where they may then sell their
produce.
It is a varied set of expectations. They have limited hands
on their farms to now farm the farm, if you will, and produce
crops, so we are developing strategies to help them develop
more efficient ways to grow produce and deliver their produce
in a more abundant way to the marketplace.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Thank you all so much for your
work, and I yield back the rest of time. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and it is always a
great privilege to be here, and I want to thank each and every
one of you for what you are doing in education.
My mom and dad were involved in education, and thank
goodness they were involved in education, although there were
many challenges there. Before that, we farmed, and of course
back in those days what motivated me to get an education is we
were dirt poor, but things worked out. And of course, I went to
school at Auburn University over there in Alabama, and a great
land, great land-grant university, and then of course, my folks
graduated from the University of Georgia, another great
agricultural school.
So yes, I guess my question would be this. There are lots
of opportunities in the agribusiness world, and we have heard
about those over and over and over again, and students--we talk
about funding and we talk about that we need money for this or
we need money for that.
And I guess my question is, outside of funding, what can we
do to help motivate young people, or what is the biggest
challenge we have with young people today, motivating them to
take a look at this industry and the opportunities available to
them? And I would be glad to offer that question to whoever
would like the tackle it on the panel.
Dr. Wright. Okay. I would like to give it a shot. It seems
to me that so many of our young people, and I don't know where
it comes from, have grown up with a stereotypical view of what
agriculture equates into farm life means.
One of the things our dean, who is here with me, tries to
do is, someone made this comment earlier, I think it was
Congressman Scott, in saying that it is about food, it is about
clothing, it is about water, it is about security, it is about
all of those things. It is also about working in forestry and
so forth, so we try to show them the wide range of
opportunities available.
At Prairie View, roughly around May the 1st, the first
Saturday in May, we have what is called ``Goat Day,'' and that
is the day that brings everyone in our community to the
university. We are very happy that a lot of white and Hispanic
young people come because we want them to see Prairie View and
consider coming there. We wish we could get more African-
Americans to come. We showed them all the things you can do
with a goat. Anything you can do with a cow, you can do with a
goat, and probably more, but it is very important to do that.
So for us, it is just educating them about the
opportunities that are available. We even talked to them about
job possibilities here in Washington, working in USDA, working
as attorneys, working in all sorts of things, and as one of my
colleagues was just mentioning, we definitely try to show them
how graduate education is possible, and all the different kinds
of opportunities throughout this country are available, so it
really is----
Mr. Allen. How could we help you get that message out? How
could this body help you?
Dr. Wright. Again, I think a lot of it falls on us
ourselves.
Mr. Allen. I see.
Dr. Wright. At Prairie View, like many of these, we try to
say the ``A'' is there for a very important reason, and the
``A'' has been there from the beginning, that it is
agriculture, and agriculture is more than someone tilling the
soil.
Mr. Allen. Yes, I am on the Education and the Workforce
Committee as well, and I was in one of our schools, and I asked
the kids what is the largest industry in our district, and a
little fella raised his hand, he said Wal-Mart.
So Mr. Chairman, we have to get the word out that
agriculture--of course, agriculture is our largest industry.
Any others like to address that need?
Dr. Mangum. May I----
Dr. Bailey. Yes, I would like to just add that you asked
what can we do to help, and I would like just to add that
agriculture is not Google, and it is not one of these high-tech
very attractive areas that young people want to be in, but it
has to really start--the education has to start at the young
ages, and so making sure that the message even goes down to----
Mr. Allen. That is a great idea.
Dr. Bailey.--K through 12 so that they realize that this is
so important. It is a matter of survival but that their
familiarity grows----
Mr. Allen. Right.
Dr. Bailey.--early and strong.
Mr. Allen. And promote it, yes.
Dr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Allen. Okay. Well, I will have to yield my time back.
My time is out. Thank you again so much for being here, and
keep up the good work. We want to help any way we can.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. Ms. Kuster,
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to all of you. I will take you to a different
part of the country. I am from New Hampshire in the
northeastern part of the state, but we have a wonderful land-
grant university, the University of New Hampshire which is
doing great things with agriculture.
Two points: One is that I just want the say for those who
don't think that government programs work, 125 years is a
pretty good record, and I imagine the number of people that
have been educated and certainly the security and the variety
of our food industry is pretty extraordinary.
I want to take a somewhat different look at young people. I
am very proud of the fact that New Hampshire has a five percent
growth rate in small farms. And by the way, all farms are small
farms in New Hampshire by any of my colleagues' reckoning.
And one of the reasons is that we have a resurgence in
organic farming, farm-to-table, farmers' markets, we have a
resurgence in our consumers wanting to know where their food is
coming from and what is in it. And with all due respect to my
colleague, Mr. Yoho, we might have a different perspective on
the research that he has asked you to--and the advocacy that he
is asked you to take on.
What I see in my district, and certainly the polling bears
this out, but the reality of our lives bears this out, people
want to understand what is in their food, and the fastest
growing restaurants in the country right now are Panera,
Chipotle, people want to actually watch their food being
prepared. They want to see what is going into it.
So I wanted to ask you, this is what is inspiring young
people, and then they are getting--the rest of us are catching
up to CSAs and how to go back to cooking great food and real
foodies. This is what is driving the economy for us in New
Hampshire.
I would like to ask you, are you seeing this? Do you see
people interested in organics or natural foods or being closer
to their food, and how are any of you, and this is just wide
open, how are any of you responding to that?
Dr. Martin. Congresswoman, thank you very much for that
excellent question. We in North Carolina are seeing significant
growth in farmers' markets. The attendance at our farmers'
markets are overflowing because of the interest of individuals
in wanting fresh vegetables and fresh produce and wanting to
know what is in their food.
We also are working very closely with our partner
institution, 1862 institution, North Carolina State and
research and centers of research and food production and
partnering with all of our food outlets in North Carolina in
our restaurants to gain commitments from them to bring to the
table in our restaurants all over our state a certain
percentage of their food grown in North Carolina.
So we are seeing an accelerated interest and excitement
about first partnerships in collaboration, but also food-to-
table through our work with our food producers, small farmers,
larger farmers, and producers, and the outlets, our restaurants
and grocery chains and the like in North Carolina. Lots more
excitement and enthusiasm about growth in quality of food and
safety of food.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Thank you. Thank you very much. Any
others?
Dr. Bell. I would like to add that at the University of
Maryland Eastern Shore, one of the initiatives that we are
working on is what we call high tunnel greenhouse farming, and
so we have a number of those high tunnel greenhouses that have
been instituted around the region working with farmers who are
then contracting directly with area outlets such as Whole Foods
and others. And we have also introduced that into some of the
school systems to help with the school age children, help them
to become accustomed to growing food and seeing how it
naturally develops. So it is a very interesting project.
Ms. Kuster. Yes. And getting consumers and children closer
to their food again. I have heard stories where children didn't
know what our food looked like. They didn't know the name of
it. They hadn't seen fresh food, so----
Dr. Bell. Absolutely.
Ms. Kuster. Dr. Bailey, I have 10 seconds.
Dr. Bailey. Yes. I just wanted to add that at Fort Valley
State University, we have devoted 18 acres to local farmers so
that they can go out, grow their own fruits and vegetables, and
we have a farmer's market associated with that. It is very
successful.
Ms. Kuster. Terrific. I think that is a great way to
attract young farmers and attract young people to it.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis, 5 minutes
Mr. Davis. Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I will not use all
my time because I actually have to be on the House floor
chairing proceedings at noon, but I do want to say, I had a
chance to watch much of your responses to the questions while I
was conducting some other meetings during this hearing, and it
is just amazing to me some of the progress that you are making
at your universities.
And the focus, I do want to add to what my colleague from
Georgia, Mr. Allen, said about focusing on agriculture. I come
from Illinois. Obviously no one here is from the State of
Illinois in representing an institution there, but Illinois is
kind of a hub of where our land-grant universities came from
and where they are today, and as a matter of fact, a former
professor at Illinois College in Jacksonville, Illinois, an
institution I went to for 1 year, and no, they didn't kick me
out, Mr. Chairman, I left on my own volition.
But Illinois College, Mr. Turner is credited by historians
with helping Mr. Morrill come up with the idea for land-grant
universities. So what you do is tremendous for us, and we are
glad to partner with you in the great State of Illinois,
especially on behalf of my land-grant university that I am
proud to represent, the University of Illinois.
I want to make sure that you have all the opportunities
that you need to talk about some of the advances. What I care
about most is being privileged to be the Subcommittee Chairman
for the Subcommittee on Biotechnology, Horticulture, and
Research. These issues of ag research are priorities of mine
and at all of our land-grant institutions.
I am going to throw this out, and if I get up in the middle
of your response, I apologize because I do have to go, but I am
going to yield back the balance of my time and allow you a
chance to be able to maybe think about some of the issues that
you would want our Subcommittee to address, and if you could,
follow up with me later. Send a letter, send some
correspondence, come see me, let me come see your institutions
because what you do is an integral part of what we are able to
do to make your institutions more successful in the future.
And I would have to thank my colleague, who is not here,
but she was instrumental in many of the issues that your
institutions are facing, and we are working very closely
together on some other issues regarding with our fellow
appropriators, and that is my good friend Marsha Fudge from
Ohio who I know had some very kind words for each of you
earlier today, and thank you again for being here. Thank you
for what you do for making agriculture such a priority, and
thank you for educating so many students and turning them into
great American professionals and giving him an opportunity and
a career.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The gentleman from
Louisiana, Mr. Abraham, for 5 minutes. I am sorry. I misspoke.
The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, former Chairman of the
Committee.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and this is a very
important hearing we are having. I always like to remind my
colleagues what our Presidents out there know, which is that
the wonders of the land-grant system, prior to the original
1862 Act being passed, unless you were the child of a rich
person in this country or for that matter anywhere in the
world, an advanced education was not available to you, and with
the 1890 Act and 1994 Act, we have made that available to
everyone in this great nation, and that is really kind of the
fundamentally amazing thing that we began in this great
country.
So we should all be very proud of all the land-grants. I
have the privilege of representing Langston University, an 1890
in Oklahoma, and I believe, Mr. Chairman, you said it would be
all right to address some questions to the Presidents who are
not at the table.
The Chairman. Yes, sir.
Mr. Lucas. Dr. Wright did a very good job discussing the
goat program, but if I could call upon Dr. Smith, perhaps, to
touch on that just a little bit more, we are very proud in
Oklahoma of that particular research program at Langston, and
if you could expand a little bit on that, Doctor, and perhaps
Dr. Wright also, if he would care to, talk about this building
relationships in foreign countries and the trust that comes
from that in a time when perhaps Americans are not always the
most trusted individuals around the planet.

RESPONSE OF KENT J. SMITH, Jr., Ph.D., PRESIDENT, LANGSTON
UNIVERSITY, LANGSTON, OK

Dr. Smith. Thank you very much, Congressman. And we are
very proud to have you as our Representative.
We are proud of the partnerships we have domestically, but
we are equally proud of the partnerships that we have
established at Langston University and particularly with our
goat research area. We are in Haiti; we are in Israel; we are
in Africa. And these are partnerships that are literally
transforming lives internationally.
As mentioned by my colleague, we tend to think of the goat
very differently in the United States of America. But when you
go abroad, the goat is one of the most used animals out there.
And when you talk about the impact both from a dairy standpoint
but also from a meat standpoint, from clothing and what have
you, it is nothing short of phenomenal what can happen in an
under-served community when they are introduced to the
possibilities that goat research and having goats available to
them could provide.
So we are heavily involved internationally at Langston
University through our goat research program, and we are doing
many of the things that my colleagues have mentioned
domestically as well.
Mr. Lucas. The opportunities there for your students, both
graduate and faculty, to participate in those international
trips, could you expand on that a little bit, because I suspect
a typical land-grant university in this day is still much like
Frank Lucas was several decades ago, had not spent a whole lot
of time outside of his state, certainly not outside of the
country, but it has to be a mind-expanding experience for the
student?
Dr. Smith. I will give you a personal example that just
happened to me. It was July 4, and the reason I know that is I
was outside with my young children, and we were popping
fireworks on the campus, and literally six students walked up,
well, about six students, and turns out they were students from
Africa, exchange students from Africa, who had just gotten onto
our campus the day before and they were there as a result of
our faculty members' research and involvement in Africa, and
they are here for the summer; and we started having a dialogue.
And for my personal children, they got to interface with
some people who were different from them, who were from another
part of the world, and many conversations. Fast forward to the
interactions that our students are having this summer with
students from Africa, that is what being prolific in the area
of research and going global can have on your campus. Our
faculty is getting to interact in ways they would not have had
otherwise.
So it is a tremendous opportunity that is provided. When
you give, you get back tenfold in terms of the research. So it
is allowing us as a land-grant institution to talk about the
university globally, but to interface with what is happening in
education throughout the world.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Dr. Smith, and thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Now Mr. Abraham,
from Louisiana, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Abraham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Being a rural
physician in the Louisiana Delta, I cannot tell you how
important agriculture and land-grant universities have been to
our state in the southeastern United States. We are very
fortunate today, we have representation from Southern
University.
Dr. Belton, if you will just stand up for a minute, sir, I
would love to recognize you. He is the newly appointed
President and Chancellor of the Southern University System. And
again, for me it is an honor for him to be here representing
Southern. Southern is a shining star, not only in our State of
Louisiana, but in the southeastern United States and really
throughout the nation. It has directly and indirectly
benefited, farmers, ranchers, agribusiness; and every resident
the state, I can assure you, has been touched through the
graduates and the work that Southern does.
I in fact, I have an intern working with me this summer,
Perez Pickney; he is a student of Southern University. So
thousands of our students in Louisiana and across the nation
have graduated with degrees from Southern, successfully
employed, gone out and become just fantastic businessmen and
businesswomen, leaders of our community, leaders of the
nation's community. And additionally Southern has been
recognized and accredited from the Urban Forestry and Natural
Resources Department that offers a B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. in
urban forestry and natural resources; and to date more than 300
students have received degrees from just this department, and
they are heavily recruited by the USDA.
So, again, I just can't say enough about Southern being an
integral part of our university system in the State of
Louisiana but also in the state of the nation, and I am proud
to have Dr. Belton and his representatives here to do that.
And I will get to my question. Dr. Bailey, you alluded to
this, but agriculture now is not what it was when I was growing
up as far as getting a degree in agriculture. It is so much
more. I couldn't begin to expound on the possibilities and the
probabilities that are available in agriculture now. I guess my
question is, of all the fields in agriculture that are new and
upcoming, where do you guys see the most growth, and are there
jobs available for these graduates when they get out? And
anybody that wants to hit first, go right ahead.
Dr. Bailey. Thank you for that question. I personally have
a background in business, and that might make me favor
agricultural economics. I think it is the basic area, the
foundation. I know that there are career opportunities for our
students in that area as well. It is an asset to the decision-
making, and I think that it will help all of the decision-
makers, the leaders, to hit the correct balance with regard to
investment in food or fabric or shelter. Its importance simply
cannot be minimized, and I would say that probably is where we
need to go.
Mr. Abraham. I agree totally. Anybody else? Yes, ma'am. Go
ahead, Dr. Mangum.
Dr. Mangum. Thank you. I would also like to expand on that
question. I think scientists are needed in agriculture. Much of
what we do, developing the biological controls, if we are going
to protect the food supply and production, we need more
students in the research area.
Mr. Abraham. I totally agree. I think it is a national
security issue, our food safety now; so you are spot on exactly
with that. It has become that important. Anybody else----
Dr. Bell. I was going to just add that food safety and
security is a prime area on our campus, in particular given the
industries that we serve in the region, and so we think that
that is an area of growth for not just our region, but for the
whole nation and the world actually.
Mr. Abraham. Go ahead, Dr. Wright.
Dr. Wright. I was going to mention water management is very
important. It just so happens that in Texas we have had a lot
of rain this year, but if you look over the last 5 or 6 years,
we have more or less had droughts. And the fact that on our
campus we have people very interested in that area is so
important. It is again a research area, but water management is
so important.
Mr. Abraham. Yes. Look at California and what happened. I
appreciate y'all's great work. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Before we adjourn,
I turn to my colleague and friend, David Scott, for any
comments he might have to close out the hearing.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Oh, well, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. First, again, thank you very much for your leadership
in providing this hearing. We are very, very appreciative of
that and with what we have to do.
I was just sitting here and this whole morning, and I want
everyone to know that this has been a hearing of soaring
magnitude and historical significance, and we have accomplished
a lot. We have strengthened the bond and relationship of the
1890s with the Congress of the United States. You genuinely see
the interest and the concern that Members of Congress have
expressed, their knowledge, the work they did in getting their
own research. You could tell by the in-depth questions that
they asked.
The other extraordinary part about this hearing that made
it of soaring magnitude is that you all came so well prepared
to talk about what you have done and are doing with the Federal
funds that you are receiving. And furthermore, the talk that
you have brought to explain the great efficiencies for how you
are getting so much out of the amount of money and funds that
we are giving.
And, third, the fine recommendations of what you and what
we can do to do, as I echo the words of George Washington
Carver, what we can to better the condition of the American
people.
Now, one of the most prevailing things that have come out
of this meeting is the urgency and the total understanding that
we are facing here an issue of grave national security. That is
why this is so important, and the role of the 1890s, going
forward, will play a very critical role in addressing this
national security area.
One, the age of our farmers, those who produce our food, is
continually escalating up, as I said, to 60 years of age. The
1890s can play a critical role in that. The whole concern about
beginning farmers, just for an acre of land now, it costs
$8,000. So we in Congress must understand that we have to look
at this as a national security area and get the resources out
into your hands so that you can do the job of opening up these
opportunities and dealing with this final issue of showing the
proper image of agriculture to the African-American community.
This was the final point that was made, and the gentleman
from Prairie View A&M addressed it so succinctly when you said
the stereotypical image of agriculture must be erased so we can
show all of the greatness of agriculture, the significance of
agriculture, the extraordinary jobs and opportunities that are
all too often being bypassed by the African-American community
because of this stereotype. As I said, it is the food we eat,
the clothes, the energy; it is everything. And so I say to you,
ladies and gentlemen, God bless you. This has been
extraordinary. We say onward and forward.
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. One of the worst things you can do is to
follow a Baptist preacher. David, thank you for those comments.
I too want to add my thanks and congratulations to the
system for 125+ years. Some of those schools have been around a
bit longer than that but at least from the 1890 version and
supports given from that legislation. Congratulations on that.
We probably won't have to wait for another 125 years to have
you back to talk to Congress. This has been a really terrific
hearing. You saw from the interest of the crowd outside when we
all got here, we transitioned from the reception, the keen
interest in that.
Universities are at their core tools, tools to prepare kids
for the future. I had a chance to meet with four young folks
that are back there this morning to talk to them about what
their plans are, where they are going, and the fact that they
need to be really good because my generation and the one just
below me and the one ahead of me have screwed this place up;
and they are going to have to be really good to save us from
ourselves in effect for all the problems that are out there
that's going on.
I marvel at the impact that teachers and administrators
have on mentoring and teaching and training and loving and
prepping young men and women for those tasks that will, in
fact, make this country a better place and all of our lives
better and then the ripple effect, because they will teach and
train and mentor and love and hug, and do all those things.
So thank you for being a part of that and being here. You
have a great story to tell. It folds really nicely into the
overall agricultural story. As we look at the future of the
2018 Farm Bill, we have to create that awareness among folks
who live in urban America and don't really have that link,
other than eating three or four times a day, to agriculture and
the impact it has on their lives.
And so how do we make them aware because they already
benefit from the cheapest, most abundant and safest food and
fiber supply of any developed nation in the world based on the
efforts of you and training those young farmers and all that
they do. They just don't know it yet, and several of you
mentioned the fact that this idea that they don't know where
food comes from other than the grocery store and have no idea
how it shows up there.
And as we gentrify our country, more and more, and that is
what is happening, and we lose that direct contact back to the
land, that we run the risks of not appreciating just what
agriculture does for us every single day. I may have told one
of you I was in a conversation with one of our colleagues when
I first got here, and I was talking about being on the
Agriculture Committee; and she said, ``Well, I represent an
urban area, and I don't have any agriculture issues in my
district.'' I said, ``Does no one in your district eat?'' And
she looked at me and she said, ``Well, yes.'' And I said,
``Well, it seems they have a keen interest in the successful
production agriculture industry in this country.''
So I hope you have had a great time in Washington, D.C. I
hope this has been beneficial for you to come and be a part of
this. It has clearly been beneficial to us. And we appreciate
all of your efforts to make that happen. As I mentioned
earlier, the other schools, if you want to prepare an opening
statement much like you would have been able to present under
the rules of the Committee, the record of today's hearing will
remain open for 10 calendar days to receive additional material
as supplemental written responses from the witnesses to any
question posed by a Member.
Thanks everyone for being here today. This hearing of the
House Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:14 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Memorandum by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Memorandum
To: The United States House of Representatives Agriculture Committee
From: U.S. Congressman, David Scott
Date: July 15, 2015

Re: The 1890 Land-Grant African-American Colleges and Universities'
funding proposed language addition

Currently:

The 1890 land-grant institutions receive the majority of their
United States Department of Agriculture funding through the farm bill,
every 5 years, and these funds are to be used for three general
purposes: research, education, and extension.
As a result of the current farm bill, on February 9, 2015, the
United States Department of Agriculture Assistant Secretary for Civil
Rights Joe Leonard announced the availability of more than $18 million
for the 19 historically black land-grant colleges and universities in
an effort to recruit, educate, and train African-American students for
careers in agriculture.

Proposed Language Addition:

The proposed language addition is to add one additional use to the
current funding structure. In order to encourage, recruit, and train
more African-American students for careers in agriculture, farming, and
agribusiness, this additional use of the funds would be helpful and
necessary to help achieve Assistant Secretary Joe Leonard's, and our
objective, which is: to recruit, educate, and train more African-
American students for careers in the very important, critical, and
growing fields of agriculture, farming, and agribusiness.
The proposed new uses of funds will read as follows:
These funds will be used for the following purposes; Teaching,
Research, Extension, Student Scholarships and Student Loan Forgiveness.

Rationale for proposed language addition:

Knowing that the average age of agricultural farmers in the United
States is 60 years of age. And, knowing the difficult challenges facing
beginning farmers, and knowing the critical need to increase the number
of African-American students seeking careers in agricultural business
and farming; therefore, the United States Congress recognizes that, we,
the United States Congress, ourselves, must play a critical role in
reducing the average age of farmers, provide greater assistance for
beginning farmers, and provide financial scholarship and loan
forgiveness to bring more African-Americans into careers in farming and
agricultural business.
Thus, through this language addition that funds can now also be
used for student scholarship and loan forgiveness for 1890 students, we
are also helping to bring down the average age of farmers, over time,
and open the door of opportunity for more beginning farmers.
______

Submitted Report by Hon. Marcia L. Fudge, a Representative in Congress
from Ohio
The Office for Access and Success Policy Brief
Report No. 3000-PB1
September 2013

By:

John Michael Lee, Jr., Ph.D., Vice President, APLU.
Samaad Wes Keys, Program Assistant, APLU.

This OAS Policy Brief highlights the inequities that exist in state
matching Federal formula funding to our nation's 1890 land-grant
universities and provides policy recommendations to fix the systemic
inequities in the nation's land-grant system.
Land-Grant But Unequal State One-to-One Match Funding for 1890 Land-
Grant Universities

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Highlights

From 2010-2012, 61 percent of 1890 land-grant institutions
did not receive 100 percent of the one-to-one matching funds from
their respective states for extension or research funding.

Between 2010-2012, 1890 land-grant universities did not
receive more than $31 million in extension funding due to states not
meeting the one-to-one match requirement.

From 2010-2012, 1890 land-grant universities did not
receive more than $25 million in research funding due to states not
meeting the one-to-one match requirement.

Combined, 1890 land-grant universities did not receive
almost $57 million due to states not meeting the one-to-one match.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction
On July 2, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln signed the Morrill Act
into law, forging a new partnership between the Federal Government and
the states to create the backbone for what is today the public system
of higher education in America. Before the establishment of the state-
university system of higher education, private institutions primarily
provided higher education to Americans and access was afforded only to
the well off at a few institutions such as Harvard, Yale and Princeton
(APLU, 2012).
For more than 150 years since that historic event, the nation's
land-grant colleges and universities have provided a ``liberal and
practical education'' and these institutions have helped open the doors
of access and empower students with the education they need. These
institutions have also developed ground-breaking research that has
moved our country forward and these institutions continue to provide
rural communities in each state with robust solutions to the challenges
they face--both agriculturally and socially. There is at least one
land-grant institution in every state and territory in the United
States and the District of Columbia (see Figure 1). Today, land-grant
colleges and universities continue their mission to provide equitable
access to education and develop innovations that continue to strengthen
individual states and the country as a whole. Americans lead richer,
productive and more prosperous lives because of the contributions of
the land-grant university system.
Under the 1862 Morrill Act, which created the vast majority of
land-grant institutions, and the Morrill Act of 1890, which established
18 black land-grant universities, the Federal Government committed to
providing financial support to schools so long as states matched that
level of support. Although 1890 land-grant universities produce
talented students, innovative research and state-of-the-art practices
in agriculture and STEM disciplines that are geared toward improving
life in rural and high-risk communities, states are failing to provide
the nation's 1890 historically black land-grant universities the same
level of one-to-one matching dollars they provide other land-grant
institutions that receive Federal funding.
Figure 1: U.S. Land-Grant Colleges and Universities

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Cooperative State
Research, Education, and Extension Service, Washington, D.C.
Based on U.S. Department of Agriculture map: m2783, June 2003.

The purpose of this policy brief is to highlight the disparities
that exist in the matching of Federal formula funding to our nation's
1890 land-grant universities and to provide policy recommendations to
fix this systemic disparity in the nation's land-grant system. The
brief gives a history of the land-grant system, offers detailed
information about land-grant matching funds to 1890 universities,
highlights survey data and concludes with four recommendations for
policymakers to strengthen the land-grant system. While this brief
compares and contrasts state one-to-one matching funds to 1862 and 1890
universities, it does not suggest a zero sum game of taking needed
funds from 1862 universities. Instead, the land-grant system is
strongest when all universities--1862s, 1890s and 1994s--are funded
adequately to carry out the land-grant mission.
The First Morrill Act of 1862
The Morrill Act is named after the U.S. Congressman from Vermont,
Justin Morrill, who led the passage of the legislation that established
the land-grant institutions for each state known as the First Morrill
Act (Allen & Jewell, 2002; Brown, Donahoo, & Bertrand, 2001; Redd,
1998; R. Wilson, 1990). Though Congressman Morrill introduced his first
version of the bill in 1857 and secured passage in 1859, it was vetoed
by President James Buchanan (APLU, 2012). The passage of the First
Morrill Act in 1862 reflected the demand for an expanded focus on
agricultural and technical education in the United States that opened
the doors of education to the agricultural and industrial workers. In
the Morrill Act the purpose of the establishment of the land-grant
system is stated in the following words:

``. . . the endowment, support, and maintenance of at least
one college where the leading object shall be, without
excluding other scientific and classical studies, and including
military tactics, to teach such branches of learning as are
related to agriculture and the mechanic arts, in such manner as
the legislatures of the states may respectively prescribe, in
order to promote the liberal and practical education of the
industrial classes in the several pursuits and professions in
life'' (Morrill Act of 162, sec. 4).

This purpose was fulfilled and what started as a system of colleges
to educate the industrial class, is today a system of comprehensive
colleges and universities that are centers for research, teaching,
agricultural innovation and the liberal arts. Many land-grants are also
flagship institutions such as the University of Florida and The Ohio
State University. Ultimately, most land-grant colleges have become
large public universities that today offer a full spectrum of
educational opportunities. However, there are some land-grant colleges
that are private schools, including Cornell University, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and Tuskegee University.
The Second Morrill Act of 1890
African-Americans could not benefit from the passage of the First
Morrill Act in states that did not allow them to attend institutions of
higher education. These states were primarily in Southern and border
states. In fact, it was not until the passage of the subsequent
legislation known as the Second Morrill Act of 1890 that African-
Americans were able to attend land-grant institutions in many states.
The Morrill Act of 1890 prohibited the distribution of money to states
that made distinctions of race in admissions unless at least one land-
grant college for African-Americans, was established, and thus brought
about the establishment of 19 public black colleges (Allen & Jewell,
2002; Provasnik, et al., 2004; Redd, 1998; Roebuck & Murty, 1993). It
should be noted that several institutions outside of the South and
border states provided access to African-American students long before
the Morrill Act of 1890. Prior to the establishment of the black-land-
grant system in 1890, access to higher education for African-Americans
in the United States was primarily limited to private universities such
as Howard University and Fisk University.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
1890 Land-Grant Universities

A second Morrill Act was passed in 1890, aimed at the former
Confederate states. This Act required each state to show that race was
not an admissions criterion, or else to designate a separate land-grant
institution for persons of color. Among the 70 colleges and
universities which eventually evolved from the Morrill Acts are several
of today's historically black colleges and universities. Though the
1890 Act granted cash instead of land, it granted colleges under that
act the same legal standing as the 1862 Act colleges; hence the term
``land-grant college'' properly applies to both groups. However, many
did not receive land nor money.

1994 Land-Grant Universities

Later on, other colleges such as the University of the District of
Columbia and the ``1994 land-grant colleges'' for Native Americans were
also awarded cash by Congress in lieu of land to achieve ``land-grant''
status.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
1890 Land-Grant Universities

Alabama A&M University (AL)

Alcorn State University (MS)

Delaware State University (DE)

Florida A&M University (FL)

Fort Valley State University (GA)

Kentucky State University (KY)

Langston University (OK)

Lincoln University (MO)

North Carolina A&T State University (NC)

Prairie View A&M University (TX)

South Carolina State University (SC)

Southern University System (LA)

Tennessee State University (TN)

Tuskegee University (AL)

University of Arkansas, Pine Bluff (AR)

University of Maryland Eastern Shore (MD)

Virginia State University (VA)

West Virginia State University (WV)
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Land-Grant But Unequal: State Matching Funds for 1890 Land-Grant
Institutions
Over the years, land-grant status has implied several types of
Federal support. The first Morrill Act of 1862 provided grants in the
form of Federal lands (30,000 acres or equivalent in scrip for each
Representative and Senator) to each state for the establishment of a
public institution to fulfill the Act's provisions. At different times
money was appropriated through legislation such as the second Morrill
Act of 1890, which funded the establishing of the nation's public
historically black land-grant colleges and universities; and the
Bankhead-Jones Act of 1935 which provided an increase in Federal
funding to land-grant colleges and universities during the depression.
The nation has significantly expanded its contributions to land-
grant colleges and universities. This support includes funding for
research through the Hatch Act of 1887 and the Smith-Lever Act of 1914
that created the extension system at 1862 land-grant universities.
However, because 1890 land-grant institutions are not eligible to
receive funding provided by the Hatch Act or the Smith Lever Act, the
Evans-Allen Act was established in 1977 (90 years after the Hatch Act
of 1887) to support agricultural research at 1890 land-grant
institutions with funds equal to at least 15 percent of the Hatch Act
appropriations. Institutions currently receive about 21 percent of
Hatch Act funding through the Evans-Allen Act.
The National Agriculture Research, Extension and Teaching Act of
1997 (NARETPA)--established 83 years after the Smith-Lever Act of
1914--provides Federal funding for agricultural extension programs and
activities at 1890 land-grant institutions similar to those of 1862
universities under the Smith-Lever Act. NARETPA provided this funding
directly to 1890 institutions for the first time. The United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) plays an integral role in the
administering of Federal land-grant funds and the coordination of
agricultural land-grant activities at the national level. USDA's
National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) awards research
funding through a combination of formula funding, non-competitive and
competitive grants.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Important Federal Land-Grant Legislation

Hatch Act of 1887

A key component of the land-grant system is the agricultural
experiment station program created by the Hatch Act of 1887. The Hatch
Act authorized direct payment of Federal grant funds to each state to
establish an agricultural experiment station in connection with the
land-grant institution in order to increase agricultural research. The
amount of this appropriation varies from year to year and is determined
for each state through a formula based on the number of small farmers
in the state. A major portion of the Federal funds must be matched by
the state.

Smith-Lever Act of 1914

In order to disseminate information gleaned from the experiment
stations' research to the farmers and other industrial workers in the
state, the Smith-Lever Act of 1914 created the Cooperative Extension
Service associated with each 1862 land-grant institution--1890 land-
grant institutions did not receive this funding (APLU, 2013). Extension
programs at land-grant institutions are the community and rural
education programs that provide a direct impact to the citizens of each
state and include programs to support small farmers and agricultural
business development in every state. This Act authorized ongoing
Federal support for extension services, using a formula similar to the
Hatch Act, to determine the amount of appropriation. This Act also
requires states to provide matching funds in order to receive the
Federal monies.

Evans-Allen Act of 1977

The Evans-Allen Act of 1977 provides capacity funding for food and
agricultural research at the 1890 land-grant universities in a manner
similar to that provided to the 1862 universities under the Hatch Act
of 1887. Research conducted under the Evans-Allen Program has led to
hundreds of scientific breakthroughs of benefit to both the unique
stakeholders of the 1890 Institutions and the nation as a whole [7
U.S.C. 3222, (Sec. 1445, Research Act of 1977)].
The Evens-Allen Act was created to support continuing agricultural
research at colleges that were created under the 1890 Morrill Act. Its
purpose is to promote efficient production, marketing, distribution and
utilization of products of the farm as essential to the health and
welfare of people and to promote a sound prosperous agriculture and
rural life.

The National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act
NARETPA) of 1977

The National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy
Act of 1977 (NARETPA) as a law, provides the basis for Federal funding
for agricultural extension programs and activities at 1890 land-grant
institutions.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Though these funding sources have been made available to the
nation's land-grant colleges and universities, this funding also
requires the home state of the land-grant institution to match all
formula based funding received from Federal funds on a dollar-to-dollar
basis commonly referred to as the one-to-one match requirement. While
one-to-one matching is a requirement for all states with land-grant
universities, states often do not fulfill the matching requirement for
its 1890 land-grant institutions while meeting and in many cases
exceeding the matching requirement for 1862 land-grant institutions in
the same state. Federal legislation allows institutional waivers for
the one-to-one match requirement for 1890 land-grant institutions while
1862 land-grant institutions are not eligible to receive waivers. As a
result, from 2010-2012, 1890 land-grant institutions did not receive
almost $57 million in Federal matching funds for research and extension
activities.
The Matching Disparity
The one-to-one matching inequity that is being experienced by 1890
land-grant institutions is not in any way caused be the Federal
Government or the U.S. Department of Agriculture. In fact, Congress
established the matching requirement so that all land-grant
institutions would receive one-to-one matching funds from their
respective state. This inequity in funding to HBCUs by states has been
well documented since the founding of these institutions, and funding
at these schools was very poor and not equitable compared to white
institutions (Allen & Jewell, 2002; Redd, 1998). While all states are
meeting the one-to-one matching requirement for their 1862
institutions, the majority of states do not meet this obligation for
1890 land-grant universities (see Figure 2) requiring these
institutions to apply for a waiver of the one-to-one match requirement
or forfeit their funding. The U.S. Department of Agriculture still
requires 1890 land-grant institutions to come up with at least 50
percent of the match.
Figure 2: Evans-Allen and Extension One-to-One Matching Status to 1890
Land-Grant Universities by State, 2012

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities
Office of Access and Success analysis of U.S. Department of
Agriculture extension and Evans-Allen Funding, 2013.
Note: In some cases though institutions may not have received
a waiver, the match comes from general funds instead of a
specific line-item.

From 2010-2012, 61.2 percent (11 out of 18) of the 1890 land-grant
institutions did not receive 100 percent of the one-to-one matching
funds from their respective states for extension or research funding.
In terms of dollars, 1890 land-grant universities did not receive
$31,828,918 in extension funding due to states not meeting the one-to-
one match requirement (see Table 1) between 2010-2012, and 1890 land-
grant universities did not receive $24,798,282 in research funding due
to states not meeting the one-to-one match requirement (see Table 2)
from 2010-2012. Combined, this is a net loss of $56,627,199. It is also
not clear if the remaining eight states where 1890 institutions have
not applied for a waiver are also losing millions of dollars because
many do not have a specific line-item that provides these matching
funds and they are taken from the institutions general agriculture
allocation. For example, in FY14, Maryland will provide the University
of Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) with a specific line-item match for
USDA matching funds for the first time. Historically, the match for the
agriculture funds at UMES was derived from the general agriculture
appropriation and was not specifically identified as a match. When
these funds are not identified as a match and are taken from general
funds, it results in a net loss to the institution. Budget reductions
to state institutions general funds also requires institutions to
reduce their state match significantly. Without a separate line-item
allocation to ensure that the one-to-one match is met each year, it is
unclear if the requirement is being met by all states, including those
that have not required a waiver. While the matching provided by states
to institutions has increased significantly over the last 2 decades,
1890 land-grant universities in many states still do not receive the
funding necessary to meet the one-to-one requirement.

Table 1: 1890 Land-Grant Universities Extension Funding 2010-2012
2010-2012 Totals
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
100% Match
State        Institutions     Total to State    Requirement     Total  Waiver   State  Actual  State  Percent
Total          Requested      Match Total     Match Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AL           Alabama A&M             $6,337,562       $6,337,562              $0      $6,337,562            100%
AL           Tuskegee                $6,337,562       $6,337,562      $2,195,669      $4,141,893             65%
AR           University of           $5,555,679       $5,555,679      $1,867,658      $3,688,021             66%
Arkansas, Pine
Bluff
DE           Delaware State          $3,486,215       $3,486,215              $0      $3,486,215            100%
FL           Florida A&M             $5,435,344       $5,435,344      $2,717,632      $2,717,713             50%
GA           Fort Valley State       $7,575,368       $7,575,368              $0      $7,575,368            100%
KY           Kentucky State          $9,473,491       $9,473,491      $3,569,427      $5,904,064             62%
LA           Southern                $4,971,901       $4,971,901              $0      $4,971,901            100%
University
MD           University of           $3,943,556       $3,943,556              $0      $3,943,556            100%
Maryland, Eastern
Shore
MS           Alcorn State            $5,931,055       $5,931,055              $0      $5,931,055            100%
MO           Lincoln University      $9,559,897       $9,559,897      $5,033,586      $4,526,311             47%
NC           North Carolina A&T     $10,736,846      $10,736,846      $3,756,038      $6,980,808             65%
State
OK           Langston                $5,856,454       $5,856,454              $0      $5,856,454            100%
University
SC           South Carolina          $5,448,885       $5,448,885      $2,724,443      $2,724,442             50%
State
TN           Tennessee State         $8,411,095       $8,411,095              $0      $8,411,095            100%
TX           Prairie View A&M       $12,562,718      $12,562,718      $6,055,922      $6,506,796             52%
VA           Virginia State          $7,097,437       $7,097,437      $2,270,574      $4,826,863             68%
WVA          West Virginia           $4,025,156       $4,025,156      $1,637,969      $2,387,187             59%
State
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Totals                     $122,746,221     $122,746,221     $31,828,918     $90,917,304             74%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2013.

Table 2: 1890 Land-Grant Universities Evans-Allen (Research) Funding 2010-2012
2010-2012 Totals
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
100% Match
State        Institutions     Total to State    Requirement     Total  Waiver   State  Actual  State  Percent
Total          Requested      Match Total     Match Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AL           Alabama A&M             $6,678,810       $6,678,810              $0      $6,678,810            100%
AL           Tuskegee                $6,629,632       $6,629,632        $312,615      $6,317,017             95%
AR           University of           $5,734,629       $5,734,629      $1,234,076      $4,500,553             78%
Arkansas, Pine
Bluff
DE           Delaware State          $3,132,109       $3,132,109              $0      $3,132,109            100%
FL           Florida A&M             $5,287,691       $5,287,691      $3,068,010      $2,219,682             42%
GA           Fort Valley State       $7,640,470       $7,640,470              $0      $7,640,470            100%
KY           Kentucky State          $9,124,875       $9,124,875      $1,677,140      $7,447,735             82%
LA           Southern                $5,086,583       $5,086,583              $0      $5,086,583            100%
University
MD           University of           $3,836,233       $3,836,233              $0      $3,836,233            100%
Maryland, Eastern
Shore
MS           Alcorn State            $8,022,396       $8,022,396              $0      $8,022,396            100%
MO           Lincoln University      $7,307,444       $7,307,444      $3,735,087      $3,572,357             49%
NC           North Carolina A&T     $10,513,898      $10,513,898      $2,845,912      $7,667,986             73%
State
OK           Langston                $5,860,825       $5,860,825              $0      $5,860,825            100%
University
SC           South Carolina          $5,691,927       $5,691,927      $3,304,647      $2,387,280             42%
State
TN           Tennessee State         $8,322,683       $8,322,683              $0      $8,322,683            100%
TX           Prairie View A&M       $12,382,874      $12,382,874      $6,315,445      $6,067,429             49%
VA           Virginia State          $7,096,901       $7,096,901        $913,367      $6,183,534             87%
WVA          West Virginia           $3,757,225       $3,757,225      $1,391,983      $2,365,242             63%
State
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Totals                     $122,107,205     $122,107,205     $24,798,282     $97,308,924             80%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2013.

Table 3: 1890 Land-Grant Universities Combined Extension & Evans-Allen Act Funding (Research) 2010-2012
2010-2012 Totals
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
100% Match
State        Institutions     Total to State    Requirement     Total  Waiver   State  Actual  State  Percent
Total          Requested      Match Total     Match Total
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AL           Alabama A&M            $13,016,372      $13,016,372              $0     $13,016,372            100%
AL           Tuskegee               $12,967,194      $12,967,194      $2,508,284     $10,458,910             81%
AR           University of          $11,290,308      $11,290,308      $3,101,734      $8,188,574             73%
Arkansas, Pine
Bluff
DE           Delaware State          $6,618,324       $6,618,324              $0      $6,618,324            100%
FL           Florida A&M            $10,723,035      $10,723,035      $5,785,641      $4,937,394             46%
GA           Fort Valley State      $15,215,838      $15,215,838              $0     $15,215,838            100%
KY           Kentucky State         $18,598,366      $18,598,366      $5,246,567     $13,351,799             72%
LA           Southern               $10,058,484      $10,058,484              $0     $10,058,484            100%
University
MD           University of           $7,779,789       $7,779,789              $0      $7,779,789            100%
Maryland, Eastern
Shore
MS           Alcorn State           $13,953,451      $13,953,451              $0     $13,953,451            100%
MO           Lincoln University     $16,867,341      $16,867,341      $8,768,673      $8,098,668             48%
NC           North Carolina A&T     $21,250,744      $21,250,744      $6,601,950     $14,648,794             69%
State
OK           Langston               $11,717,279      $11,717,279              $0     $11,717,279            100%
University
SC           South Carolina         $11,140,812      $11,140,812      $6,029,090      $5,111,722             46%
State
TN           Tennessee State        $16,733,778      $16,733,778              $0     $16,733,778            100%
TX           Prairie View A&M       $24,945,592      $24,945,592     $12,371,367     $12,574,225             50%
VA           Virginia State         $14,194,338      $14,194,338      $3,183,941     $11,010,397             78%
WVA          West Virginia           $7,782,381       $7,782,381      $3,029,952      $4,752,429             61%
State
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grand Totals                     $244,853,426     $244,853,426     $56,627,199    $188,226,227             77%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2013.

Survey of 1890 Land-Grant Universities
In a 2013 survey of 1890 land-grant universities conducted by the
APLU Office for Access and Success, 50 percent of institutions
indicated that they did not receive one-to-one matching funds from
their state (See Figure 3) and 70 percent of institutions indicated
that they had requested a waiver between 2008 and 2013 (see Figure 4).
Further, only ten percent of respondents (one institution) indicated
that the 1890 land-grant institutions received more than a one-to-one
match (see Figure 5), and 80 percent of respondents noted that the 1862
land-grant institutions receive more than a one-to-one matching of
funds from their state (See Figure 6). This further underscores the
under-funding of 1890 land-grant institutions in comparison to 1862
land-grant universities in the same state. Figure 7 shows that since
2008, there has been an increase in 1890 land-grant institutions
receiving waivers for the one-to-one matching requirement. When asked
what entity in the state makes the final decision on whether or not
your institution receives matching funds, 90 percent of survey
respondents indicated that the state legislature was responsible for
the making the decision on matching funds while only ten percent
indicated the governor as the final decision maker. The survey also
asked respondents to briefly describe the process to secure matching
funds in their state (See Figure 9). The responses received ranged from
a request being made to the legislature by the university to the
absence of any formal process to secure matching funds. The responses
show that there is a need to standardize the process of how requests
for funding for matching funds are handled on a state-by-state basis.
Figure 3: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: Does your institution receive 100 percent of one-to-one
matching funds from your state for the Agriculture funding
received from USDA?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 4: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: Has your institution ever requested a waiver from USDA for
not meeting the One-to-One Matching Requirement between 2008
and 2013?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 5: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: Does your institution receive more than 100 percent of one-
to-one matching funds from your state for the Agriculture
funding received from USDA?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 6: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: Does your state's 1862 land-grant institution receive more
than 100 percent one-to-one matching funds from your state for
Agriculture Funding received from USDA?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 7: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: In what year(s) has your institution received a waiver from
USDA for the One-to-One Match Requirement? (Select All That
Apply)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 8: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: What entity in your state makes the final decision on whether
or not your institution receives one-to-one matching funds?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Figure 9: Land-Grant Universities Matching Survey, 2013
Question: Please briefly describe the process to secure matching funds
in your state?

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Source: Association of Public and Land-grant Universities,
Office of Access and Success 1890 Matching Survey, 2013.
Moving Forward: Recommendations for Policy Makers
The disparities in matching funds in the nation's land-grant system
must be corrected. States must meet their obligation that was
established under the Morrill Acts to equally fund the land-grant
system in their states that provide research and extension services
that benefit rural farmers and communities in their respective states.
More must be done on both the Federal and state level to ensure that
match funding for 1890 land-grant institutions is brought to parity
with their 1862 land-grant counterparts. We do not aim to introduce
through these recommendations a zero sum game where money should be
taken from 1862s to accomplish the goal of parity for 1890s. The money
received by both sets of institutions is important to the overall
strength of the land-grant system and the contributions of both are
important to the state. It is in the best interest of the state to
fully fund the land-grant system, and we propose the following policy
recommendations to strengthen the entire land-grant system:
Recommendation 1
States should ensure that 1890 land-grant Universities receive the
One-to-One Matching of Funds from the state in a separate line-item
budget.

State legislators, governors and system and institutional governing
boards should ensure that yearly budgets to 1862 and 1890 land-grant
universities automatically include a separate line-item to match the
Federal dollars received for land-grant institutions. This would not
only ensure that all 1862 and 1890 land-grant universities receive the
one-to-one match that is required under Federal law, but also ensures
that universities do not have to make up the deficit for the funds
through general operating dollars that are intended to be spent on
academic programs.
Recommendation 2
States should ensure that both 1862 and 1890 land-grant
universities receive the percent of matching funds in their
appropriation dollars.

State legislators, governors and system and institutional governing
boards should ensure that the percent of formula funds matching is the
same for 1862 and 1890 land-grant universities because this is the only
way that parity in funding can be reached. While each institution
receives their grant allocations from the Federal Government based on a
Federal formula, some states go above and beyond the matching
requirement for their 1862 land-grant institutions but do not even meet
the minimum 100 percent one-to-one match requirement for many of their
1890 land-grant institutions. This means that while an 1862 institution
(which receives more in land-grant funding based on institutional size
and other factors) can receive 2:1 or 12:1 matching funds, the
corresponding 1890 institutions receive less than and up to a one-to-
one match. The under-funding of HBCUs has been a persistent problem for
many 1890 land-grant institutions in general, and it is time that these
institutions receive their Federal match. This does not mean that 1862s
should not continue to receive the funding they currently receive, but
it does mean that more money should be invested into 1890 institutions
in these states.
Recommendation 3
States should ensure that the process to request and receive
matching funds is the same for 1862 and 1890 land-grant universities.

States should create standardized and automated processes for the
request and receipt of matching funds from the state. The results of
the survey show that the processes that are currently used by states
vary greatly and can often be different for 1862 institutions versus
1890. For example, one 1890 land-grant institution noted that while it
had to specifically make a request for matching funds to the state
legislature, the same funding was provided to the 1862 land-grant
university without making a specific request before the same
legislature and received much more money than required by the one-to-
one matching requirement. The process in each state should be reviewed
to ensure equity in funding.
Recommendation 4
Federal legislators should provide oversight to ensure that states
meet their obligation for providing the one-to-one matching requirement
and should incent states to provide the same percentage of formula
match funding to both 1862 and 1890 land-grant universities within
their state.

States should no longer be allowed to not meet their obligation of
providing matching funds to 1890 land-grant institutions. The Federal
Government should provide more mechanisms to ensure that institutions
receive the matching funds from their states. It should not be left up
to 1890 land-grant institutions themselves to use the waiver process in
lieu of not receiving matching funds from the state.
Conclusion
The above recommendations represent a path forward to ensure that
1890 land-grant universities can finally receive the one-to-one
matching funds. To be land-grant but unequal is a strange place to be
for a land-grant system that was created to bring education to
agricultural and industrial citizens in each state. Staying true to the
original intent of the Morrill Acts, 1890 land-grant universities have
contributed and continue to contribute greatly to research, extension
services and academic training to citizens and farmers. However, many
of these institutions have been doing so in states that have not met
their obligation to provide matching funds to these institutions. This
must be changed and rectified. Each state has an obligation to ensure
these changes not only for the 1890 land-grant institutions but also
for the citizens and farmers of each state that are served by these
universities.
For the executive summary, visit www.aplu.org/OASresearch.
References
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (2013). 1890
Land-grant Universities One-to-One Matching Survey. Washington, D.C.:
APLU Office of Access and Success.
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (2012). The Land-
grant Tradition. Washington, D.C.: author.
Allen, W.R., & Jewell, J.O. (2002). A backward glance forward:
Past, present, and future perspectives on historically black colleges
and universities. Review of Higher Education, 25(3), 241-261.
Brown, M.C., Donahoo, S., & Bertrand, R.D. (2001). The black
college and the quest for educational opportunity. Urban Education,
36(5), 553-571.
Evans-Allen Act of 1977.
Hatch Act of 1887.
Morrill Act of 1862, sec 4.
National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act
of 1977.
Provasnik, S., Shafer, L.L., & Snyder, T.D. (2004). Historically
black colleges and universities, 1976-2001 (No. NCSE 2004 062).
Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
Redd, K.E. (1998). Historically black colleges and universities:
Making a comeback. New Directions for Higher Education, 26(2), 33-43.
Roebuck, J., & Murty, K. (1993). Historically black colleges and
universities: Their place in American higher education. Westport, CT:
Praeger Publishers.
Smith-Lever Act of 1914.
Wilson, R. (1990). Can black colleges solve the problem of access
for black students? American Journal of Education, 98(4), 443-457.
About the Authors
John Michael Lee, Jr. is Vice President for the Office for Access
and Success (OAS) and is responsible for advancing Public Black
Universities, Hispanic-Serving Institutions, and Tribal Colleges and
supporting the APLU Council of 1890 Universities; Commission on Access,
Diversity and Excellence; and the OAS Advisory Board. His research
interests include student access, participation, and success in higher
education; student recruitment, retention, and graduation; student
development; minority serving institutions (HBCUs, HSIs, and Tribal
Colleges); higher education diversity; and education policy.
He earned a Ph.D. in higher education administration from New York
University, an MPA with a concentration in economic development from
Georgia State University, and a bachelor of science in computer
engineering from Florida A&M University.
Samaad Wes Keys is the program assistant for the OAS and is
responsible for research, managing collaborative partnerships and
initiatives to meet the key organizational objectives for advancing
college access and success for all students, with particular attention
paid to underrepresented groups at the pre-college and college levels.
His research interests are focused on postsecondary education policy,
minority student access and success, and minority-serving institutions.
He holds a deep interest in the for-profit sector of higher education
and how these institutions are shaping the future direction of higher
education.
He is currently a doctoral candidate at the University of Georgia's
Institute of Higher Education. He earned a master's degree from Central
Michigan University in educational curriculum and instruction and a
bachelor of arts degree from Morehouse College in psychology.
Suggested Citation
Lee, J.M. and Keys, S.W. (2013). Land-grant But Unequal: State One-
to-One Match Funding for 1890 Land-grant Universities. (APLU Office of
Access and Success publication no. 3000-PB1). Washington, D.C.:
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities.
About APLU
The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) is a
research, policy, and advocacy organization representing 223 public
research universities, land-grant institutions, state university
systems, and related organizations. Founded in 1887, APLU is the
nation's oldest higher education association with member institutions
in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, four U.S. territories, and
Canada. Annually, member campuses enroll four million undergraduates
and 1.2 million graduate students, award over one million degrees,
employ over one million faculty and staff, and conduct $39 billion in
university-based research.
About The Council Of 1890 Universities
APLU's Council of 1890 Universities collectively represents the
interests of 1890 land-grant institutions including the University of
the District of Columbia and the University of the Virgin Islands. The
Council seeks to maintain, insure and increase funding, to present a
unified approach for presentation of views regarding these institutions
and to serve as a forum to share ideas and resources. The Council works
with other 1890 associations in developing a comprehensive agenda for
APLU regarding Congressional and Federal policies and programs
impacting 1890 institutions.
About OAS
APLU's Office for Access and Success (OAS) is dedicated to equity,
access, and educational excellence for all Americans with a special
focus on under-served students and minority-serving institutions. OAS
is primarily responsible for supporting the APLU Council of 1890
Universities; the Commission on Access, Diversity and Excellence
(CADE); Hispanic-Serving Institutions; and the OAS Advisory Board. To
reach the authors, please e-mail
[emailprotected]
.
Acknowledgements
This report was written and edited by John Michael Lee, Jr., Vice
President for the Office of Access and Success (OAS) at APLU and Samaad
Wes Keys, program assistant in OAS at APLU. The authors would like to
thank M. Peter McPherson, President of APLU; Howard Gobstein, Executive
Vice President; and Michael Tanner, Chief Academic Officer and Vice
President; Ian Maw, Vice President for Food Agriculture & Natural
Resource; Eddie Gouge, Senior Associate Director of Federal Relations--
Food and Agricultural Sciences; Christine Keller, Associate Vice
President for Academic Affairs and Executive Director of the Voluntary
System of Accountability; Jennifer Poulakidas, Vice President for
Congressional and Governmental Affairs, Jeff Lieberson, Vice President
for Public Affairs and Troy Prestwood, Public Affairs Representative in
Public Affairs for their many contributions to this effort.
We would also like to the thank the staff at the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the National Institute for Food
and Agriculture (NIFA) for their assistance with securing the data
necessary to make this report possible.
______

Prepared Statement of Laurence B. Alexander, J.D., Ph.D., Chancellor,
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, AR
Thank you Honorable Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture for providing this
opportunity for me to provide written testimony for the Congressional
hearing.
My name is Laurence B. Alexander and I am the Chancellor of the
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff.
The University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff is an 1890 land-grant,
historically black college/university (HBCU) with a diverse student
population of more than 2,500 students, more than 30 undergraduate and
graduate degree offerings, including a Ph.D. Program in Aquaculture/
Fisheries. Our talented faculty members are among the most diverse of
any university within the state. As the second oldest higher education
institution in Arkansas, our aim has remained the same over the years--
to provide a high quality, affordable education with a personal touch.
For more than 140 years, the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
has worked to create an environment that infuses excitement into
learning, affords opportunities for personal growth and productivity
while providing a basic need to its students--a chance to advance. The
15:1 student-to-teacher ratio makes it possible to maintain a learning
environment with close interaction between students and faculty while
offering challenging curricula which encourage our students to seek and
fulfill their potential. Our land-grant academic programs and STEM
Academy lead the charge in these areas.
Out-of-class experiences and student involvement includes more than
120 student organizations, an internationally renowned Vesper Choir,
Marching Band, Concert Bands, Wind Symphony, nationally recognized
spirit and debate teams, award-winning theater department and
accomplished athletics program.
Land-Grant Programs
The School of Agriculture, Fisheries and Human Sciences is an
integral part of the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff and
administers the 1890 research and extension land-grant programs at the
University. The School consists of three academic departments:
Agriculture, Fisheries and Human Science. Approximately $7.7 million in
combined Federal and state funds (Evans-Allen, Extension and State
Match) support 15 approved ongoing research and extension projects.
While most of the research is conducted at the UAPB campus site, some
activities are occurring at the UAPB Lonoke and Marianna farm sites.
Additional research studies were conducted on private cooperating farm
sites in Jefferson, Lee, St. Francis, Monroe and Phillips counties and
in collaboration with other institutions such as the Felsenthal
National Wildlife Refuge. Through collaborations with other colleges
and universities, both in the U.S. and internationally, the School of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Human Sciences strives to help improve the
quality of life for people in Arkansas, the nation, and the world. The
School's Office of International Programs, is vital to achieving global
effectiveness and success.
Seven new Evans-Allen research projects conducted by School
researchers were approved and seven Evans-Allen projects were
completed. The knowledge gained by these research activities is
extended to families and communities through a variety of outreach and
Extension programs. The extension program has structured programs in 29
counties with staff housed in ten of those counties.
Research and Extension in Agriculture are conducted in the areas of
biotechnology, plant science, animal science, water quality and
agricultural economics. The efforts in the Department of Human Sciences
are directed toward human nutrition, food safety and family life. A
newly developed project in the textiles program includes the
utilization of new applications for biomaterials such as traditional
fibers and new modified regenerated proteins like spider silk and
cellulosic fibers in relation to aspects of sustainability of
materials.
The Agriculture and Human Sciences components of the Research and
Extension programs are designed to provide information and assistance
to small-scale and limited resource farmers and disadvantaged families
and youth.
Last, but not least, our nationally known Aquaculture/Fisheries
program supports both the state's aquaculture industry and recreational
fishing. The latter serves as an avenue for enhancing tourism as an
economic engine for the state.
Selected Land-Grant Impacts
Some of the impacts that our land-grant research and extension
programs have yielded center around sweet potatoes, rice, catfish, bait
fish and locally grown produce. I will briefly detail the more
significant impacts we have had in the above mentioned areas with a
sampling of the research conducted at UAPB:
UAPB is working to identify a number of major viruses that
detrimentally affect the sweet potato crop in the state of Arkansas.
Our researchers can now advise producers to not use their own seeds
over a period of time as higher accumulation of viruses may lead to
yield loss. This knowledge could save producers thousands of dollars
over a period of time.
To help solve inefficiencies in commercial production of baitfish
and keep down feed costs, UAPB scientists are testing new diet
ingredients and feeding strategies using prebiotics with golden
shiners. The study will direct producers to a feed that can produce a
hardy, disease-resistant product that will increase profitability.
A UAPB study examined the increased demand for fresh and chilled/
frozen seafood while the market size and share of U.S. farm-raised
catfish were declining. It found that the catfish industry needs to
develop market-specific strategies to gain further market share in the
U.S.
Through a collaborative effort between UAPB, the East Arkansas
Enterprise Community and the Arkansas Delta Seeds of Change, several
schools now have fresh, locally grown fruits and vegetables to meet the
``color my plate'' guidelines. As a result, school districts in
Arkansas have added more fresh fruits and vegetables to school lunch
and summer feeding programs to meet USDA guidelines and to provide
healthier choices to school children.
STEM Scholars Academy
I would also like to call attention to our STEM Scholars Academy at
UAPB. The Academy is a well-integrated set of enrichment programs
designed to help meet local, state and national human resource needs in
STEM areas. The STEM Scholars Academy reflects the land-grant mission
and the University's mission with a particular emphasis on helping to
increase the pool of well-prepared underrepresented minorities in STEM
majors and careers.
Currently, there are three enrichment initiatives, including the
NSF-funded HBCU-UP Comprehensive Implementation grant which is
foundational to the STEM Academy; the NSF-funded Arkansas Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation grant which is reflective of best
practices learned in the HBCU-UP STEM Academy; and the U.S. Department
of Education funded M.Ed. degree in Science and Mathematics Education
Program. All are designed to help meet research, teaching and industry
needs in science areas, with a particular emphasis on diversity in
these critical areas. The Arkansas Science and Technology Authority is
also a major partner in these initiatives.
Key components of the STEM Academy initiatives include a Guest
Lecture Series, Advisory Board, Pre-First Year Summer Institutes/
Academy, hands-on research/mentoring experiences, internships, study
groups, curricula and infrastructure upgrades. Currently, the STEM
Academy has 229 undergraduates and six graduate students. The
disciplines include: chemistry, mathematics, physics, computer science,
biology, plant science, animal science, and industrial technology.
The UAPB STEM Scholars Academy has helped to transform education
efforts within the science, engineering and mathematics disciplines at
the University by producing a well-designed model of intervention that
sharpens the students' skills in teamwork, research, STEM content,
technical writing and professional presentations. As a result, we have
experienced an increase in STEM enrollment from 21.3% to 33.2% (Fall
2005 to Fall 2014). The number of bachelor degrees conferred in STEM
majors has increased from 76 to 124 (2005-2014), a 63.2% increase since
the development of the Academy.
Today, the STEM Scholars Academy serve as strong beacons to
students, their parents, organizations and agencies, shedding light on
the importance of STEM research and educational programs. These
programs are critical for creating well prepared and diverse STEM
graduates. These programs also provide a spring board for STEM career
growth while at the same time helping the U.S. to remain competitive in
the global economy.
Continuing Challenge
One of the major challenges that our university faces is securing
the full state match for the university's annual Evans-Allen and
Extension funding. The annual effort to secure the full match deters
the university from more fully serving its clientele through research
and Extension efforts. Each biennium the University has to diligently
work to secure the state match. Since the inception of this Federal
requirement, the university has not been successful in securing the
state match and has had to request a waiver each year from USDA-NIFA to
receive our full Federal funding allocation.
We are concerned that any decreases in Evans-Allen and Extension
funding will further hamper our ability to serve our clientele through
our research and Extension efforts.
Concluding Statement
I will close my written testimony by saying that I am honored to
have the opportunity to submit my testimony for the Congressional
hearing. On behalf of all of the students, faculty, staff and citizens
of the great State of Arkansas who are associated with our land-grant
programs and mission, we at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
thank you for your continued support.
______

Prepared Statement of Dr. Ray L. Belton, President and Chancellor,
Southern University and A&M College System, Baton Rouge, LA
Mr. Chairman, Honorable Members of the Committee, fellow 1890 land-
grant university leaders, ladies and gentlemen, good morning! I am Ray
Belton, the President and Chancellor for the Southern University and
A&M College System of Louisiana. It is an honor for me to be here today
to participate, observe and to share some comments on such an important
and historical occasion--125th celebrations of 1890 land-grant
institutions, where Southern University and A&M College is recognized
as one among these great institutions.
It is my pleasure to provide this testimony to the House
Agriculture Committee of the United States House of Representatives. My
testimony consists of a brief overview of the Southern University A&M
College System, it's five campuses, and highlight some features of
agricultural and related programs as they exist. Moreover, this
testimony will address future goals and funding opportunities needed to
help Southern University continue to provide quality educational,
research and extension services to the citizens of Louisiana.
Southern University and A&M College is the only HBCU System in the
United States of America. The System consists of five campuses:
Southern University and A&M College--Baton Rouge, a comprehensive
institution offering 4 year, graduate, professional, and doctorate
degree programs; Southern University at Shreveport Louisiana, a 2 year
junior commuters college, designed as an extension of Southern
University--Baton Rouge for the students in the Shreveport--Bossier
City and surrounding areas; Southern University--New Orleans, a 4 year
urban institution that offers personalized co-curricular programs;
Southern University Law Center, a traditional law program inclusive of
outstanding clinical and externship, joint degree and studies abroad
programs; Southern University Agricultural Research and Extension
Center, an entity whose mission is to conduct basic and applied
research and disseminate such information nationally, as well as
statewide.
The agriculture and related programs are housed on the SUBR and Ag
Center campuses. First, let me provide a few general highlights of
SUBR, our flagship campus. It consists of five colleges with bachelor
degree programs in various disciplines to include agricultural, family
and consumer sciences. It also provides eighteen (18) master degree
programs and five (5) Ph.D. programs. The University's College of
Nursing and Allied Health has been ranked among the top 10 producers of
African-American nurses in the nation. It was named Nursing School of
the Year by reputable association, the Louisiana State Nurses
Association and the Louisiana Nurses Foundation. The Southern
University's Marching Band--the Human Jukebox--was recognized among the
top marching bands in the 2015 Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Digest's national awards competition.
The College of Engineering is one of the country's top 10 producers
of African-American engineers, and its graduates hold significant,
creative and administrative positions in such companies as IBM,
ExxonMobil, Entergy Corp., Caterpillar Corp., Raytheon, Dow Chemical,
Chevron and others. Noted alumni include the following: Russel L.
Honoree, retired Lieutenant General, U.S. Army and leader of the 2005
Task Force Katrina; the late Freddye Scarborough Henderson, founder of
the first African-American travel agency in the country; and Joseph
Steward, former Vice President, Kellogg Company. These are some
examples of noteworthy graduates from Southern University A&M College
programs.
Many of the graduates of the division of Agricultural, Family and
Consumer Sciences hold responsible positions within USDA and private
industry. Southern University's first patent emanated from the Division
of Agricultural, Family and Consumer Sciences in which a method and
apparatus of reducing calcium in aquatic waste to be used as plant and
animal feed. In 2014, the Urban Forestry program helped Southern
University to earn the designation of Tree Campus USA, becoming the
first HBCU in Louisiana and only the 4th in the nation to receive the
designation.
Academics, Research and Extension at Southern University: Southern
University has directly and indirectly benefits students, farmers,
agribusiness men and residents of Louisiana through programs funded in
large measures through the House Agriculture Committee to the United
States Department of Agriculture, for the enhancement of the land-grant
programs.
Thousands of students have graduated with Bachelor of Science
degrees in agriculture and are successfully employed throughout USDA,
the private sectors, self-employed as farmers and owners, and
practicing agribusiness men in farm related businesses. Additionally,
Southern University has a nationally recognized and accredited Urban
Forestry and Natural Resources department, one of a few in the United
States, that offers a B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Urban Forestry
and Natural Resources. To date, more than 300 students have received
degrees at the various levels from this department. These graduates are
highly recruited by the USDA, the university community and the private
sector. The Division of Agricultural, Family and consumer Sciences
(DAFCS) ranks first in undergraduate student retention out of the
university's nine undergraduate degree colleges and schools; first in
average grant funding per faculty over the last 6 years; and seventh in
the number of African-Americans with bachelor's degrees in the
agricultural sciences among 1890 land-grant universities. Southern's
first patent was received for method and apparatus of reducing calcium
in aquatic waste to be used as plant and animal feed. In 2014, the
Urban Forestry program helped Southern University to earn the
designation of Tree Campus USA, becoming the first HBCU in Louisiana
and only the 4th in the nation to receive the designation.
As stated earlier, the Ag Center's mission is to conduct basic and
applied research and disseminate the discovered information nationally,
as well as statewide. The Center's practices are based on practical
research, qualitative and quantitative research results. The research
and extension programs support the academic offerings by promoting
faculty and student research; outreach leading in the various
disciplines of agriculture and natural resources. Further, it also
provides our students with real global experiential learning and
competencies. Beyond supporting academic programs, research and
extension continue to connect farmers, rural communities, and urban
residents with opportunities for success. For example, given the
importance of beef cattle production to small farmers in Louisiana,
Southern University is engaged in a major research program designed to
maximize income for small land holders by improving efficiency in land
use through upgraded pasture production and, expanded grazing practice,
by having both beef cattle and goats to sequentially graze the same
pasture. The results of this project are being well received by our
farmers.
Niche crop production and value-added commodities such as hibiscus
and mushroom are providing several promising opportunities for farmers
to have other profitable crops to put in crop production mix.
Additionally, the cooperative extension program has graduated over
65 small farmers from across the State of Louisiana in a 20 hour whole
farm-planning curriculum through the State Leadership Development
Institute. As results of this training, small farmers are realizing
increased farm productivity and income.
Finally urban agriculture and gardening are being integrated into a
research, educational and nutritional program. With Louisiana ranking
49th in the country in obesity and having sixty-four percent of its
adults either overweight or obese, Southern University AgCenter has
developed interactive hands-on group sessions and in-home nutrition
notes on dietary quality, physical activity and safety are also being
provided to under-served families in rural and urban communities.
Future Goals and Funding Needs: The funds are essential for the
future of agriculture and forestry in Louisiana and America as well as
having helped to improve technology transfer abroad to a growing
population and decreasing availability of land; growing demand for
sustainable urban forestry, urban agriculture and the need to restore
vast amount of urban and urban-rural interface ecosystems (including
restoration of our wetlands). Additionally, the cooperative extension
program has graduated approximately 65 small farmers from across the
state of Louisiana in Whole Farm Planning sessions through the Regional
and State Leadership Development Institutes. The farmers received in
excess of 200 hours of instruction and traveled throughout the southern
states and the State of Louisiana to become more familiar with best
practices in agriculture. The Cooperative Extension Program works with
farmers assisting them with specialized/individualized training to meet
their needs. The overall goal of trainings and workshops is to increase
the profitability and sustainability of the small farm operations.
Instructional areas provided by agents, specialists and external
collaborators include record keeping, variety selection, production,
resource inventory, and estate planning and risk management. Research
and extension programs will be critical to help develop successful
models where farming, environmental issues, urban living can all co-
exist while improving access to quality affordable food.
Many challenges exist that affect efforts to address needed issues
of clientele groups through land-grant programs at the university.
Additional resources are needed to fully support on-going and expanded
initiative at the university. Some are as follows:

continue and expand the work on increasing profitability
among small farm families.

continue efforts to address obesity and related issues.

continue the work toward enhancing economic development
activities in underprivileged and unfortunate communities.

enhance the work of preparing students for career
opportunities in the food, fiber and agricultural industries.

In addition to a need for resources to expand these on-going
initiatives, similar resources and funding opportunities are needed to
support proposed centers of excellence:

Create an integrated center to benefit Small Farms, Ranchers
and Forest Landowners in high poverty areas.

Establish a virtual center to support the science,
technology, engineering, agriculture, and mathematic (STEM)
pipeline of students and to address the growing need of
talented career candidates to meet future workforce needs.

Create a center the satisfy the nation's need in the areas
of international engagement and global food security to
increase international cooperation, trade and development.

It has been observed and recognized that many of the 1890 land-
grant institutions including Southern University A&M College have not,
on a consistent basis been awarded the required 1:1 Federal match
funding of land-grant programs through state appropriation. This has
been a challenge for Southern University as it has been for many
institutions when securing the required and deserved match of dedicated
funding. Therefore, we join others in support of proposed legislation
to amend current Federal mandates which could strengthen and close the
gap of disparity in receiving match funding requirements for 1890
colleges and universities in the future.
Again, thank you for affording me the opportunity to share comments
about Southern University; present programmatic engagement in land-
grant initiatives, future goals and funding opportunities, and above
all the need for enhanced funding.
______

Prepared Statement of Raymond M. Burse, President, Kentucky State
University, Frankfort, KY
The 1890s--Building on Yesterday, Finding Answers Today, and Preparing
for Tomorrow--Celebrating 125 Years of Providing Access and
Enhancing Opportunities
To Chairman Mike Conaway, Ranking Member Collin Peterson, and
Members of the House Committee on Agriculture, I am Raymond M. Burse,
President of Kentucky State University, and I am honored to submit my
written testimony for the official hearing record.
This recognition of the 125th anniversary of the Second Morrill Act
serves as an opportunity to highlight the innovative research and
significant contributions of the 19 land-grant universities across the
country. The Second Morrill Act of 1890 has afforded this network of
universities 125 years of access to education and excellence, an
achievement that we celebrate today.
Kentucky State University Historically
From its modest beginnings as a small normal school for the
training of black teachers, Kentucky State University has grown and
evolved into a land-grant and liberal arts institution that prepares a
diverse student population to compete in a multifaceted, ever-changing
global society. The university, chartered in May 1886 as the State
Normal School for Colored Persons, was only the second state-supported
institution of higher learning in Kentucky. During the euphoria of
Frankfort's 1886 centennial celebration, when vivid recollections of
the Civil War remained, the city's 4,000 residents were keenly
interested in having the new institution located in Frankfort. Toward
that end, the city donated $1,500, a considerable amount in 1886
dollars, and a site on a scenic bluff overlooking the town. This united
display of community enthusiasm and commitment won the day. The new
college was located in Frankfort in spite of competition from several
other cities.
With the passing of the Second Morrill Act in 1890, KSU became the
second land-grant institution in Kentucky, a designation that allowed
the school to establish home economics, agriculture and mechanics
departments.
Kentucky State University Today
Today, KSU serves a student population of approximately 2,000
through the College of Agriculture, Food Science, and Sustainable
Systems, the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Business and
Computer Science and the College of Professional Studies. KSU's 882
acre campus includes a 204 acre agricultural research and demonstration
farm and a 306 acre Environmental Education and Research Center.
KSU, building on its legacy of achievement as a historically black,
liberal arts and 1890 land-grant university, affords access to and
prepares a diverse student population of traditional and non-
traditional students to compete in a multi-faceted, ever-changing
global society by providing student-centered learning while integrating
teaching, research, and service through high-quality undergraduate and
select graduate programs.
Kentucky State University is committed to keeping relevant its
legacy of service by proactively engaging the community in partnerships
on civic projects driven by the objective of positively impacting the
quality of life of the citizens of the commonwealth.
The College of Agriculture, Food Science, and Sustainable Systems
at KSU works to uphold the mission of the university through its
commitment to research, service, and teaching in the food and
agricultural sciences. The College is organized around five divisions
including, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Aquaculture,
Environmental Studies and Sustainable Systems, Food and Animal Science,
and Family and Consumer Sciences. Each division works to resolve
agricultural, educational, economic, and social problems of the people
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky while fulfilling the principles upon
which the Morrill Act was founded: research, extension and teaching.
KSU boasts the largest multi-disciplinary organic agriculture
program in the 1890's land-grant system with nationally and
internationally recognized research programs in aquaculture, organic
agriculture, sustainable biofuel feedstock production, alternative
fruit and nut crops, ecological entomology, alternative pesticides and
water quality, goat production, obesity and human health, and
apiculture.
Leading Research in Aquaponics
With interest in aquaponics having grown considerably in recent
years, KSU's Aquaculture Program, our ``Program of Distinction,'' is
widely recognized as a leader in the field. More specifically, the
program has led research in the areas of paddlefish culture, freshwater
prawn culture, Koi breeding, production of feed-trained largemouth
bass, and fish meal replacement research. Using a customized raft
design based on the University of the Virgin Islands system, the six
rafts available to researchers and housed in the KSU Aquaculture
Research Center, provide the unique ability to conduct replicated
research trials. Upcoming research will evaluate the microbial profile
of the aquaponics system and screen for potential harmful bacteria at
different points in the system. Additional aims include the development
of an online academic course in aquaponics that will cover aspects such
as the design, construction and management of the aquaponics system,
fingerling and plant production, economics, and food safety.
Meeting the Needs of Farmers and Consumers
Taking on a problem common among both commercial and home vegetable
and fruit growers, identifying and managing insect pests and diseases,
KSU researchers are working to develop biologically-based, sustainable
insect pest management options and strategies for sweet corn and
blackberry production.
Promoting Healthy Living Through Outreach Across Kentucky
According to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
approximately 30% of the adult population in Kentucky and 25% of
Kentucky's children are either overweight or obese. In both cases,
Kentucky ranks in the top ten of most obese states in the nation. In an
effort to combat this epidemic, researchers and Extension specialists
at Kentucky State University's College of Agriculture, Food Science,
and Sustainable Systems have developed programs to teach and encourage
healthy eating habits and physical activity in youth and families.
SHAPE UP KSU, a program through which 376 undergraduate students have
received health screenings for their height, weight, waist
circumference, body mass index (BMI), body fat percentage, blood
pressure, and fasting lipid and glucose concentrations was developed to
this end. A second program, the Center for Family Nutrition and
Wellness Education, has boosted KSU's College of Agriculture, Food
Science, and Sustainable Systems' efforts in better addressing the
obesity challenge among the vulnerable populations in the Bluegrass
Region. And yet a third endeavor, KSU's Expanded Food and Nutrition
Education Program, summer programs enrolled students in grades ranging
from kindergarten to eighth grade and provided them education on health
and nutrition and the importance of physical activity. Such innovations
have been made possible by research made possible in part by land-grant
funding.
Conclusion
In conclusion, it is my hope that you will consider the gains made
by all 1890 universities as well as the potential for further
advancement as you move forward in this process. With continued funding
and support, Kentucky State University is poised to set itself as a
leading institution of research an innovation in agriculture. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee, for
your time and consideration.
______

Prepared Statement of Pamela V. Hammond, Ph.D., Interim President,
Virginia State University, Petersburg, VA
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the Committee, thank
you for the opportunity to address you today and include our testimony
in the record. I am Dr. Pamela V. Hammond, Interim President of
Virginia State University (VSU). Founded in 1882, when the Virginia
Legislature passed a bill to charter the Virginia Normal and Collegiate
Institute. After several years of legal battles and name iterations, in
1979, the legislature passed a bill changing our name to the present
Virginia State University. By our centennial year, we were fully
integrated with a student body of nearly 5,000, approximately 250
faculty, a library of over 200,000 books, a 236 acre campus and the 416
acre Randolph Farm.
The Importance of VSU as an 1890 University: We play a significant
role in addressing agricultural, educational, health and STEM issues
throughout Virginia and in partnerships with other states. We are
uniquely prepared and positioned to address the critical needs of
diverse, limited resource and challenged communities; we have the
ability to adapt and adjust to the changing needs of clientele; and we
have the research and scientific knowledge and community engagement
credibility to solve complex and ordinary issues. While we are
positioned and ready to address many critical issues, more often than
not, we continue to receive inadequate Federal and state funding to
accomplish goals. To put it simply, if we had more, we are talented and
creative enough to accomplish more. The 1890 universities have a role
to play in addressing the five national priorities identified by USDA/
NIFA (National Institute of Food and Agriculture):

Global Food Security and Hunger.

Childhood Obesity.

Sustainable Energy.

Climate Change.

Food Safety.

We have unique niches in the areas of alternative and sustainable
agriculture, value-added production, aquaculture and small ruminants
(sheep and goats), and small fruits and vegetables with an ability to
add diversity, local impact and safer foods to the food supply chain.
We have strengths in environmental and water quality, natural resource
management, and family, community and youth development. Our close
connections and credibility with small farmers and rural communities
are sought after by other organizations. We work with them to enhance
economic development and profitability and sustainability of
agricultural enterprises. We address the health and nutritional
challenges of our communities and develop solutions to hunger and
nutritional issues. The 1890 universities have produced more minority
educators, agricultural professionals, health professionals, military
leaders and scientists of color than any other universities in the
nation. However, we continue to receive minimal Federal and state
funding when compared to our sister 1862 land-grant institutions. This
is exacerbated by changes in Federal financial aid policies that
disproportionately impact students who attend 1890 universities.
Ultimately, this threatens enrollment, retention, auxiliary services
and the capacity of our universities to prepare more leaders,
innovators and graduates of color in STEM and food and agricultural
sciences and other high demand fields. Additionally, our challenges in
reaching and preparing youth for leadership, science, technology and
agriculturally-based professions, limit our selection pool for higher
education and occupational advancement.
A Major Challenge in Funding and Disparities for 1890 Universities:
Federal and state funding formulas for land-grant universities are
provided through the Federal farm bill. The use of these funds is
guided by Sections 1444 and 1445 of the National Agricultural Research,
Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (NARETPA) and Section 1449
of NAREPTA. Section 1449 outlines the expectation that each state
adheres to a 100% Federal match requirement: National and worldwide
economic challenges have impacted state and Federal funding levels.
Federal funding levels are continuously eroding. Based upon the 100%
state matching requirement, each dollar lost in Federal funding results
in another dollar lost in state funding. This doubles the loss of every
Federal dollar to an 1890 university. Our 1862 partners receive
significantly more state and Federal funding, along with more local
funding to conduct research and extension programming. As state budgets
become more strained, it becomes increasingly difficult to advocate for
state dollars to support valuable research and extension programs. The
chart below shows the disparity in Federal funding for 1890 and 1862
universities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2014 Budget for 1890 Research,
Teaching and Extension Federal      FY 2014 Budget for 1862 Research
Funding                   and Extension Federal Funding
------------------------------------------------------------------------
$35 Million (1890 Extension and      $515 Million (Smith-Lever and Hatch
Evans-Allen)                         Funding)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source. USDA/NIFA http://www.csrees.usda.gov/newsroom/news/2014news/
02261_1890_grants.html (Feb. 26. 2014).
Editor's note: The hyperlink for the press release referred to is http://
nifa.usda.gov/press-release/usda-awards-grants-support-research-
teaching-and-extension-programs-1890-historically.

Additional Challenge--The Matching Requirement for Competitive
Grants: For 1890 universities, the Federal matching requirement of many
larger grants limits our ability to apply for competitive funding. We
are typically limited to the grants earmarked for the 1890 universities
such as 1890 Capacity Building Grants, 1890 Facilities Grants and
others. While these funding streams have kept us alive for years, it
has meant that we are limited in our capacity to apply for and garner
more funding. We have the interest and capabilities to apply for many
of the grants available to 1862 institutions; however, we are unable to
meet the matching requirements unless we have an established Research
Foundation, or a large state or private funding source. Thus, we often
leave valuable dollars on the table. This also shows why formula
funding keeps us alive and is critical to our existence. If left to
rely solely on competitive grant dollars only, which appears to be the
trend in the way Federal funds are dispersed, many of our 1890
universities would struggle to exist.
Our Precious Small and Limited Resource Farmers, Being Squeezed
Out: The average age of a farmer in the Commonwealth of Virginia is 68
years. Without a farm management plan, a land/farm transition plan, and
the willingness of a new generation of family members to continue
farming the family land, we stand to lose valuable agriculture
producers, valuable land and valuable food sources. African-American
farmers are a more vulnerable group. Each year more farm bill funding
supports the nation's supplemental nutrition programs, and less funding
is earmarked for producer programs--particularly small farmers and
rural communities. In the past, a significant amount of funding had
been provided in the farm bill to work with Small Farmers through the
``[Section] 2501 Outreach to Socially Disadvantaged Farmers and
Ranchers.'' In the most recent farm bill, funding for this program was
literally wiped out, thereby challenging 1890 universities to make
critical decisions of how to source the program. Many decided they
could no longer source the program and simply had to end it. These
programs were critical in providing valuable resources and technical
assistance to keep farmers and their rural communities economically
sustained and flourishing.
VSU Can Augment Positive Impact with Increased Funding of 1890's
Extension; Evans-Allen Research; and 1890 Capacity Building and 1890
Facilities Funds in the farm bill. VSU is positioned to: Develop Small
Farm Marketing Incubators--Enhancing Local Food Distribution in
Regionally Based Food Value Chains; Hire Extension Agents to increase
the profitability and sustainability of Small and Limited Resource
Farmers through Small Farm Outreach; Develop Value-Added Farm Product
Infrastructure and Marketing for Small Poultry, Ruminants, and
Specialty Crops; Conduct Multi-State research on Nutrient Dense Food
Production, Marketing and Consumer Education; Help Eradicate Food
Deserts and Food Insecurity, through the continued development of Urban
Agriculture Centers, Address Obesity and Health Disparities in Urban
and Rural Communities; Develop new 4-H Youth Programs focused on STEM
and Agricultural Fields of Study, Increase Research on New Pest
Resistant and Drought Resistant Crop Varieties; Develop Online Courses,
Videos, and Interactive Publications addressing client need and
increase our Outreach Capacity; Establish a Small Farm Entrepreneurship
and Family Resource and Financial Management Center; Employ Extension
Specialists in the areas of Healthcare and Child and Human Development,
Gerontology, Nutrition and Animal and Poultry Science.
With increased 1890 Facilities Funding--VSU would build/expand
facilities to: Increase laboratory and classroom space at Randolph
Farm; Establish a new degree program in Veterinary Technology; Develop
a fully equipped small ruminant parasitology laboratory, addressing
emerging Animal and Plant Science Issues; Increase focus on Food Safety
and Food and Nutrition Science; Establish food processing facilities to
increase value-added plant and animal products; Increase capacity to
conduct research and Extension education in Urban Food Production;
Develop VSU's Small Ruminant Extension and Research Center for the
sustainable/low-input production of meat goats and hair sheep; Design
and implement a USDA-inspected mobile processing slaughter unit,
providing outreach programs on humane and safe small ruminant
slaughter, meat processing, and waste composting.
With Current Federal and State Funding Support, VSU has
accomplished: Including, but not limited to--Renovation and increased
laboratory facilities in areas of Agricultural Engineering, Hospitality
Management Program, Small Ruminant Research, Aquaculture, Horticulture
and Extension Facilities; Increased aquaculture research and extension
capacity constructing a Fish Processing Plant and Hatchery;
construction of new greenhouses increased research capacity and
environmental impact for Extension Research and Teaching;
infrastructure improvements at Randolph Farm increased capacity
supporting experiential learning for small farmers and students;
Constructed a wetlands area for research and extension determining the
impact that wetlands have on absorbing herbicides and pesticides,
including herbicide and pesticide storage areas meeting EPA standards;
installation of infrastructure improving communication by offering
distance learning opportunities to clientele.
1890 Capacity Building Funds: Implemented summer youth programs
engaging students in agriculture, human sciences and STEM fields of
study; Lead Water Quality Research and preventing wastewater from
entering Virginia's Chesapeake Bay.
Evans-Allen and State Research Funds: Generated an average of
$4,000,000 annually in competitive external grant funds to conduct
basic and applied research projects; Lead a statewide study to
eradicate food deserts and food insecurity in Virginia; implemented a
pilot-scale research module for improving the health of Virginia's
Chesapeake Bay through removing harmful nutrients from wastewater
entering Virginia's Chesapeake Bay; Lead new research in the production
of hops to help small farmers meet the needs of a growing craft brewery
industry; Conduct research and lead extension efforts to build urban
sustainable food systems providing access to fresh healthy affordable
food and nutrition education to challenged communities; Partner with a
new Virginia-based industries to develop optimal crop varieties for
product lines and conduct food science research; Utilize food science
research to develop practical post-harvest handling and storage methods
lengthening the shelf-life of niche crops.
1890 Extension Funds: In excess of 50,000 individuals directly
participate in VSU Extension programs annually; Help improve Virginia's
economic development by assisting small farmers in generating more than
$1.9 million in the past 2 years; Our Marketing and Agribusiness
Program helped small and limited resource farmers generate $750,424 in
local sales; VSU partnered with private-sector interests in local foods
sales leading to the innovation of local food start-up businesses
grossing $640,000 from 1,600 customers in the Richmond area,
participating small farmers earned $400,000, in a single year; VSU's
Small Farm Outreach provided technical assistance to 396 limited-
resource farmers to improve farm production, marketing, prepare
business and marketing plans, and apply for USDA farm programs; 182
Virginia farm businesses saved $139,150 and 175 earned a combined
$151,400; Alternative Agriculture programs trained 520 landowners
(representing 330 Virginia farms), helped 80 farmers transition to
alternative enterprises and assisted 60 farmers increase farm incomes
an average of $6,000 per farm, VSU, in partnership with The Virginia
Berry Growers Association, assisted farmers in growing and marketing
fresh berries to local industries (35 farmers have reached sales levels
of $250,000); Our Aquaculture Program partnered with local farmers to
expand local aquaculture enterprises and generate $445,750 in income,
In Winter 2014, VSU and Virginia Cooperative Extension initiated a new
partnership with Hampton Roads area farmers and the successful Richmond
area food hub enterprise called ``The Farm Table.'' Resulting in 12
farmers signed up to sell directly to the new food hub for 300 weekly
Hampton Roads customers with subscription boxes valued at $25 for 40
weeks, over the 2014 growing season, participating area farmers earned
a total of $100,000.00 ($8,333.00 per farm, on average).
Preparing our youth: VSU hosts a student run farmer's market, the
``Farm Stars Program,'' generating approximately $11,000.00 in annual
sales; Through 4-H youth development and Summer Enrichment Programs,
more than 500 youth are educated annually through a series of
residential and day camps (4-H Intermediate Congress, The Future of
You, Kids-Tech University, Summer Agriculture Program, and Meaningful
Watershed Educational Experiences [MWEE]), ``Ag Discovery'' summer
enrichment program to provide experiential learning in Animal Science,
Biology and Veterinary Medicine to youth from states across the U.S.;
Hosting Randolph Farm Tours providing experiential learning, for over
1,400 youth annually, in ages ranging from 8-18 years old.
Concluding Statement: As Interim President of Virginia State
University, I am honored to have this historic opportunity to testify
before you on behalf of the administrators, faculty, staff and students
of our prestigious College of Agriculture's research, academics and
extension programs. Thank you for your valued consideration,
partnership, and continued support. We look forward to the next 125
years of land-grant university successes impacting agriculture and the
lives of Virginians.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Pamela V. Hammond,
Interim President.
______

Prepared Statement of Andrew Hugine, Jr., Ph.D., President, Alabama
Agricultural and Mechanical University, Huntsville, AL
The 1890s--Building on Yesterday, Finding Answers Today, and Preparing
for Tomorrow--Celebrating 125 Years of Providing Access and
Enhancing Opportunities
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and to each of you,
distinguished Members of the United States House of Representatives, I
bring you greetings as the President of Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama in the City of Huntsville,
Alabama.
As you may have been or are now aware, the year 2015 marks the
125th anniversary of the Morrill Act of 1890 that established black
land-grant colleges and universities. These 1890 land-grant
institutions of higher learning continue to be major educational
resources for the nation, as well as key sources of African-American
leaders, who render valuable service to their communities, the nation,
and the world. Currently, there are 19 black land-grant colleges and
universities throughout the United States.
Our existence is credited to Senator Justin Smith Morrill, an
abolitionist who had a vision that education would be for all social
classes, and offered a shift from predominantly classical studies to
applied studies. This shift, through the First (1862) and Second (1890)
Morrill Acts, prepared students for the real world and advanced the
nation, by providing an opportunity to educate all classes of
citizenry.
Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU), a
beneficiary of the 1890 Act, is a traditional, yet progressive 1890
land-grant institution with a tri-fold focus of teaching, research, and
outreach, where academic excellence is a strong commitment.
Our founder, William Hooper Council, an ex-slave, opened the doors
of this University on May 1, 1875 to 61 students with a state
appropriation of $1,000 per year. His vision was consistent with the
vision Senator Morrill had in the land-grant Acts, ``to provide for the
education of my people.'' Thus, our presence and successes were further
cultivated through the Morrill Act of 1890 and our becoming a land-
grant institution; providing additional monies for practical and
mechanical subjects, such as engineering, agriculture, and
architecture. After several name modifications, the Alabama Board of
Education adopted a resolution on June 26, 1969, which presented the
current and final name of Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical
University.
For the past 140 years, AAMU has thrived and can boast of more than
37,000 alumni and counting. Among that number are several renowned
public and community figures.
Today, as a part of the 1890 land-grant university system, AAMU has
a School of Graduate Studies and four Colleges--Business & Public
Affairs; Education, Humanities, & Behavioral Sciences; Engineering,
Technology & Physical Sciences, and Agricultural, Life & Natural
Sciences (CALNS).
The research and instruction of the CALNS encompasses the
biological and environmental sciences, community and regional planning,
family and consumer sciences, and food and animal sciences with a focus
of changing lives through the use of science and technology in
agriculture.
The varied research efforts that allow us to maintain a relevant
impact include identification of foods, and food ingredients and spices
in the mitigation of various forms of cancer. We have also made
significant inroads in research involving biofuels, geospatial
information studies (GIS); forestry and wildlife management, and
silvopasture management, just to name a few. Through our efforts in
grantsmanship, CALNS has established a combination of meteorological
and soil profile stations (Alabama MesoNet System) across Alabama and
three counties in southern Tennessee. In addition, there are three Eddy
Covariance Systems sited in three of our dominant ecosystems. They
monitor soil carbon sequestration dynamics and energy of forested
biomes.
Against this background, and with our course offerings, manpower
and laboratory equipment, a center of excellence in GIS (under the
sponsorship of the National-Intelligence Agency and the United States
Geological Survey) was recently established. Furthermore, AAMU is an
integral player in working with the Forest Service, the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, Alabama Department of Conservation, Southeastern
Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study and others to reduce the spread of
the fungal White-Nose Syndrome (WNS) in bats, which has caused the
death of at least six million bats. Arresting this disease is critical,
as bats are an important part of forest ecosystems, helping to control
forest and agricultural insect pests. Insectivorous bats likely save
the U.S. agricultural industry at least $3 billion each year,
approximately $74 per acre for the average farmer. The presence of this
disease was discovered in Alabama by an AAMU wildlife scientist.
Our Small Farms Research Center is influential in the education of
new and beginning farmers and ranchers, particularly those with limited
resources throughout all 67 counties via shared information,
conferences and hands-on workshops.
The university is committed to attracting and educating the next
generation of agriculturalists. As such CALNS is responsible for on-
line delivery of courses in the Alabama Black-Belt Region, one of the
poorest regions in Alabama. Through these courses, high school students
are given assistance in their preparation for college/university
studies.
Our international engagements are also noteworthy. Collaborative
research, teaching and student and faculty exchange programs have been
established in China, Costa Rica, Brazil, Ghana, Uganda, and Nigeria;
other like collaborations are in their early developmental stages. Of
particular note, is the Confucius Institute. AAMU is one of only 107
universities nationwide to host such a prestigious entity. The
Confucius Institute, through its furtherance of Chinese language and
culture, will facilitate economic partnerships, particularly those
related to agriculture, between our nations.
The outreach arm of the CALNS is the Alabama Cooperative Extension
System, which collaborates with Auburn University to achieve a
statewide extension service. The AAMU location focuses on the life-
changing Urban Affairs and New Nontraditional Programs for individuals,
families, children and youth, entrepreneurs, 4-H, animal producers, and
more. Its ultimate goal is to improve and sustain lives, homes,
communities, businesses, and the environment. Additionally, for the
past thirteen years, the Alabama Cooperative Extension System has
conducted a successful aging initiative, due to the keen awareness of
the demands of our aging population for transportation, housing,
healthcare, finances and food security. Statistically, there are over
35 million people in America that are 65 years old or older and that
number will double to 70 million in 20 years; accounting for more
people over 65 than under 18.
The physical campus of AAMU is situated on more than 2,300 scenic
acres, a 5 minute commute from downtown Huntsville, which was in fact,
its original site. The campus has the unique distinction of being laid
out in 1928, by Frederick Law Olmsted, Sr., designer of New York's
Central Park.
In addition to the campus proper, there are two off-site facilities
that serve the university and community, as well. The first is where a
vast amount of our agricultural research is done, on over 980 acres of
land at the Winfred Thomas Agricultural Research Station in Hazel
Green, AL; approximately 10 miles from the campus. Second, the
Agribition Center is a facility that is located in an industrial area,
and hosts community events ranging from horse and cattle expositions to
organizational meetings.
With over 5,300 students, including graduate and undergraduate
combined, there are at least 44 states and 11 countries represented at
our University, with over 40% of all students being first generation
college attendees. Our student-faculty ratio is 20:1, thereby ensuring
that our students receive the specialized attention and support that
they need to be successful.
The accomplishments of the University are vast. We have compiled
140 Points of Pride that pinpoint many of our University's faculty,
alumni and student successes. The complete listing can be found at
http://www.aamu.edu/news/2011/Pages/Points-of-Pride---140.aspx;
however, I have selected a few to be specifically mentioned:

AAMU would be ranked in the Top 10 nationally, according to
news reports, if the effectiveness of higher education
institutions were ranked by criteria set by U.S. President
Barack Obama

AAMU is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges
and Schools Commission on Colleges.

AAMU is the only 1890 land-grant university with three Ph.D.
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) areas. The fourth Ph.D. program (and state's only one)
focuses on Reading/Literacy.

The Department of Food and Animal Sciences offers the only
Institute of Food Technologists (IFT) certified food science
program at a historically black college or university (HBCU) in
the U.S. The Food and Animal Sciences Department is one of two
and the oldest Ph.D. food science program among HBCUs in the
U.S.

AAMU ranks second in the nation in awarding undergraduate
degrees in natural resources and conservation to African-
Americans (DIVERSE, 2014).

AAMU is the eighth largest producer of undergraduate degrees
to African-American minorities in agriculture and related
sciences (DIVERSE, 2014).

AAMU ranks eighth in the nation in awarding master's degrees
to African-Americans in the fields of both biological/
biomedical sciences and physical sciences (DIVERSE, 2014).

AAMU contributes directly to the defense of the country and
has commissioned nearly 900 officers through its ROTC since the
program's inception.

AAMU's forestry program is accredited by the Society of
American Foresters and is the only such program at an HBCU.

AAMU is second in the nation in the awarding of
undergraduate degrees in mathematics and statistics to African-
Americans (DIVERSE, 2014).

AAMU ranks fifth in the awarding of degrees to African-
Americans in the field of engineering (DIVERSE, 2014).

In closing, I would like to sincerely express my gratitude for the
opportunity to present Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University
to such an august assembly of officials. With continued funding and
support, we expect to remain among the Top 20 largest employers in the
region, as well as make our economic impact felt throughout the region
(according to the Center for Business and Economic Research at the
University of Alabama's Culverhouse College of Commerce--$350M).
______

Prepared Statement of Alfred Rankins, Jr., Ph.D., President, Alcorn
State University, Lorman, MS
Good morning. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and
distinguished Members of the House Committee on Agriculture. Thank you
for allowing me to enter this written statement for the record.
On behalf of our more than 3,639 students, 677 faculty and staff,
and 25,000 alumni thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this opportunity.
Our History
Founded in 1871, 6 years after the Civil War ended, Alcorn State
University traces its heritage to the Morrill Acts. Alcorn State is
unique among the 1890s institutions because it, also, received funding
from the first Morrill Act, making it America's oldest public
historically black land-grant institution. Alcorn is, also,
Mississippi's second oldest state-supported university. We now attract
a racially and ethnically diverse student body from 40 states and more
than 20 countries. We educate those of limited means, as well as the
affluent. Alcorn's programs engage students in applied and basic
research while stimulating intellectual development of life-long
learning. We remain a leader in Agricultural education, annually
conferring degrees in Agribusiness Management, Agricultural Economics
and Agricultural Science.
Agriculture, as you are aware, is critical to Mississippi's and
America's economy. Mississippi agriculture, representing $7.4 billion
is the top industry in the state, directly and indirectly employing
approximately 39% of the state's workforce. The state's agriculture
enterprises include more than 11 million acres of farmland, 19.7
million acres of forestland, 14,000 miles of streams and 640,000 acres
of pond and lakes. The leading agricultural products in the state
include:

Poultry--MS broilers    $2.5 billion, eggs $215 million

Forestry                $1.17 billion

Soybean                 85.14 million bushels at $993
million

Cotton                  $331 million

Cattle & Calves         $289 million

Catfish                 $178 million

Rice                    $141 million

The strength of the Mississippi agriculture is due, in large part,
to the strength of the two state's land-grant universities--of which
Alcorn is the oldest. With the research and outreach of these two
institutions--Alcorn State University and Mississippi State
University--we have been able to improve agriculture in our state
through research and extension services. Our extension employees
continue to work with our growers to move them to new levels in both
rural and urban communities.
Research Initiatives
Patents
In 2006, a patent was received by scientists at Alcorn State that
could help to reduce the risk of heart disease without the use of
prescription medicines. Supplements of this vegetable crop fed to human
subjects with high blood cholesterol showed significant reduction in
`bad' cholesterol and increase in `good' cholesterol. The patent for
waterleaf was the first ever received by Alcorn State. Further research
is continuing to develop the patent.
Dr. Yufeng Zheng, associate professor in the Department of Advanced
Technologies, is the principal inventor for the utility patent
(8,917,914), ``Face recognition system and method using face pattern
words and face pattern bytes,'' that was recently issued to Alcorn
State. The present invention provides a novel system and method for
face recognition utilizing facial features. The system and method of
the invention comprise creating face patterns called ``face pattern
words'' and ``face pattern bytes'' for face identification.
Swine Development Center
Scientists in the Department of Agriculture are making their mark
in the heart disease prevention arena with their published findings
that vegetable purslane leaves lower the risk of cardiovascular disease
in humans. Heart disease continues to be a leading cause of mortality
and morbidity in the United States. As a result of these concerns for
potential side effects and consequent increase in health care costs,
there is a growing demand for non-traditional and/or diet related
approaches to lower blood lipids and cholesterol, and prevent
cardiovascular disease and stroke. In a feeding trial conducted at
Alcorn State, Scientists explored the efficacy of purslane leaves in
lowering cardiovascular diseases risk in patients with high blood
cholesterol and other blood lipids.
The study demonstrated that using a novel food product rich in
omega-3 fatty acids, pectin, and other essential nutrients, produced a
marked improvement in the lipid profile of the patients, LDL-
cholesterol (bad cholesterol) was reduced by 27%, suggesting a
remarkable improvement in heart disease risk, a primary culprit in the
development of cardiovascular disease and stroke.
Experiment Station
Scientists at the Alcorn State Experiment Station are currently
evaluating the effects of progesterone supplementation on the survival
of transferred embryos; this process is needed in order to release
mechanisms used by progesterone to alter the survival of the embryos in
cattle. The strategy evaluated and recommended by our scientists to
supplement progesterone is now being used by many farmers practicing
embryo transfer as a means to improving the fertility and genetics of
herds.
Dr. Victor Njiti is looking at ways to reduce the high cost of
sweet potato production by limiting the number of harvesting operations
through reduced vine growth. Further, we have expanded the market for
sweet potato through increased industrial utilization and human
consumption. Technology has been developed to process sweet potato into
high quality chips, and is now being prepared for patent and
transferred to industry.
Delta Obesity
The Department of Human Sciences secured a grant through Delta
Obesity Prevention Research Unit (OPRU), Adaptation and Adoption of the
Dietary Guidelines by African-American Children in Southwest
Mississippi. The ongoing project promotes investigation of the impact
of nutrition education (alone or combined with physical fitness) on the
adoption of the Dietary Guidelines for Americans (DG) among rural,
limited-resource African-American middle school children. The project
will add to the body of knowledge regarding low income, rural African-
American adolescents' understanding of the Dietary Guidelines as it
applies to their individual lives. The project will also help to
determine if increased knowledge of the Dietary Guidelines
recommendations alone or paired with physical activity within its
population can impact adoption of the Dietary Guidelines.
A feasibility study on obesity is currently underway in Fayette,
Mississippi with middle school-aged children.

Focus group discussions were conducted with adult women
(28 women from Warren, Claiborne, and Jefferson Counties), and
children in Jefferson County (63 males and 99 females).

The feasibility study exposed 287 middle school-aged
children to nutrition education focused on following the
Dietary Guidelines for Americans.

One conclusion drawn from the focus groups is that there
is a significant need for marketing to encourage these cultural
groups to utilize the website, Mypyramid.gov.
Extension Program
The Alcorn State University Cooperative Extension Program provides
educational programs to help Mississippians improve the quality of
their lives. In 2014, the Alcorn State University Cooperative Extension
Program completed the second year of its long range plan which
represents many of the accomplishments of Extension's educational
programs. These efforts were supported through the cooperation of
county, state and Federal Government, and a diverse group of
organizations and individuals. One of our major programs (Expanded Food
and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP)) promotes optimum nutrition and
healthy lifestyle management. Nutritional needs change throughout life
and have a direct impact on health, quality of life and ability to
achieve physical and mental potential. Diet related risks involved in
chronic diseases can be lowered through changed behaviors and positive
pregnancy outcomes can result from better prenatal nutrition.
Program Impacts:

Over 5,000 participants increased awareness of need to
have good nutrition habits; 8,480 participants increased
knowledge that promotes health; and 15,849 participants
increased attitudes and aspirations that are indicative of a
need for good health.

Nearly 723 person showed a decrease in high blood
cholesterol; 663 showed a decrease in high blood pressure; 292
showed a decrease in high blood sugar; and 1,000 showed a
decrease in excess weight.

Approximately 2,538 parents adopted food behaviors
consistent with the Dietary Guidelines and Food Guide Pyramid.

The Family Nutrition Program supported by the USDA Food Nutrition
Service was conducted in 40 counties with a focus on food stamp
eligible families with 3 to 5 year old children. One agent's comment
after finishing the four sessions was of the participants does not want
the sessions to end. Family Nutrition participants have been hired as
EFNEP program assistants while others come back as volunteers. In a
letter with $1,436 of support from the United Way in Warren County, the
grantor stated, ``You are really making a difference in the lives of
many women and children in our community.'' Various counties reporting
evaluation results for the low income audience, in general, indicated
an improvement in food resource management practices for 75% to 97% of
participants; and improvement in nutrition practices for 88% to 97% of
participants; and improved food safety practices of 50% to 81% of
participants.
Mississippi Small Farm and Agribusiness Center
The Alcorn State University Mississippi Small Farm and Agribusiness
Center (MSFAC), the only one of its kind at an 1890 institution, was
established in 1988 by an Act of the Mississippi State Legislature to
promote, enhance and facilitate the development and growth of small
farms and alternative agricultural enterprises, including international
marketing, thereby improving the economic condition of small farmers
throughout Mississippi. The state has approximately 37,500 small farms
that have an annual gross farm revenue of $50,000 or less. MSFAC
provides services directly to approximately 600 farmers and indirectly
to several thousands, with its website linking the center to farmers
all over the state and beyond its borders. Located on the campus of
Alcorn State, the center provides services in the following areas:

Database and Information.

Energy Database.

Marketing & International.

Agricultural Education.

Small Farm Loan Program.

Vegetable Industry Development.

Natural Products Industry.

Livestock Industry.
Student Successes
Department of Agriculture
We are proud of our graduates who have decided to pursue advanced
degrees in agriculture. Crystal Vance is pursuing a Ph.D. in soil
science, with an assistantship, Louisiana State University School of
Agriculture Plant, Environmental and Soil Sciences. During the spring
semester, Vance presented her thesis at the Alcorn State School of
Agriculture, Research, Extension and Applied Sciences Seminar Series.
Her presentation was entitled, ``Plant Density Effects of Switchgrass
(Panicum virgatum L.) On Biomass, Nutrients and Carbon Buildup on Heavy
Soils.'' This research was funded by the United States Army. Vance
graduated with a 4.0 GPA from the Department of Agriculture in Plant
and Soil Science.
Department of Human Sciences
Several undergraduate students in nutrition and dietetics are going
on to pursue advanced degrees. Aquierra Anderson, Victoria King, and
Kanesha Sumling. Anderson will enter the Food and Nutritional Services
Master's Program at Tuskegee University, and King and Sumling have been
accepted in the Belhaven University Health Administration Master's
Program where they are hoping to acquire knowledge and skills to become
hospital administrators.
Over the years our graduates have gone on to be highly successful
in their fields. You will find them in agricultural leadership roles
all over our state, nation and the world. Indeed, we can boast of
Alcornites who are making outstanding contributions within USDA as
employees. Among these individuals are:
USDA/Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)

1.  Jacqueline Davis-Slay, Director Public and Private Partnership.
USDA/Agriculture Marketing Service (AMS)
1.  Darmechie Hulbert, Agricultural Commodity Grader.

2.  Yolonda M. Moore, Agricultural Commodity Grader.
USDA/Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)
1.  Perry Earl Davis, Deputy District Manager.

2.  Christina Travis, Resource Manager.

3.  Natoya Cameron, Resource Management Assistant.
Foreign Agricultural Service
1.  Patrick Packnett.
Challenges and Opportunities
According to the 2012 United States Census of Agriculture, there
were 30,227 black farmers in the 18 states served by 1890 universities.
Of that number 5,129 or 17% of those farmers reside in Mississippi. The
2012 Agricultural Census, also, shows there has been a 30% increase in
black farmers' ownership of farmland. Much of that increase in USDA
program participation is credited to educating the farmers on USDA
programs offered by 1890 universities.
Our work with small- and limited-resource farmers is important,
because they represent 50% of the farmland and have the potential to
increase jobs and economic development. If funds are enhanced, we could
do so much more in a positive way to reach and assist limited-resource
farmers and the communities in which they live and operate.
______

Submitted Question
Response from Harold L. Martin, Sr., Ph.D., Chancellor, North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University
Question Submitted by Hon. David Rouzer, a Representative in Congress
from North Carolina
Question. Dr. Martin, I am honored to be one of two members from
North Carolina who get to welcome you to the House Committee on
Agriculture and thank you for your service and leadership to our state
and to North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University. NC
A&T boasts a proud tradition among the 1890 land-grant universities as
evidenced by the College of Engineering ranking number one for the
number of degrees awarded to African-Americans, and the School of
Agriculture and Environmental Sciences recently becoming the largest
school of its kind among the nation's historically black colleges and
universities.
Please explain A&T's commitment to the people of North Carolina as
an institution of higher learning and its commitment to small minority
farmers. Also, please discuss the ways in which both North Carolina
land grant universities--NC A&T and North Carolina State University--
work together to help the agricultural industry in our state.
Answer. Thank you so much for the question Congressman Rouzer and
thank you for all that you that you do for the people of North
Carolina.

A&T's commitment as institution of higher learning

N.C. A&T is a learner-centered community that develops and
preserves intellectual capital through interdisciplinary learning,
discovery and engagement, and is committed to fulfilling its
fundamental purposes through exemplary instruction, scholarly and
creative research, and effective public service and engagement. A&T is
dedicated to providing ``ladders of opportunity'' to high-achieving
students seeking a superior education and is committed to creating a
campus climate that fosters student satisfaction and a sense of
community. The university's academic and outreach efforts illustrate
how campus and community collaborations enhance the quality of life for
the citizens of North Carolina, the nation, and the world.
A&T is ranked by the Carnegie Classification System as a
``doctoral/research university'' and, for the past nine years, has
ranked third among The University of North Carolina system's member
institutions for sponsored research funding. With an enrollment of
nearly 11,000 students, A&T is recognized as the largest among the
nation's historically black colleges and universities, and the School
of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences at A&T is the largest school
of its kind among the nation's HBCUs. A&T ranks No. 1 in the nation for
the number of baccalaureate degrees in engineering awarded to black or
African-Americans (American Society for Engineering Education) and is
the top producer of African-Americans with undergraduate degrees in
STEM disciplines, arts and humanities, and education.

A&T's commitment to small minority farmers

In an era where family farms and farmland are rapidly disappearing
from the American landscape, North Carolina farm census data shows that
African-American owned farms in North Carolina are on the rise, having
increased in number from 1,491 in 2007, to 1,637 in 2012. Overall
acreage under cultivation in these enterprises has increased by nearly
20,000 acres. Despite these successes, challenges loom for North
Carolina's small farming community, and particularly, for new farmers.
According to North Carolina farm census data, 86 percent of African-
American farms had gross sales of less than $50,000 and 51 percent of
those farmers' sole source of income is farming. Small farmers of all
races are also aging and nearing retirement and unfortunately, only 3
percent are under 34 years old. A&T is committed to providing the
education and training needed to attract and retain the next generation
of farmers and has done so through effective community outreach and
innovative undergraduate and graduate programs.
A&T is striving to make small farming in North Carolina more
profitable and more attractive, while continuing its unique mission to
serve minorities in rural communities. Through new ideas like our Small
Farms Collaborative and Local Foods and Health Initiative (funded
through the 1890 Facilities Program), A&T plans to use its 492 acre
farm as a strong community education resource for local food
production. Elements of the farm plan mentioned include a food
processing facility to teach entrepreneurs how to add value to North
Carolina agricultural products, a pasture-based dairy and creamery
producing A&T-branded yogurt, ice cream and artisanal cheeses for
revenue production, an organic vegetable production research and
demonstration site, a student-run farm, and land for community gardens
that will be available to residents of the surrounding communities.

A&T's commitment to collaboration

At A&T we use long-range planning and evaluation to adapt our
programs to the emerging needs and issues in the state of North
Carolina. A&T's cooperative extension program is a responsive, high-
touch organization and one that works in direct partnership with N.C.
State University. Together, our cooperative extension services help
families and communities throughout North Carolina with nutritional
programming aimed at: reducing obesity, diabetes and other chronic
diseases; parenting classes for troubled families; financial literacy
training; and youth development through 4-H programs. Examples of
continued collaborations are below:

In addition to the nearly 500 acre University Farm--A&T's
largest classroom--cooperative extension also has an
agricultural presence in Goldsboro through the Center for
Environmental Farming Systems. CEFS is a consortium comprised
of the N.C. Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services,
A&T and N.C. State. The center is a premier locale for
extension, research, and educational programs in sustainable
agriculture and local food systems, with units of: small farm
vegetable production, dairy, beef, outdoor swine, goats, and
organics.

A&T and N.C. State also collaborated to design, implement,
and evaluate the Farm School educational program--a 6 month
intensive program that recruits new, beginning, and young
producers into farming. Participants are trained on business
and marketing planning, farm financing options, and alternative
agricultural enterprises. Participants also tour farms to gain
a better understanding of the farming enterprise.

A&T and N.C. State embraced local foods as a joint signature
program of both universities a few years ago, resulting in a
coordinated expanded focus on local-and-regional foods at the
county levels. County Extension agents have also become better
trained to help growers and consumers produce and buy more
affordable, fresh and local foods.

Extension agents from both universities have also partnered
with the N.C. Department of Agriculture Piedmont Research
Station in Salisbury to conduct winter squash and broccoli
variety trials, to determine which varieties are best grown in
North Carolina.

The cooperative extension program at A&T has created two
unique curricula in the areas of Family and Consumer Sciences,
Table for Two and Speedway to Healthy. These programs are being
endorsed and shared by both A&T and N.C. State extension agents
to help promote nutrition and health to audiences in the
interest of developing healthier children and families in our
state, and also to lower health care costs and expenses--
including those born by taxpayers through public and
governmental assistance programs.

Table for Two, a curriculum focused on improving the
nutrition and health of pregnant teens and their pre- and-
post natal babies.

Speedway to Healthy, a 1,200 foot
2
, custom-
made exhibit of the human body's interior provides an
interactive teaching tool where children learn about their
bodies' relationship to food. Since its launch this spring,
the exhibit has been hosted in five counties, seen by more
than 2,000 elementary aged children, including more than
800 alone during a 3 day stop in Alexander County. As
school resumes, two more counties have booked the Speedway
in late September.

[all]
