- SERVICE IN THE FIELD: VETERAN CONTRIBUTIONS TO NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SERVICE IN THE FIELD: VETERAN
CONTRIBUTIONS TO NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 18, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-51

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

____________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
20-273 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2016
___________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma             JIM COSTA, California
STEVE KING, Iowa                     TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
MIKE ROGERS, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      SUZAN K. DelBENE, Washington
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                FILEMON VELA, Texas
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  MICHELLE LUJAN GRISHAM, New Mexico
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      RICHARD M. NOLAN, Minnesota
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois
DAN BENISHEK, Michigan               SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York
JEFF DENHAM, California              ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
DOUG LaMALFA, California             PETE AGUILAR, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands
TED S. YOHO, Florida                 ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina
JACKIE WALORSKI, Indiana             GWEN GRAHAM, Florida
RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia               BRAD ASHFORD, Nebraska
MIKE BOST, Illinois
DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
RALPH LEE ABRAHAM, Louisiana
JOHN R. MOOLENAAR, Michigan
DAN NEWHOUSE, Washington
TRENT KELLY, Mississippi

______

Scott C. Graves, Staff Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     3

Witnesses

Fant, COL John S., (Ret.), U.S. Army; Co-Owner/Operator,
Summerfield Heritage Farm, Independence, VA....................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Lemondes, COL John, (Ret.), U.S. Army, Jamesville, NY............     8
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Chastain, COL Cindy, (Ret.), U.S. Army; Veteran Outreach
Coordinator, National AgrAbility Project, West Lafayette, IN...    13
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Grandon, SSG Eric, (Ret.), U.S. Army; Owner/Operator, Sugar
Bottom Farm, Ovapa, WV; on behalf of West Virginia Warriors;
Veterans to Agriculture Program................................    18
Prepared statement...........................................    19

SERVICE IN THE FIELD: VETERAN
CONTRIBUTIONS TO NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 18, 2016

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in Room
1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. K. Michael
Conaway [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Conaway, Goodlatte, Lucas,
Rogers, Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia, Crawford, Gibson,
Benishek, LaMalfa, Davis, Allen, Rouzer, Abraham, Moolenaar,
Newhouse, Kelly, Peterson, David Scott of Georgia, Walz,
McGovern, DelBene, Vela, Lujan Grisham, Kuster, Nolan, Bustos,
Maloney, Kirkpatrick, Aguilar, Plaskett, Adams, Graham, and
Ashford.
Staff present: Caleb Crosswhite, John Goldberg, John Weber,
Mykel Wedig, Stephanie Addison, Faisal Siddiqui, John Konya,
Anne Simmons, Lisa Shelton, Robert L. Larew, Nicole Scott, and
Carly Reedholm.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS

The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
entitled, Service in the Field: Veteran Contributions to
National Food Security, will come to order. I ask Rick Crawford
to open us with a quick prayer. Rick?
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Heavenly Father, I thank you for every blessing of life. We
are thankful that we live in this nation, and Father, it is my
prayer today that you will dwell in this place, Lord, and I
thank You that we have the opportunity. I pray that everything
that is said and done here be pleasing to You, and ask in
Jesus' name. Amen.
The Chairman. Well thank you, and I thank our witnesses for
being here.
Last November, the Agriculture Committee began examining
the links between agriculture and our national security. The
first hearing highlighted global security challenges and
underscored the connection between food security and political
stability. As former President George W. Bush said, ``A nation
that can feed itself is a nation more secure.''
We followed that hearing with an examination of our
readiness in dealing with threats to plant and animal health.
And today, as we approach the Memorial Day holiday, we turn our
attention to the programs and policies that enable our nation's
veterans to transition into agricultural occupations.
In addition to serving on the House Agriculture Committee,
I am privileged to serve on the House Armed Services Committee
and the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. It is
an honor to regularly interact with the men and women who risk
their lives in service of this great nation. As these men and
women lay down their weapons and re-enter the private-sector,
many seek to continue contributing to our nation's food
security with a career in agriculture.
Veterans returning to the United States from active duty
face many challenges. Congresses past and present have sought
to facilitate this transition through the adoption of Federal
programs and policies aimed at supporting veterans. These
include programs such as the Beginning Farmer and Rancher
Development Program where a minimum of five percent of funds
available are set aside to meet the needs of veteran farmers
and ranchers, and the AgrAbility program, which provides
assistance to farmers and ranchers, including veterans with
disabilities.
Sound farm policy plays an integral role in preventing food
insecurity, and it is one of the reasons the United States is
consistently ranked as one of the most food-secure nations in
the world. Our veterans have seen food insecurity, and they
know the unrest it brings. They understand, perhaps better than
any of us, how important it is for the United States to
continue to be able to feed its people. At the same time, this
Committee is steadfast in its commitment to assisting veterans
who choose to work in agriculture.
Today, we will hear directly from soldiers-turned-farmers
on their experiences going from military service to agriculture
production. We will learn how the various USDA programs are
working for participants, and what can be done to improve them.
I can think of no better group more deserving of our best
efforts than America's veterans.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conaway follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas
Good morning.
Last November, the Agriculture Committee began examining the links
between agriculture and our national security. The first hearing
highlighted global security challenges and underscored the connection
between food security and political stability. As former President
George W. Bush said, ``A nation that can feed its people is a nation
more secure.''
We followed that hearing with an examination of our readiness in
dealing with threats to plant and animal health.
Today, as we approach the Memorial Day holiday, we turn our
attention to the programs and policies that enable our nation's
veterans to transition into agricultural occupations.
In addition to serving on the Agriculture Committee, I am
privileged to serve on the House Armed Services Committee and the House
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. It is an honor to regularly
interact with the men and women who risk their lives in service of this
great nation. As these men and women lay down their weapons and re-
enter the private-sector, many seek to continue contributing to our
nation's food security with a career in agriculture.
Veterans returning to the United States from active duty face many
challenges. Congresses past and present have sought to facilitate this
transition through the adoption of Federal programs and policies aimed
at supporting veterans. These include programs such as the Beginning
Farmer and Rancher Development Program where a minimum of five percent
of funds available are set aside to meet the needs of veteran farmers
and ranchers, and the AgrAbility program, which provides assistance to
farmers and ranchers, including veterans with disabilities.
Sound farm policy plays an integral role in preventing food
insecurity, and it is one of the reasons the United States is
consistently ranked as one of the most food-secure nations in the
world. Our veterans have seen food insecurity firsthand, and they know
the unrest it brings. They understand, perhaps better than any of us,
how important it is for the U.S. to continue to be able to feed its
people. At the same time, this Committee is steadfast in its commitment
to assisting veterans who choose to work in agriculture.
Today, we will hear directly from soldiers-turned-farmers on their
experiences going from military service to agriculture production. We
will learn how the various USDA programs are working for participants,
and what can be done to improve them. I can think of no group more
deserving of our best efforts than America's veterans.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his opening remarks.

The Chairman. I now recognize the Ranking Member for any
comments that he would like to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am really pleased
that we are having this hearing today, and welcome to today's
witnesses. Thank you for your service.
I have heard from folks all across the country who want to
start a career in agriculture, but if they didn't grow up on a
farm or have family in farming or have some other connection to
farming, it is nearly impossible for them to get started in
this day and age. We tried to address some of these barriers to
entry in recent farm bills by including provisions that help
recruit and support the next generation of farmers, including
veteran farmers. There are also organizations like the National
AgrAbility Project, and Farmer Veteran Coalition that are doing
an excellent job providing support and resources to returning
service members who are interested in farming.
I am looking forward to learning more about the work that
they are doing, and I am also looking forward to hearing more
on the role active duty service members play in agriculture
development and outreach while serving overseas, and how these
efforts might relate to food security issues here at home.
So again, thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing, and I look forward to the witnesses who are going to
enlighten us today, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the Ranking Member. The chair
requests that other Members submit their opening statements for
the record so our witnesses may begin their testimony to ensure
there is ample time for questions.
I would like to welcome to our witness table today Colonel
John Fant, retired, U.S. Army, who is the co-owner of
Springfield Heritage Farm in Independence, Virginia; Colonel
John Lemondes, retired, U.S. Army, Jamesville, New York;
Colonel Cindy Chastain, retired, U.S. Army, Veteran Outreach
Coordinator for the National AgrAbility Project of West
Lafayette, Indiana, and our Staff Sergeant Eric Grandon. Which
brings us to proper ratio of three colonels and one staff
sergeant. That is about the right mix on the issue. Retired
U.S. Army, Sugar Bottom Farm, Ovapa, West Virginia, and he is
here on behalf of the West Virginia Warriors and Veterans to
Agriculture Program.
I want to thank all our witnesses for coming. Colonel Fant,
please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF COL JOHN S. FANT, (RET.), U.S. ARMY; CO-OWNER/
OPERATOR, SUMMERFIELD HERITAGE FARM,
INDEPENDENCE, VA

Mr. Fant. Thank you, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and Members of the Committee on Agriculture. It is a
real privilege and an honor to be able to speak to you today. I
believe it was General Washington that is attributed to saying
that ``I have grown gray and blind in the service of my
nation'' so have I, if you will.
This is a special day for me, but more importantly, I want
to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and the Committee Members for
holding this critically important hearing on food security and
encouraging veterans to farm. I am a soldier, and I am a
farmer. My life has been one of service to nation, service to
community, and service to family, but not always in that order.
Like previous citizen soldiers, today, many of our veterans
find themselves securing our nation using shovels and tractors
rather than rifles and artillery.
My journey began on a farm. I grew up around cows, corn,
and collards, but left the mountains of Virginia for college
and to ``Be All I Can Be'' in the U.S. Army. My career exposed
me to many cultures and climates. While I did not realize it at
the time, my service also impressed on me the importance of
food, the challenges in producing it, and the dangers in
providing it.
While stationed in South Korea, I observed the challenges
of cultivating rice and livestock. While deployed to
Afghanistan, I saw a beautiful almond grove along the foothills
of the Hindu Kush, a cash crop inaccessible due to local
threats. In Iraq, I served along the Euphrates River in Ramadi.
The Fertile Crescent appeared intact but the land quickly
became arid, highlighting the criticality of water.
I began planning for life after the Army about 3 years
prior to my retirement. One of the earliest events was
attending a training program for veterans sponsored by the
Livestock Conservancy and the Farmer Veteran Coalition. Both
these organizations have been and continue to be instrumental
in how I operate my farm and the networks in which I
participate.
One of the most beneficial training programs in which I
participated was the Northern Piedmont Beginning Farmer
Program, a component of the Virginia Beginning Farmer and
Rancher Coalition, which is largely funded by the 2014 Farm
Bill through the USDA's Beginning Farmer and Rancher
Development Program. This course taught participants about what
it means to be in production agriculture and culminated with
each student having to produce a business plan but, more
importantly, making a decision if agriculture was what he or
she really wanted as a vocation.
While many young farmers are beginning farmers, not all
beginning farmers are young. However, I have some distinct
advantages as a retired veteran: I am physically capable, I
have an operational and planning background, and I have a
reliable income with benefits. These advantages help mitigate
several vulnerabilities which cause small businesses of any
type to fail.
My assessment of the farm revealed two major issues:
livestock health and infrastructure. For animal husbandry
training I turned to my mentors, my veterinarian and neighbors,
to help me learn what right looked like. The main barn on our
farm was built circa 1818 and many of my fences appeared to
have been built before that. Therefore, I have made use of the
USDA's Conservation Reserve Program and Virginia's Best
Management Program cost-share to develop the beginnings of a
pasture management system through the use of permanent and
temporary fences and pressurized watering systems. As a result
of these capital improvements I have seen a reduction in
winter-feeding requirements and an improvement in soil and
livestock health. Therefore, based on my experience as a
beginning farmer I would recommend the following for your
consideration.
First, it is a fact that roughly one percent of the nation
defends the other 99 percent. However, it is also true that
roughly one percent of the nation feeds 100 percent of the
nation. Continue to support USDA's, VA's, and DOD's efforts to
educate and encourage veterans to continue their service to the
nation by ``joining the other one percent.'' More work needs to
be done in demonstrating to veterans the opportunities in
agribusiness.
Second, General Stan McCrystal, among others, has written
and spoken about the need for a national service requirement.
This requirement could be met partially through a concept I
call Agriculture Corps, or Ag Corps, where citizens enlist to
work on a farm or farms for 1 year with pay and benefits. This
will provide a common experience while beginning to address the
projected future farmer shortfall. If we are serious about a
diverse food security network we have to begin to mobilize
towards those efforts.
Third, continue to provide funding for business planning
training like the Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development
Program. We are on the right path in educating our citizens who
want to farm. This must be sustained.
And finally, CRP has greatly assisted land-owning farmers
in resolving infrastructure issues while protecting our natural
resources. I spend a lot of my time setting the conditions for
future operations. Programs like CRP have helped me prepare
today to farm tomorrow.
When I began transition and told my peers I was going to
farm, I got some strange looks and a few chuckles. But if you
really thing about it, there are many similarities between
soldiering and farming. The most obvious is both are outdoor
sports. But the planning and communications ability, integrity,
mission focus, personal discipline, dedication, physical
fitness, operational flexibility and decision making are all
skills that I brought back to the farm from the Army. Our
nation is blessed with natural resources, which we use to feed
our citizens. The mission of the Farmer Veteran Coalition is to
mobilize veterans to feed America. Let's work together to
encourage our veterans to join the other one percent.
I am prepared to answer any questions you may have. Thank
you again for this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of COL Fant follows:]

Prepared Statement of COL John S. Fant, (Ret.), U.S. Army; Co-Owner/
Operator, Summerfield Heritage Farm, Independence, VA
Executive Summary
Personal Information

27+ years active Federal service in the U.S. Army.

Co-Owner/Operator, Summerfield Heritage Farm, LLC.

Participates in USDA's Beginning Farmer and Rancher
Development Program and Conservation Reserve Program.

Member, Advisory Committee, Virginia Beginning Farmer and
Rancher Coalition.

Member, Farmer Veteran Coalition.

Elected Member, Board of Supervisors, Grayson County, VA.
Recommendations
1.  Continue to support the USDA's, VA's, and DOD's efforts to
educate and encourage veterans on the opportunities in
Agribusiness.

2.  Establish Agriculture Corps, or Ag Corps, where citizens
``enlist'' to work on a farm for 1 year with pay and
benefits.

3.  Continue to provide funding for business planning programs.

4.  Continue to fund conservation programs.

5.  Support Land Access Workshops to assist in generational
transition.

Thank you Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of
the Committee on Agriculture. It is a real privilege and an honor to be
able to speak to you today. I have always wondered what it would be
like to testify at a Committee hearing and now I know. This is a
special day for me but more importantly I want to thank you, Mr
Chairman, and the Committee Members, for holding this critically
important hearing on Food security and encouraging veterans to farm.
I am a Soldier. I am a Farmer. My life has been one of service to
nation, service to community and service to family and not always in
that order. Like previous citizen Soldiers, today many of our veterans
find themselves securing our nation using shovels and tractors rather
than rifles and artillery. My journey began on the farm. We are a beef
cattle operation . . . with a sheep hobby. While our farm has been in
our family for a couple of centuries, my parents are not professional
farmers but we did try to farm professionally. I grew up around cows,
corn and collards but left the mountains of Virginia for college and to
Be All I Can Be in the U.S. Army. My career exposed me to many cultures
and climates. While I did not realize it at the time, my service also
impressed on me the importance of food, the challenges in producing it
and the dangers in providing it.
While stationed in South Korea, I observed the challenges of
cultivating rice and livestock. While deployed to Afghanistan, I saw a
beautiful almond grove along the foothills of the Hindu Kush; a cash
crop inaccessible due to local threats. In Iraq, I served along the
Euphrates River in Ramadi. The Fertile Crescent appeared intact but the
land quickly became arid highlighting the criticality of water.
I began planning for life after the Army about 3 years out: reading
books, attending conferences, visiting farms, taking classes, learning
about conservation programs, writing a business plan. One of the
earliest events was attending a training program for veterans sponsored
by The Livestock Conservancy and The Farmer Veteran Coalition. It was
at this conference I meet Alison Martin, The Livestock Conservancy, and
Michael O'Gorman, Farmer Veteran Coalition. Both these organizations
have been and continue to be instrumental in how I operate my farm and
the networks in which I participate.
One of the most beneficial training programs in which I
participated was the Northern Piedmont Beginning Farmer Program, a
component of the Virginia Beginning Farmer and Rancher Coalition which
is largely funded by the 2014 Farm Bill through the USDA's Beginning
Farmer and Rancher Development Program. This course taught participants
about what it means to be in production agriculture and culminated with
each student having to produce a business plan but, more importantly,
make a decision if agriculture was what he or she really wanted as a
vocation. Currently, there are four organizations in the Virginia,
which teach this whole farm-planning course (Appalachian Sustainable
Development, Virginia State University, Northern Piedmont Beginning
Farmers, Growers Academy).
At the time of my retirement, I was the only one of my siblings
able to move back and operate the farm on a long-term basis. While many
young farmers are beginning farmers not all beginning farmers are
young. However, I have some distinct advantages as a retired veteran: I
am physically capable, I have an operational and planning background,
and I have a reliable income with benefits. These advantages help
mitigate several vulnerabilities which cause small businesses of any
type to fail.
My assessment of the farm revealed two major issues: livestock
health and infrastructure. For animal husbandry training I turned to my
mentors (formal and informal), my veterinarian and neighbors to help me
learn what right looked like. The main barn on our farm was built circa
1818 and many of my fences appeared to have been built before then.
Therefore, I have made use of the USDA's Conservation Reserve Program
and Virginia's Best Management Program to develop the beginnings of a
pasture management system through the use of permanent and temporary
fences and pressurized watering systems. As a result of these capital
improvements I have seen a reduction in winter-feeding requirements and
an improvement in soil and livestock health.
Therefore, based on my experience as a beginning farmer I would
recommend the following for your consideration:

First, it is a fact that roughly 1% of the nation defends the
other 99%. However, it is also true that roughly 1% of the
nation feeds 100% of the nation. Continue to support the
USDA's, VA's, and DOD's efforts to educate and encourage
veterans to continue their service to the nation by ``joining
the other 1%.'' Much has been accomplished in this area since I
retired, thanks largely to the efforts of the Farmer Veteran
Coalition, but more work needs to be done in demonstrating to
veterans the opportunities in Agribusiness.
Second, General Stan McCrystal, among others, has written and
spoken about the need for a national service requirement. This
requirement could be met partially through a concept I call
Agriculture Corps, or Ag Corps, where citizens ``enlist'' to
work on a farm or farms for 1 year with pay and benefits. This
will provide a common experience and an appreciation for how
our food is produced while beginning to address the projected
future farmer shortfall. If we are serious about a diverse food
security network we have to begin to mobilize towards this
effort.
Third, continue to provide funding for business planning
training like the Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development
Program. A component of business planning is marketing. The
Farmer Veteran Coalition has a program to demonstrate to the
general public the opportunities to buy farm products produced
by veterans--the Homegrown By Heroes label; celebrated by many
Members of this Committee at Farm Credit's ``Salute to Farmer
Veterans.'' Therefore, I think we are on the right path in
educating our citizens who want to farm; this must be
sustained. Additionally, CRP has greatly assisted land-owning
farmers in resolving infrastructure issues while protecting our
natural resources. I spend a lot of my time setting the
conditions for future operations. These programs have helped me
prepare today to farm tomorrow.
Last, one of the major barriers for people wanting to farm is
access to land. Encourage state and local organizations, like
Farm Bureau, Cooperative Extension, and Grayson Landcare, to
continue to hold Land Access Workshops in order to match the
willing with the means and to assist in generational
transition. We must get beyond the perception that owning land
is a requirement to farm.

When I began to transition and told my peers I was going to farm, I
got some strange looks and a few chuckles. But if you really think
about it, there are many similarities between soldiering and farming;
the most obvious is both are outdoor sports. But the planning and
communications ability, integrity, mission focus, personal discipline,
dedication, physical fitness, operational flexibility and decision
making are all skills I brought back to the farm from the Army. Our
nation is blessed with natural resources, which we use to feed our
citizens. The mission of the Farmer Veteran Coalition is ``To mobilize
veterans to feed America.'' Let's work together to encourage our
veterans to ``join the other 1%.'' I am prepared to answer any
questions you may have. Thank you again for this opportunity.

The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel Fant. Colonel Lemondes?

STATEMENT OF COL JOHN LEMONDES, (RET.), U.S. ARMY, JAMESVILLE,
NY

Mr. Lemondes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Committee Members,
ladies and gentlemen.
Like my father before me, I carried a rifle in defense of
our nation and because of that, I am honored to appear before
you to provide my testimony on this topic, and thank you
wholeheartedly for the opportunity, and most importantly, for
my family, and above all, for veterans past, present, and
future.
Above all, I view it as an extension of service to our
country through a means that impacts everyone. Food itself is
something few Americans think about, yet require three times a
day. While food security is a vulnerability we are exposed to
with virtually no means or infrastructure to protect, I hope to
be a part of the solution to this dilemma. Furthermore, I view
certain things as being a part of the fabric of America itself,
so interwoven with who we are and where we came from, you don't
even realize it is there. Farming at the literal grassroots
level is one of the threads of that fabric and in the end, I am
personally content knowing that I have risked more than most
with a respect to our population at large, still contribute to
the security and nourishment of our country, and ultimately,
simply thankful to still be alive and able to meaningfully
contribute.
Agriculture has brought me all over the U.S. and all over
the world. As the Chairman of the board for the New York State
Chapter of the Farmer Veteran Coalition, I hope to create
positive momentum for veterans in agriculture in New York, and
seek your support in doing so.
Our farm, very simply, is a little over 400 acres,
diversified start up operation, lamb, wool, and maple syrup,
and I am executing that on a five phase plan. With that, I look
forward to answering your questions, and last and above all,
thank you for having me here.
[The prepared statement of COL Lemondes follows:]

Prepared Statement of COL John Lemondes, (Ret.), U.S. Army, Jamesville,
NY
I am honored to appear before you to provide my testimony on this
topic and thank you wholeheartedly for the opportunity on behalf of my
state, our country, all veterans (past, present and future) and most
importantly, my family. Above all, I view it as another extension of
service to our country through a means that impacts everyone. Food
itself is something few Americans think about, yet require 3x/day while
food security is a vulnerability we are exposed to with virtually no
means or infrastructure to protect.
Background: Please see attached article I wrote for Cornell
University (Small Farms Quarterly).
Our Farm: 436 acres located in Onondaga County, NY.
Qualifications: See attached resume.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: Colonel Lemondes resume is retained in Committee
files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Service in the Field: Veteran Contributions to National Food
Security.
Current Situation & Challenges
1. If the USDA were to expand their efforts to collaborate with
other departments and organizations to better serve veteran farmers,
they should first appoint veteran farmer liaisons to the pertinent
organizations similar to what they have done at the national
headquarters. This may be viewed negatively as Federal Government
growth, but food security is our number two national priority, preceded
by physical security and followed by economic security. They are all
interrelated. Next, there should be national effort to educate the
public on food security, and food and fiber production and it should
start in elementary schools. Most Americans have absolutely no idea
where their food and clothing comes from (simple examples are cotton,
wool, meat, poultry, etc.) and what it takes to get the end item to
them.
2. I have beneficially utilized the GRP and EQIP programs. Neither
is without challenges, but both are beneficial.
3. Skills gained as a Soldier that are transferable to farming are
essentially the same as those transferable to any vocation. Some of the
more important are: professional discipline, leadership and
organization skills, and the ability to see something through and not
quit. Additionally, veterans gain a much deeper understanding of human
emotion and capability and can lead others to accomplish things they
never thought possible. Most veterans have had their limits tested,
whereas most civilians would not even know what that means. However, I
caution lumping veterans into any particular category as most of the
experience gained can be transferred to any endeavor or profession.
This is a major misunderstanding today, in my opinion, due to the fact
there are relatively few veterans in comparison to the population at
large, therefore as a cohort, they are stereotyped and misunderstood.
4. I don't know if the distinction of being a veteran farmer is of
any help yet. My operation is only 2 years old and we are still
fighting an uphill battle to simply get off the ground. My greatest
concern is that it may hurt business because of the subtle contempt
that is displayed toward our military, constitution and traditional way
of life by some. The simple fact that so few people bear the Herculean
burden of protecting the ``American Dream'' and understanding its
costs, leaves the vast majority to pursue life, liberty and happiness
without ever meaningfully contributing to its sanctity.
5. I have utilized no USDA operating loans because I simply do not
have the time or bandwidth to explore these opportunities. I applied
for multiple grants in 2014 and got little back for the time invested.
This was a hard lesson learned.
6. I think the only way agriculture can obtain and maintain the
confidence of the American people is to have greater emphasis on food
production (again starting w/young children, especially in urban
schools and centers) and the people who do it. Additionally greater
emphasis on local food production to include Federal infrastructure
improvements (i.e., mobile USDA slaughter facilities for rural
communities, perhaps subsidized slaughter facilities in rural areas and
in general, simply raising the profile of what farmers do. Note that as
a veteran being highlighted in agriculture, many may experience `push
back' in subtle ways because they may be new entrants to agricultural
production in the communities they settle in. This is a challenge that
each individual veteran has to manage.
7. My experiences working with my local FSA and NRCS offices have
been mixed. At the county or what I call the execution level of these
large Federal programs, it all boils down to the ability of the local
personnel to make sensible judgement calls on the implementation of
program guidelines. I have worked with some that are incapable of doing
this while others are perfectly able to professionally synthesize what
needs to be done to satisfy legal requirements, yet still provide
benefit to that local farm. USDA must emplace people that have the
temperament, skill and judgement to do this effectively and require
managers at all levels to take actions to either train or remove those
that can't. This requires leadership.
8. Impediments to farming are numerous and ever present. At the
macro economic level, agricultural production is one of the last (if
not the last) industry in our country to industrialize. This simple
fact over the last hundred years has had two unmistakable impacts.
First, the number of family owned and operated farms has decreased and
will continue to do so; and, secondly, the average farm size has
continually increased enabling operations to leverage economies of
scale while simultaneously driving out smaller producers. Depending on
source, the size of the average farm today is slightly over 400 acres.
These trends are irreversible which gives me concern over all of the
current emphasis on small farms. Are we setting people up for success
or failure?

a.  Entry barriers to farming are immense, ranging from the
difficulty of land capture to equipment financing and
depending on which state you live in, tax burdens, minimum
wage challenges, energy prices, regulations and labor.

b.  Additionally, although veterans demonstrate a higher success rate
in most post military endeavors when compared to the
population at large, they face discriminatory hiring
practices which impact those (farmer and or spouse) who
need off farm income to finance their start up or simply to
mitigate its risk.

c.  Specific to veterans, simply being able to have the time to
search for farm land prior to military transition is
daunting. During my transition (I retired in 1 Feb. 2014),
there were no known or recognizable sources that could help
a veteran find information. I did it solely on my own. I
also found that the USDA was promoting many veteran
``programs'' but I was totally unable to find any
applicable benefits. By benefits, I don't mean from a
dependency perspective, I mean it more so from a how to,
who to see, and where to go for answers point of view.

d.  Additional impediments from a market perspective are the
militancy of the anti-farming and agricultural groups
sponsoring activities like ``Meatless Mondays,'' and all of
the various methods used to portray agriculture as cruelty
to animals. This point alone is directly counter to
national food security through protein diversity (type,
location, processing methods, etc) and should be considered
as a national priority. Crop and protein diversity should
be given a higher priority with respect to their
integration into the National Security and National
Military Strategies.

9. National food security can also be enhanced (in my opinion) by
leveraging the VA system as a means of surveillance of rural America
for detection of domestic or foreign bioterrorist activity. I think the
more means of detection and monitoring we have for food born illness,
the safer we and our food supply are. Additionally, some sources cite
as high as nine of the top ten bioterrorist sources as risks that can
come to us through the targeting of our farms. Since we don't enough
veterinarians, I think a logical use of Federal training and support
funding would be to the VA and rural American farmers which, together,
would be the vanguard in mitigating or at least identifying exposure to
these risks.
Attachment
So, You Want to Be a Farmer *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* http://smallfarms.cornell.edu/2015/10/05/so-you-want-to-be-a-
farmer/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By John Lemondes

A veteran shares the challenges of beginning a farm.

Before making the decision to become a ``farmer,'' ``agricultural
producer,'' or ``grower,'' there are many things that should be
considered. This is a decision that cannot be taken lightly, because
like many vocations, farming is more than a job or career; it's a way
of life. If that way of life isn't cherished, you won't be successful,
because the lifestyle tradeoffs are too numerous and will result in
conflict. For me, after a military career in which the U.S. Army was at
war for nearly 25 of my 27 years in service, I needed a more peaceful
life.
My journey began 4 decades ago growing up in Onondaga County.
During this period, I developed a deep love for all things outdoors. My
very first job was as a fruit picker; I had just completed fifth grade
and learned from a very young age about farm labor. In high school, I
briefly worked on a farm and liked it, further solidifying my love for
the outdoors. However, I had a dilemma to work through. My father,
three uncles, and most of the other male members of my family were
veterans. Their sacrifices and positive impact on our country (a
pharmacist, doctor, chef, and business owners) weighed heavily on me,
so I ultimately decided I had a debt to pay to our country.
For my wife, who grew up as an Army brat, the closest she ever got
to a farm was the grocery store. When I graduated from The Pennsylvania
State University (PSU) in 1987 with a BS in Agricultural Science, I
became a commissioned Army officer. From PSU I went straight into the
Army, putting my dreams of being a landowner on hold for an
undetermined period of time. Then, as a senior officer the decision to
leave the service boiled down to:

1.  Our children were paying the bill for my career. Upon retiring
and moving to NY, our then 4 and 8, and 13 year old had
been in three schools in three states.

2.  In the Army, we continued to put on hold any personal lifestyle
dreams and goals,

3.  I wanted to run for U.S. Congress in my local district (NY 24).
The military had given me considerable leadership and
business experience that I thought could benefit NY state
and our community.
Specific Challenges
After my wife and I decided to buy a farm, it took 2 years of
dedicated searching to actually find one. This is the first major
challenge to anyone considering farming. Simple land access is a major
impediment. Although some may be lucky and receive land through the
estate or gifting processes, most do not. We experienced land
acquisition through the school of hard knocks. Although I can only
speak of our experiences, I have heard others say the same thing: that
this is perhaps the single greatest challenge to farming. After
applying the criteria which met our needs, most properties wouldn't
work, which further challenged us.
Moreover, buying a farm is not like buying a home; we've bought and
sold several homes and it is comparatively easy. Everything you thought
you knew doesn't apply. This became our most difficult challenge. We
cycled through four agents before finding one that had rural and
agricultural land experience. They'll all tell you they do, but it's
not easy to find those who really know their stuff. However, once you
do, it is time well spent. In fact, the saving grace to our whole
experience was our real estate agent. We would have never been able to
navigate the process without her knowledge. We are farmers thanks to
her. Bottom line, looking for and purchasing a farm is significantly
more stressful for first time buyers than ``fee simple'' residential
real estate.
Once we found the farm we wanted, we were introduced to the next
major, yet unknown obstacle; financing. In fact, we almost lost it
because of the arduous finance process. After several dozen phone calls
to banks and equivalent lending institutions, we found one that was
willing to help us realize our dream; only to find in the eleventh hour
that they were reversing their decision because we had no farming
experience. This chicken and egg situation is something we've found
replaying itself time and again especially with attempts to secure cost
share grant funding.
Somewhere along the way, we were introduced to Farm Credit East
(FCE)
(https://www.farmcrediteast.com/), which saved the day for us. They
were prepared to deal with and accept the exact criteria and situations
that sent the other traditional banks running. I knew nothing of FCE
prior to our farm acquisition, but am a huge fan. Without them, we
would be in a cul-de-sac somewhere. Their business model, product mix
and most importantly, flexibility, is unique.
After Occupation Surprises
In our eighteenth month on our farm, we are realizing that there
are many more unanticipated challenges. One of the greatest, in spite
of the generally favorable economic conditions in NYS for agriculture,
is the tax burden. After forming an LLC in our first few months, buying
our livestock, starting to turn fallow ground back into production, and
replacing broken, missing, or otherwise unacceptable fencing, we still
can't get an agricultural tax assessment reduction because we didn't
meet the income threshold of $10K. So, when you need extra cash the
most, in the beginning phase of a start up in order to grow the
business, you are instead taxed until you can generate $10K per year
for 2 consecutive years.
The money we've paid in extra tax burden could have been used to
buy equipment (we have none and have been renting), pay an employee or
two (our business is run by sweat equity), and develop a website and
marketing materials. Bottom line, access to capital and tax policy are
significant barriers to entering agriculture. We, like many others, had
to make a hard yes/no decision and accept the realization that if we
wanted to farm, we would have to first acquire land and deal with
everything else, over time, as we could.
I can't say enough how important having funding to fuel your start
up farm operation is. Although there are many grant and funding
opportunities advertised, I would have been essentially better off by
not spending the time to apply for them and instead simply using the
time for more general labor. The documentation burden is so immense
that we simply can't allocate 4-5 days of labor consolidating every tax
return and financial statement of our lives up to this point on the
``whim'' of maybe getting a few thousand in funding. So, if you want to
farm and are starting from scratch, be prepared for an uphill battle.
Without external jobs, we could not finance an agricultural business
startup.
Additionally, simple business risk is a huge potential impediment
for new agricultural operations. Recent legislation attempting to
require farmers to pay overtime to farm workers, house them in homes
with exorbitant standards (unsure if the home we live in would qualify)
in addition to significant wage increase requirements have solidified
our decision to grow more slowly and not hire anyone until we
absolutely cannot handle the workload anymore. Although this
legislation was defeated, I am sure it will be back and if passed, will
result in significantly higher food prices; thus exacerbating entry
barriers.
Legislative attempts to regulate farming like manufacturing will
never work. Livestock, crops and other agricultural endeavors require
what they need, when they need it, as determined by the weather,
seasons and market forces, not an 8 hour industrial time clock.
Therefore, with respect to farming, it is critical to be ``plugged in''
so that you know what is going on politically. We accomplished this by
becoming NY Farm Bureau members.
Next, I enrolled in a Cornell Farm Risk Mitigation course, which
was invaluable. As a result, I was able to immediately identify and fix
several risk factors which we had not recognized as such. Although at
the time I went to the course, I didn't realize it, in a few short
months, the knowledge gained would become critical.
As with any agricultural endeavor, weather itself is a significant
risk factor, which we experienced first-hand in Dec. 2014 after losing
a barn to snow load. In the wake of the epic storm, we received just
under 36" of heavy wet snow in about 24 hours. This paralyzed
everything, and we were the first of many in our area to lose
infrastructure. welcome to farming! However, thanks to the Cornell
course, we had two degree and tertiary emergency action plans that we
had developed and implemented. This was unpleasant; however, the
preparation made it tolerable.
Recommendations
Often overlooked are the fringe benefits of living on a farm.
Things as simple as fresh air, limited noise, few if any ``neighbor''
problems and issues to contend with and the freedom of space.
Additionally, the simple pleasure of knowing your feeding other people,
growing your own food to the extent you desire, and having a happy dog
that has space to run are all aspects that can be forgotten amidst the
pressure of harvest and maintenance cycles; but shouldn't be! We make
it a point to remind ourselves how lucky we are to live were we do and
to be responsible caretakers of land in our local community.
Moreover, as we look back and think from a lessons learned
perspective about what we did that really enabled us to get underway
quickly, it boils down to:

1.  Get involved in every professional training and educational
aspect of your farm's products. For me, that meant
attending many Cornell Small Farm (http://
smallfarms.cornell.edu/) lectures and symposium's,
attending the Howard Wyman Sheep Industry Leadership School
(http://www.nlfa-sheep.org/leadership.html) (Sponsored by
the National Lamb Feeder Association), attending an
American Sheep Industry Association professional wool
classing school and finding people and opportunities where
you could work in your intended field to gain fast,
relevant experience in order to decrease ``learning curve''
trial and error. For my family, we spent almost a week on a
commercial ranch in Montana where we worked under
supervision to learn necessary husbandry skills;

2.  Establish networking opportunities by joining the pertinent
organizations in your area related to your operation (like
the Farm Bureau). We did this as a means to meet people,
who then helped us reduce our learning curve challenges.

3.  Be flexible. You'll experience many, many ``gray area'' decision
points where you'll have to make critical decisions with
out all the information. As a veteran, I am comfortable in
that realm because I've spent nearly my entire adult life
operating in that space.

4.  For other veteran families like ours, I think doing all of the
above over a period of 3 years prior to retirement or
separation would significantly decrease start up time. In
our case, we had to wait because we weren't exactly sure
where we were going to live; however, the sooner you can
start connecting to the people and organizations that
you'll be working with for the rest of your lives, the
better!
Summary
Although it takes time and money to start an agricultural
operation, it is well worth it. From our perspective as a family it has
been great, despite the challenges and in light of the macroeconomic
issues facing NYS. Nonetheless, agriculture in NY is a great industry
and probably has its brightest days ahead thanks to proactive policies
from the governor. We experienced several major obstacles that would
have undoubtedly caused many people to quit, but with understanding and
preparation have made us more resilient. In the end, the last and
perhaps most important point I want to make is that in all things worth
pursuing, there will be obstacles which in order to be successful, must
be dealt with. In order to deal with setbacks, you have to be
persistent. Persistence in and of itself is probably the most
discriminating attribute for success in any agricultural endeavor.

COL (Ret.) John Lemondes served all over the U.S. and world
in his military career from 1987 to 2014. He and his wife,
Martha and their three children live on their farm in
Lafayette, NY (Elly's Acres Farm) named in honor of their
oldest child who is severely disabled.

The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel. Colonel Chastain?

STATEMENT OF COL CINDY CHASTAIN, (RET.), U.S. ARMY;
VETERAN OUTREACH COORDINATOR, NATIONAL AgrAbility PROJECT, WEST
LAFAYETTE, IN

Ms. Chastain. Good morning, Chairman Conaway, and Members
of the Committee, staff, and guests. It is an honor to be
invited here today to talk about the USDA AgrAbility program.
One of AgrAbility's goals is to enhance the capacity of
veterans, especially those with either invisible or visible
disabilities so they can contribute to America's food security.
I was raised on an Indiana farm, graduated with an ag
degree, and at the same time, received my commission. My last
assignment before retiring was a year-long deployment to
Afghanistan as part of an agribusiness development team for the
Indiana National Guard. Working with Afghan farmers and members
of our team encouraged me and reinforced my belief that I
needed to move back to the family farm. Retired in 2010, I
moved back to the family farm, and eventually came to work for
the AgrAbility program as their Veterans Outreach Coordinator.
I am also the President of our family farm, Chastain Farms
Incorporated, a corn and soybean farm in Indiana. It has been
in my family for eight generations.
AgrAbility is the only program dedicated specifically to
aid those with disabilities to thrive in agriculture, and this
year it is celebrating its 25th year of service to America's
agricultural producers. The program, administered by USDA's
National Institute for Food and Agriculture, has grown to
include a National AgrAbility Project which is located at
Purdue University, 20 funded state projects, and several
affiliated unfunded state projects. Over the past 25 years,
AgrAbility has served hundreds of veterans who almost, without
exception, didn't want a parade but rather simply wanted the
opportunity and a little technical support to do what they
love: work the land, grow things, and feed their communities.
Many found that agriculture was not only a means of sustaining
themselves, but also a path to recovering some of what was lost
or damaged during their military and combat experiences.
Our mission statement is to enhance the quality of life for
farmers, ranchers, and other agricultural workers with
disabilities so that they, their families, and their
communities continue to succeed in rural America.
To accomplish our mission, AgrAbility's staff provide
direct on farm assessments and services to assess the need for
technologies and other modifications that can keep our clients,
veterans, active in agriculture. Over the past 3 years, the
AgrAbility program has made a concerted effort to reach out to
veterans, especially those with disabilities. We are doing this
by organizing workshops, promoting new or existing resources to
veterans, conducting webinars for rehabilitation professionals,
and just raising awareness of programs out there to help
veterans.
Several of our state AgrAbility projects have partnered
with the farmer veterans to start state chapters of the Farmer
Veteran Coalition, and also promote the Homegrown by Heroes
initiative that brands agricultural products produced by
veterans.
Measuring the success of our program can be difficult and
expensive, but several indicators suggest a high return on the
investments being made by USDA and the AgrAbility Program. A
study by Colorado State University found that those who
received on farm visits and follow up assistance demonstrated a
significant enhancement in their quality of life scores.
In addition to my involvement with veteran programs within
AgrAbility, I am also involved with USDA's Beginning Farmer
Rancher Development Program. In this capacity, I have the
opportunity to host several workshops and farm tours. Through
these experiences, I have come to several personal conclusions.
First, land acquisition and financing opportunities are the
largest hurdles to the beginning farmer veteran. Many
transitioning veterans don't have the opportunity like I did to
return home to the family farm and inherit the land and
equipment that goes along with that. Second, most veterans who
attend our training are interested in small acreage farming,
not large production agriculture; third, farming, whether
working with animals or growing crops, is therapeutic to those
suffering from the common disabilities of wartime service, such
as post traumatic stress or traumatic brain injuries; and
fourth, many AgrAbility clients feel that they need to farm. It
is that strong a calling. I have heard farmer veterans say that
farming saved their lives and often reduced their reliance on
other things such as drugs and alcohol to cope with their
issues.
With the estimated dearth of farmers to take this country
into the next 20 or 30 years, we need veterans to consider
careers in agriculture. I also take pride in the observation
that a significant number of farmer veterans are not only
giving back to their communities by providing food, they are
also giving back to their fellow veterans. Many have
established nonprofit organizations and are training,
mentoring, hiring, and encouraging other veterans in their
desire to farm.
I encourage the Members of this Committee to continue
supporting the efforts of the USDA AgrAbility Program, and
consider how its services can be expanded to the 30 states that
do not currently receive USDA funding. As a veteran and a
farmer, and now as a provider of AgrAbility services, I am
keenly aware of the benefits this program had on the lives of
many farmer veterans, including my own.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of COL Chastain follows:]

Prepared Statement of COL Cindy Chastain, (Ret.), U.S. Army; Veteran
Outreach Coordinator, National AgrAbility Project, West Lafayette, IN
Chairman Conaway, Members of the Committee, staff and guests, it is
a pleasure and honor to be invited here today to testify about the
contributions that the USDA AgrAbility Program has made, and continues
to make, to enhance the capacity of veterans, especially those with
either visible or invisible service-related disabilities, to contribute
to America's food security.
My name is Cindy Chastain. I was raised on an Indiana farm,
graduated from Purdue University with an agriculture degree, and at the
same time, received my commission in the Army. My goals then included
getting as far away from our Indiana farm as possible, so joining the
Army helped me accomplish that mission. However, sometime during the
next 30+ years of my military career, I came to the conclusion that I
couldn't wait to get back to my rural Indiana community and farm. My
last assignment before retirement was a year-long tour of duty in
Afghanistan as part of an Indiana National Guard Agribusiness
Development Team. Working with Afghan farmers and members of the team
on agricultural projects further reinforced my desire to return to the
farm. I retired in 2010, moved back to the family farm and eventually
went to work as the Veteran Outreach Coordinator for the USDA National
AgrAbility Project hosted at Purdue University. I am also currently the
President of Chastain Farms, Inc., a corn and soybean farm that has
been in my family for eight generations. My husband and I also operate
our own small hobby farm near the family farm.
I came to the AgrAbility project less than 2 years ago and prior to
that, had not even heard of the program. However, one of AgrAbility's
predecessors, the Breaking New Ground Resource Center within the
Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering at Purdue has
been working since 1979 to provide technical assistance to farmers,
ranchers, other agricultural workers, and their families who have been
impacted by disability and still desire to remain engaged in
agricultural production. This mission was carried out as part of
Purdue's Cooperative Extension Service and was from its beginning,
national in scope. Many of the first clientele of this program were
veterans who had come home to their farms and rural communities with
service-related disabilities.
One early client was a disabled World War II Navy veteran who was
expanding his New York dairy operation to include blueberry production
and needed better ways to improve his mobility both around the dairy
farm and blueberry patch. Another client was a Korean War veteran who
was trying to find easier ways to accommodate the use of his prosthetic
leg in completing farm chores, especially getting on and off his
tractor. One early collaborator with the program was Butch Robbins from
North Carolina who came back from Vietnam with both legs missing above
the knees and an arm amputation at the shoulder after stepping on a
land mine. He eventually became a successful custom hay producer,
baling tens of thousands of bales of hay annually for his neighbors.
Among the veterans the program has recently served is a former Air
Force nurse who had served a tour of duty in Iraq, returning with post-
traumatic stress. Through encouragement and consultation, she has
already earned organic certification for her farm and is continuing to
diversify her operation.
Over the past 37 years, the Breaking New Ground Resource Center has
served hundreds of veterans, who almost without exception, didn't want
a parade, but rather simply wanted the opportunity--and a little
technical support--to do what they loved: work the land, grow things
and feed their community. Many found that agriculture was not only a
means of sustaining themselves, but also a path to recovering some of
what was lost or damaged due to their military and combat experiences.
In the 1990 Farm Bill, the Breaking New Ground Outreach Program was
used as a model to establish the USDA Technical Assistance Program for
Farmers with Disabilities. This program, now known as AgrAbility, is
this year celebrating 25 years of service to America's agricultural
producers. The program, administered by USDA's National Institute for
Food and Agriculture, has grown to include a National AgrAbility
Project located at Purdue University, 20 funded state AgrAbility
Projects, and several affiliated, unfunded state projects.

As our mission statement says:

The vision of AgrAbility is to enhance quality of life for
farmers, ranchers, and other agricultural workers with
disabilities, so that they, their families, and their
communities continue to succeed in rural America. For this
target audience, ``success'' may be defined by many parameters,
including: gainful employment in production agriculture or a
related occupation; access to appropriate assistive technology
needed for work and daily living activities; evidence-based
information related to the treatment and rehabilitation of
disabling conditions; and targeted support for family
caregivers of AgrAbility customers.

The program has worked vigorously for the past 25 years to help
make rural America and rural employment opportunities more accessible
and accommodating to persons with disabilities. As with the Breaking
New Ground Resource Center, this effort has been carried out through
the Cooperative Extension Service, which has offices covering every
county in the U.S., and in partnership with a wide range of like-minded
organizations such as Goodwill Industries, Easter Seals, the Arthritis
Foundation, federally funded rural centers for independent living,
state vocational rehabilitation agencies, and the Veteran's
Administration.
To accomplish its mission, AgrAbility staff members provide direct,
on-farm services to assess the need for technologies and other
modifications that can keep our clients active in agriculture.
AgrAbility has also collaborated with manufacturers and fabricators of
assistive technology to develop new devices that enable farmers and
ranchers to accomplish tasks that had become impossible or difficult
after experiencing a disability. One fabricator, Life Essentials of
Brookston, Indiana has now completed over 2,000 modifications to
tractors, combines, skid loaders, and other agricultural equipment for
use by farmers and ranchers who have experienced spinal cord injuries,
amputations, strokes, and other physical disabilities. The National
AgrAbility Project has also developed an extensive database of
assistive technology for agricultural workers known as The Toolbox,
which is available online to a world-wide audience
(www.agrability.org).
Over the past 3 years, with generous financial support from the CHS
Foundation of Minnesota, and in collaboration with the Farmer Veteran
Coalition and other veteran organizations, the AgrAbility Program has
made a concerted effort to reach out to veterans, especially those with
service-related disabilities. Staff members come alongside veterans and
build meaningful relationships, an approach that is in harmony with the
spirit and history of the Cooperative Extension Service. They provide
assistance, without engendering dependency, to assist clients in
exploring strategies that will enable them to return to farming or
become successfully engaged in agriculture as beginning farmers. This
has been accomplished by organizing workshops specifically for
veterans, promoting existing resources to veterans through the National
AgrAbility website (www.agrability.org), conducting webinars for
rehabilitation professionals on working with returning disabled
veterans who want to farm, and raising the awareness of rural lending
agencies and rural community leaders on the importance of ensuring that
veterans have access to the same resources needed by all farmers to be
successful. Events have included training tracks at our annual National
AgrAbility Workshops for both farmer veterans and AgrAbility staff to
help them provide more effective services to veterans. In addition to
AgrAbility's efforts, workshops have been conducted in many states
around the country for female veterans engaged in agriculture, new and
beginning farmer veterans, and those interested in organic and
sustainable farming practices.
Measuring the success of this type of program can be difficult and
expensive, but several indicators suggest a high return on the
investments being made by USDA in the AgrAbility Program. A review of
65 AgrAbility clients in Indiana who received collaborative services
from AgrAbility and the Indiana Department of Vocational Rehabilitation
beginning in 2006, found that 10 years later, 61 are still engaged in
agriculture, living on the same farm, and receiving all or part of
their income from agricultural production. A study by Colorado State
University has found that AgrAbility clients who received on-farm
visits and follow-up assistance from AgrAbility staff demonstrate a
significant enhancement in their quality of life scores using standard
assessment tools. Success is also communicated through the comments
made by AgrAbility clientele when surveyed. One veteran from Vermont
stated:

I ended up linking up with people of AgrAbility, and that has
been really wonderful because it's not just working with
veterans. [It's] working with people who have disability, all
types of disabilities, and they all had different types of
backgrounds. And they are all farming different things . . .
And it's amazing to me that that this project has gotten people
to continue their livelihood how it was before you know . . .
And I am very honored to be able to work in the fields and
knowing that there are all these groups and organizations who
were working every day to make efforts to see to it that people
can farm, that veterans can farm.

Another veteran farmer from Missouri responded to the question,
`What AgrAbility means to me' with:

I would say to any farmer that has not experienced
AgrAbility, you need to get up, open your eyes and take a look.
AgrAbility has helped every farmer that I have spoken to
tremendously and make them proud. So if you haven't seen
AgrAbility, it will put a smile on your face, all those
negatives that say you can't do that, through AgrAbility and a
little will of [your own], you will go a long way.

Some of the initiatives for veterans that we are currently working
on within the AgrAbility program include a video production titled,
``The Next Mission'', which incorporates interviews with farmer
veterans and emphasizes transition difficulties, the therapeutic
aspects of farming and the available resources. In addition, several of
our state AgrAbility projects have partnered with farmer veterans to
start state chapters of the Farmer Veteran Coalition and also promote
the ``Homegrown by Heroes'' initiative that brands agricultural
products as produced by veterans.
In addition to my involvement with veteran programs within the
AgrAbility program, I am also involved in Indiana's USDA Beginning
Farmer Rancher Development program as well as the Farmer Veteran
Coalition's Beginning Farmer Rancher Development initiative. In this
capacity, I've had the opportunity to host several workshops and farm
tours for beginning farmer veterans. These workshops and those offered
by other AgrAbility state programs are usually filled to capacity. I'm
always amazed at the numbers of veterans or even those currently still
in an active military duty status that are planning to farm.
Through these experiences, I've come to several personal
conclusions.

(1)  Land acquisition and financing opportunities are the largest
hurdle to the beginning farmer veteran. Many transitioning
veterans do not have the opportunity to return back to the
family farm and inherit the land and equipment that
generally goes along with that.

(2)  Most veterans that we work with come from rural communities,
were familiar with the farm life, and at some point decided
that that's the life they wanted.

(3)  Most veterans who attend our training are interested in small
acreage farming, not large production agriculture.

(4)  Farming, whether working with animals or growing crops in the
soil, is therapeutic to those suffering from the common
disabilities of wartime service, such as post-traumatic
stress and/or traumatic brain injuries.

(5)  Many AgrAbility clients feel that they NEED to farm; it's that
strong a calling. I've heard farmer veterans say that
farming saved their lives and often reduced their reliance
on drugs and alcohol to cope with their issues. That's not
something that is said of many career choices.

With the estimated dearth of farmers to take this country into the
next 20 to 30 years, we Need veterans to consider careers in
agriculture. And, I also take pride in the observation that a
significant number of farmer veterans are not only giving back to their
communities by providing food; they are also giving back to their
fellow veterans. Many have established nonprofit organizations and are
training, mentoring, hiring, and encouraging other veterans in their
desire to farm.
I encourage the Members of this Committee to continue supporting
the efforts of the USDA AgrAbility Program and consider how its
services can be expanded to the 30 states that do not currently receive
USDA funding, including some of the nation's most important
agricultural states such as Iowa, Minnesota, New York, Florida, Oregon,
Alabama, and Washington. As a veteran and a farmer, and now as a
provider of AgrAbility services, I am keenly aware of the benefits this
program has had on the lives of many farmer veterans, including my own.
Thank you.

The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel. Staff Sergeant Grandon, 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF SSG ERIC GRANDON, (RET.), U.S. ARMY; OWNER/
OPERATOR, SUGAR BOTTOM FARM, OVAPA, WV; ON BEHALF OF WEST
VIRGINIA WARRIORS; VETERANS TO
AGRICULTURE PROGRAM

Mr. Grandon. Good morning, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Peterson, and Members of the Agriculture Committee. My name is
Eric Grandon, owner/operator of Sugar Bottom Farm in Ovapa,
West Virginia. It is an honor and a privilege to be here with
you today. I am testifying today on behalf of West Virginia
Warriors and Veterans to Agriculture Program.
Americans have a longstanding tradition of service in the
armed forces of the United States. Many veterans suffer from
physical and emotional afflictions and are often unable to find
gainful employment upon returning from combat. Exploring
opportunities to engage our nation's veterans in agriculture is
beneficial to the health and welfare of veterans, as well as to
the future of America's agricultural economy.
The mission of the West Virginia Veterans to Agriculture
Project is to actively recruit and train military members and
veterans in agriculture and agriculture related business. We
will grow a new generation of farmers, agribusiness leaders,
and develop meaningful careers through the collaboration of
Federal, state agencies, public and private resources in order
to help our veterans achieve success in agriculture. We believe
that empowering our veterans in small agribusiness
opportunities will also provide more access to food for our
citizens in areas that have food access issues, like those
found in food deserts and rural communities. We will accomplish
this by connecting our veterans to opportunities and nurture
that connection for success. We believe that our veterans and
members of the National Guard and Reserves possess the unique
skills, patience, leadership, and the character needed to
strengthen rural communities with agribusiness opportunities
plus create a natural, sustainable, and safe food system for
all. In addition, we have cases to prove that farming and
agriculture offers a life with purpose and remarkable physical
and psychological benefits. We work directly with organizations
and programs that assist in the current physical and
psychological needs of our disabled veterans. This program
allows for access to the full benefits of agriculture therapy.
Our primary goal is to grow a new generation of farmers,
but we also do our part to help our veterans, and those
currently serving members of the military in transition from
the battlefield to home, using the unique value that
agriculture holds.
Five years ago I suffered a horrific flashback that left me
totally disabled with PTSD. For 2 years I wandered my property
aimlessly not looking forward to tomorrow. That is when James
McCormick, Director of West Virginia Warriors and Veterans to
Agriculture Program found me and recommended I give farming a
try. For the first time in 2 years, I had a mission. I tilled a
meadow for 3 weeks and planted a crop of sweet sorghum for our
state's molasses festival. My crop failed miserably, but I got
my life back. I am now a third year farmer and have built a
small commercial vegetable farm that serves four county school
systems through the USDA's Farm to School program. I can
honestly say that agriculture has saved my life and now I am
looking forward to tomorrow and the day after that. This
program works and it can work in any state. Five years ago I
could barely sit in a room with my family, and today I sit here
in front of you.
What can be done to help our veterans in agriculture?
First, assign funds to the USDA in the form of a matching grant
that will be available to states' governments that
legislatively establishes a Veteran to Agriculture project that
can be used to staff, operate, and support Veterans to
Agriculture Program in each state, using the West Virginia
Veterans to Agriculture project as a model. Continue support of
the position in the USDA that Lenon Bacon currently holds. This
has, by far, been a great benefit having a fellow veteran in
the USDA at the top level to give us a voice to the Secretary.
Third, utilize the Farmer Veterans Coalition as a model for
national outreach with the Homegrown by Heroes marketing plan.
Encourage the voluntary development of nonprofit chapters in
every state that will assist in marketing and access to small
startup grants that would work in tandem with each
legislatively established State Vets Ag Program. Fourth,
support a veterans agriculture therapy project. This was
suggested by Senator Shelley Moore Capito last month, shortly
after her visit to our veterans' apiary project in Hedgesville,
West Virginia. I feel that this was an eye-opening experience
for all that clearly shows the value of agriculture for the
rehabilitation, in particular as it relates to PTSD.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of SSG Grandon follows:]

Prepared Statement of SSG Eric Grandon, (Ret.), U.S. Army; Owner/
Operator, Sugar Bottom Farm, Ovapa, WV; on Behalf of West Virginia
Warriors; Veterans to Agriculture Program
Good morning Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members
of the Committee. My name is Eric Grandon, owner/operator of Sugar
Bottom Farm in Ovapa, West Virginia. It is an honor and a privilege to
be here with you today. I am testifying today on behalf of West
Virginia's Warriors and Veterans to Agriculture Program.
Americans have a longstanding tradition of service in the armed
forces of the United States. Many veterans suffer from physical and
emotional afflictions and are often unable to find gainful employment
upon returning from combat. Exploring opportunities to engage our
nations veterans in agriculture is beneficial to the health and welfare
of veterans, as well as to the future of America's agricultural
economy.
The mission of the West Virginia Veterans to Agriculture project is
to actively recruit and train military members and Veterans in
agriculture and agriculture related business. We will grow a new
generation of farmers, agribusiness leaders, and develop meaningful
careers through the collaboration of Federal, state agencies, public
and private resources in order to help veterans achieve success in
agriculture.
We believe that empowering our veterans in small agribusiness
opportunities will also provide more access to food for our citizens in
areas that have food access issues like those found in food deserts and
rural communities. We will accomplish this by connecting our Veterans
to opportunities and nurture that connection for success. We believe
that our veterans and members of the National Guard and Reserves
possess the unique skills, patience, leadership, and the character
needed to strengthen rural communities with agribusiness opportunities
plus create a natural, sustainable, and safe food system for all.
In addition, we have cases to prove that farming and agriculture
offers a life with purpose and remarkable physical and psychological
benefits. We work directly with organizations and programs that assist
in the current physical and psychological needs of our Disabled
Veterans. This program allows for access to the full benefits of
agriculture therapy. Our primary goal is to grow a new generation of
farmers, but we also do our part to help our veterans, and those
currently serving members of the military in transition from the
Battlefield to home, using the unique value that agriculture holds.
We have eight Primary Objectives:

1.  Actively recruit Veterans, and members of the National Guard and
Reserves that have a sincere desire to start an agriculture
related business.

2.  Actively recruit Veterans, National Guard and Reserve members
that are currently operating an agribusiness and assist
them with growing their business through marketing,
mentoring, and cooperative agreements like those found in
the Minutemen Farmers' Cooperative and Farmers Veterans
Coalition.

3.  We maintain a list of Veteran farmers and agribusiness owners to
offer a Veteran specific brand to utilize for their
products and/or agribusiness related items that clearly
identifies them as a Veteran farmer or agribusiness owner.
Currently, we are partnered with the Farmers Veteran
Coalitions' Homegrown by Heroes program for marketing
veteran's products, services, and goods.

4.  Develop Memorandums of Understanding between local, state, and
Federal agencies to assist in the standup, operation, and
continued growth of the Veterans to Agriculture program.

5.  Designate property to offer Veteran farmers for agriculture
purposes. Offer these properties to Veterans at a yearly
affordable rate for the sole purpose of agribusiness
development, cooperative opportunity, and Agra-therapy
sites for Veterans in agriculture.

6.  Coordinate and establish certified Agriculture education programs
to allow veteran to utilize the GI Bill for programs that
will lead to either a certificate of proficiency, diploma,
apprenticeship or degree in agriculture.

7.  We work closely with the West Virginia Veterans Assistance,
National Guard, Federal and state agencies to offer
potential rehabilitation sites and technical assistance for
veterans, families, and members of our armed forces to
maximize the use of Agriculture based therapy programs.

8.  Create a program that is duplicable and share this program with
any state, territory, or agency to maximize the
availability of this resource to all veteran, military
members and families across the nation.

Five years ago I suffered a horrific flashback that left me totally
disabled with PTSD. For 2 years I wandered my property aimlessly not
looking forward to tomorrow. That is when James McCormick, Director of
West Virginia's Warrior and Veterans to Agriculture found me and
recommended I give farming a try. For the first time in 2 years I had a
mission. I tilled a meadow for 3 weeks and planted a crop of Sweet
Sorghum for our states Molasses festival. My crop failed miserable, but
I got my life back. I am now a third year farmer and have built a small
commercial vegetable farm that serves four county school systems
through the USDA's Farm to School program. I can honestly say that
agriculture has saved my life and now I'm looking forward to tomorrow
and the day after that. This program works and it can work in any
state. Five years ago I could barely set in a room with my family, and
today I sit here in front of you.

The Chairman. I thank our witnesses this morning for being
here, and the testimony. The chair would remind Members that
they will be recognized for questioning in the order of
seniority for Members who were here at the start of the
hearing. After that, Members will be recognized in order of
arrival, and I appreciate Members' understanding.
Again, I thank our witnesses for being here. Colonel Fant
mentioned that one percent defends our country, one percent
feeds our country. That means the other 99 percent don't know a
whole lot about either one of those noble endeavors. Could each
of you visit with us about things that you have seen in your
overseas assignment that affect food insecurity there, and
perhaps things that perhaps Americans take for granted in the
farming operations or production agriculture?
Colonel Fant, we will start with you.
Mr. Fant. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ultimately, it starts
with understanding what we have, and part of it takes getting
away from where we are to be able to appreciate for what we
have.
My first assignment was in West Germany and I lived in a
small town that was an agricultural town, and it was surrounded
entirely by fields growing crops. When you had a discussion
about how they developed their town or built a new house, it
always came back to can we make use of a lot that had already
been built on, rather than the sprawl taking up additional
farmland. It is an attitude thing in a lot of ways because of,
in our case we have a lot of land in this country and so it is
not readily apparent. But in Germany or other places that I
have been stationed, you begin to see the challenges associated
with what happens if you don't take into consideration the land
on which you are going to develop, and then the fact that it no
longer is being able to be used to grow what everyone needs,
which is food.
When I was stationed in South Korea, the impression I got
from that is we drove around through the rice paddies and all
the different little small farms, it was really subsistence
farming in most cases, but their approach was they had to make
use of every piece of land that was available in order to
sustain themselves and their family. I didn't get the
impression that it was a national effort to grow food, but it
was a requirement to grow food. And the climate there was such
that it supported growing rice as their grain, but what they
didn't grow, because they didn't have the land, was cattle. And
so they had to look at alternative ways to obtain protein.
Security, on the other hand, in Iraq and Afghanistan where
the real challenges there, the farmers wanted to farm but they
didn't necessarily have access to those fields.
So what those tours of duty showed me and helped me begin
to understand was the blessings that we have here, both from a
land standpoint and from a water standpoint. In Iraq, folks
lived along the Euphrates and the Tigress Rivers mostly because
they needed the water, and therefore, that is where the crops
were. You didn't see a lot of development away from those
rivers and trying to pump the water from those rivers, although
there are aqueducts around.
That is really where it begins is an appreciation for what
it is we have, and then the better understanding of if it goes
away, we are going to face some real challenges in feeding
ourselves.
The Chairman. Colonel Lemondes?
Mr. Lemondes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The most important
aspect of our policy is it is a critical diplomatic tool. You
can do a lot with food, and I really saw this firsthand in my
service on the Agriculture Committee when I attended the
Eisenhower School for National Resource Strategy. In that
spring the curriculum was divided in the fall with common core
leadership that all the war colleges take, but the spring term,
what makes the Eisenhower School different is it studies the
GDP. Each staff group takes one segment of our GDP and you do a
deep dive on domestic policy issues that are relevant and
pertain to what our agencies and industry need in that year,
and then you do the same thing internationally. When I traveled
to India, Thailand, and Vietnam, among others, those three
particular countries struck me the hardest with what we have,
although I already knew that from service in Afghanistan and
Iraq and all over the Middle East. I implicitly knew the
benefits that we have here, but when you go to countries where
real, no kidding poverty exists, unlike anything you could ever
imagine here, it really sets the stage for understanding how
critically important food is, food policy, the diplomacy of
food and water, and I just saw a lot that really made me thank
what we have, and protection of that is critical.
The Chairman. My time has expired. I will come back to the
other two witnesses at the end, so hold your answers.
Mr. Peterson, 5 minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. From all your
testimony, it seems that there are some great programs out
there for veterans, both publicly and privately funded.
I am just wondering, are there holes that need to be filled
between USDA and other Federal agencies, or anything that we
might be missing that we could do to improve the situation? If
each of you would address that.
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir, where the real opportunity lies is,
again, if you embrace this idea of mobilizing veterans to feed
America, then what I recall from my transition from the
military is that no one ever talked to us about the
opportunities in agribusiness. And it doesn't have to be about
production ag. There are a lot of opportunities, as you all
know, in agriculture to do a lot of things, but it all feeds
the main purpose, which is development and transportation of
food.
The real opportunity that exists, and we are making a lot
of headway with what USDA stood up with their veterans' liaison
officer and what the Farmer Veteran Coalition has been able to
do in educating those veterans. But, that is really the
opportunity. Before they transition out of the service, we have
to really spend some time educating them about the
opportunities, because once they are gone, it is much harder to
get them back. And that is where we can make a lot of headway
into this issue.
Mr. Peterson. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Chastain. USDA has just started a program where they
are working with DOD to get some agricultural training in their
TAP program, the Transition Assistance Program. It is just
beginning. I don't think it is an extensive piece of
information, but it is some to get to what John Fant said. It
encourages veterans to seek out agricultural workshops and
other things after they get out. But there is some training
that is planning to happen in the Transition Assistance
Program.
But I would also like to bring out that maybe the USDA is
also working with the VA, but maybe that could be encouraged a
little bit more. We know we don't want to talk about all the
issues of the VA, but I do think that there are some issues
with disabled veterans getting help in agriculture as a
possible career. So if a veteran is disabled, I don't even
think agriculture is on the list of possible career options for
those individuals. We want to encourage that. I think it is an
option.
Mr. Lemondes. If there is a means for the USDA to build on
the infrastructure that they have had and the momentum that
they have put behind this so far, that it would yield the
results that have just been mentioned. And specifically, if the
agencies that deal with farming and farmers, and I am talking
about the local agencies at the county level where the
execution of our farms takes place across the country, if they
were able to be better armed with information about veterans
and veterans in their district, in their counties, and know
what information, programs, education, et cetera is available
or potentially available, they might be able to be a filter to
screen and link resources with farms.
Whereas I found the same thing as Colonel Fant. My family
had zero knowledge to get from the Army during this transition
process, and we started in 2011 looking. It took from 2011 to
2013 to actually buy a farm and the capture of the farm was
the, as Cindy said, the land capture aspect was the most
difficult piece for many, many reasons, especially financing at
the top of the list. But nonetheless, if the people at NRCS,
FSA, et cetera, et cetera, had more information, keep in mind,
this is from a layman's perspective of my interactions with
them thus far. This may be provided already. I don't know for
sure that it is, because oftentimes when I ask questions, I get
the I will get back to you, or I don't know. If that
information could be pushed, accentuated, perhaps organized in
a fashion that they knew that, okay, I have 12 farms that are
veteran-owned in my district. Let me specifically look at when
I say resources, I don't mean just money. I mean anything
across the spectrum of ag commodities. But there may be things
that they can do to provide that link.
Just this morning, for example, I received an e-mail from
my FSA office reminding me to file my crop report, which I
haven't done yet. And that was great. That is an example of
this gal knows me, knows I am probably going to be late if she
doesn't remind me, and again, I can only speak to my state and
my county and my office. I don't know what the rest of the
country is like, but that is an example of something being done
really well.
The Chairman. Thank you, Colonel.
Mr. Lucas, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I believe, for a
moment, I would like to step back to the perspective that
Chairman Conaway was pursuing for just a moment ago, and
whoever on the panel would care to answer this.
But, one of you mentioned having been stationed, for
instance, in South Korea. Sometimes this Committee, in dealing
with food-related issues and supporting production agriculture
and processing, sometimes our biggest challenge here is much
what the men and women of the armed services face, and that is
the assumption in the general population of this country that
the food will always be there, that security will always be
there, that there will never be a threat on our shore. But the
mention made a moment ago about South Korea, isn't that an
example of that instability, not in South Korea but across the
border in North Korea where they face famines more years than
not? And it is not just North Korea. The price of corn
tortillas in certain parts of the Americas determines stability
of the government. Famines occur in Africa and certain parts of
Asia. Would anyone care to expand on how important that food
security issue is in preserving--yes, sir? Colonel.
Mr. Lemondes. Sir, I would thank you.
It is absolutely critical, and to your point of the general
population not understanding where their food comes from, how
it is made, how many touch points are on a head of lettuce
before it ends up in their sandwich. Same thing with any aspect
of agriculture. People do take it for granted, and they take it
for granted because of our level of overall security, in my
opinion. We are one of the richest countries in the world. Our
food is prevalent because of the way we are organized, and
perhaps because of geography we have the ability to have more
food, and we have cheap food. We have the cheapest food in the
world.
And so with all of that, we have set the stage ourselves
for the average person as over time as our economy has gone
from agrarian to industrial, we have set the stage for the
average person to be completely removed from the source of
their food, and I see that. We all see that every day.
Mr. Lucas. But there are places around the world where if
there is not enough to eat, the government will fall, society
will collapse. We have seen that in recent years.
Let me turn to a slightly different perspective. Colonel
Fant, you referred to the Conservation Reserve Program, and how
it assists landowners in resolving infrastructure issues. Could
you, or anyone on the panel, care to expand on the conservation
programs as they are now available to veterans and the
utilization rate and the challenges in particular there, if
there are challenges?
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir, the Conservation Reserve Program, or
CRP, it was available to any land owning farmer. As a veteran,
though, there are other programs out there that are specific
for socially disadvantaged populations. I haven't taken
advantage of those. The one that I have been using the most is
the CRP program and the Commonwealth of Virginia's Best
Management Practices Cost-Share. But what it allows you to do
is really to address some of the major concerns on the farm of
being able, I almost in some says now look at my farm as a
cattle prison, because I am tired of them being out on a rope.
But the real purpose of those programs is to protect our soil
and our water. What I have noticed through, and we have
probably built over the last 3 years, through these programs,
we are close to 50 miles of fence that we have built. And we
have restricted livestock access to the water, and the other
thing that we have done is we actually test our surface water;
if you don't measure it, you can't do anything about it. And so
we try to assess our quality of our surface water and whether
or not we are making a difference. And I can tell you that we
are making a difference through the use of restriction of the
livestock to the creeks.
And it is not so much about what I am doing on my farm, but
it is the effect that I am having on my farm on my neighbors
and the rivers and the--ultimately, the ocean. And so these
programs have allowed us to improve the use of my farm. It has
given me greater access to areas of my farm that I didn't have,
and it has enabled me to help me improve the quality of the
natural resources that I have on my farm.
So I hope that----
Mr. Lucas. I define that as a success, Colonel, and the old
adage about good fences make for good neighbors is still as
true today as it was centuries ago.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Scott, from Georgia, for 5 minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First
of all, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, for this
extraordinary hearing. It is very, very meaningful because our
veterans, our soldiers, and our farmers, that combination
provided the foundation of our country. The Revolutionary War
itself that got our country started was started by soldiers who
were farmers. Our country was sustained and kept together
through the Civil War by farmers and by soldiers. So I commend
you veterans and soldiers, for you all are truly the blood, the
sweat, and the tears of this great nation. I mean, you have so
much in common, farmers and veterans. You get up early in the
morning. You are incredibly disciplined. You have strong family
values, and you provide the backbone for this great nation.
And I want to know from each of you if you had to name two
things that we could do right now to help our veterans and our
soldier farmers, what would they be? We will start with you,
Colonel. I know some of you have mentioned the land prices, and
I certainly want to get into that, but specifically two things,
each of you.
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir. I was afraid you were going to ask me
to go first. The one that pops into my head is this idea that
we need to encourage and educate folks and try to defeat this
idea that you have to own land to farm. One of the challenges
that you always hear when you go to these conferences,
regardless if it is focused on veterans or not, of beginning
farmers, the challenge is access to land.
But a lot of times, and especially down where I live, when
you think about farming, they immediately think about beef
cattle. When they think about beef cattle, they think about the
large land requirement----
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Colonel, before you go any
further, it might be helpful to us if you have an idea, because
a lot of people may not know what the average price per acre of
land would be.
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir, it is different throughout the nation.
Before the crash in 2008, acre land where I am from in
southwestern Virginia, which is very rural and mountainous, was
going for about $8,000 an acre. Now after that, it is down
between $4,000 and $5,000. But as you go further out West where
the land might be more suitable for a different type of
agriculture, the price could be much higher than that, and
other places it could be even lower. So it really is
geographically driven, but where we are right now, if you are
buying land, farmland, pastureland, it is probably somewhere
between the $4,000 and $5,000 an acre, which is still a lot of
money for a beginning farmer.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Okay. Colonel Lemondes, my time
is up, but do you have anything to add to that, other than land
prices?
Mr. Lemondes. Sir, I would add greater role of the
Department of Defense in education of veterans, and in simply
understanding what agriculture is throughout the country. And
that would the first one and the most important because through
that, then as Colonel Chastain explained, the TAP program that
we all went through could actually have a section on farming,
and people could access that information long before their
retirement. I think that is critical.
As I said, our personal quest to farm started about 5 years
before retirement, and it was a bloody uphill fight all the way
to the end.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Colonel Chastain?
Ms. Chastain. One of the things I would like to see is the
encouragement of incubator farms. An incubator farm is a farm
where a veteran, and these incubated farms would be for
veterans, is a current farm that would allow a veteran to come
in for a very low price, rent some acreage, use the equipment
on that farm, get experience, have the mentors there to teach
them what they needed to do before they went out on their own
and possibly failed because they didn't have the background
that they needed. Incubator farms for veterans, if we could
encourage that somehow financially for current veterans to do
that program, it would be substantial benefit to the veterans.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Mr. Grandon?
Mr. Grandon. Yes, sir, to come back to that, our program
offers, we have two farms right now that are incubator farms
that were leasing out an acre of ground for $20 a year for
veterans to come in and train to be a farmer and to see if they
wanted to farm as a living. One of the greatest things is
education. We just have to get the word out. Two years ago, the
command team from the transition team from the Pentagon was at
my house, just to see if somebody could make it without any
experience whatsoever. Three years ago when I started my farm,
I knew absolutely nothing about farming. I had no background
whatsoever, and like I say, today, we have a small, successful
vegetable farm. It can be done, but the education is the key.
We have to get that out at the transition point, well before
the soldiers get out.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gibbs, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you all for
your service to our country.
Just a couple of thoughts, and then I have a question here.
But in your testimony you talked about price of land and
challenges and work you are doing with the disabled. Colonel,
of course, you had a farm to come back to in Indiana.
I have kind of a unique perspective on this, and not from
the service aspect, but I am a city kid who became a farmer,
and I have to tell you, it is a tough business, and you know
that. The military people, our veterans coming back, they have
some great discipline, as you said, that can fit in, but we
need to make sure that we are clear-eyed about this and not
down the wrong track. I see in my area in agriculture beginning
farmers, a lot of them don't own a whole lot of land. They
rent. So there are ways to do that, and there are also ways to
partner with landlords that now the baby boomers that are
getting out of it. So there are those opportunities.
But I also would comment that there are two things to think
about in the programs, and I support these programs to help the
veterans do this. This country owes quite a debt to our
veterans. We have to do all we can do, but I think there are
two things. I look at the colonels here. You are more senior in
age and you have more resources like the one said you hit your
retirement and so it is a little easier, but the veterans
coming out that served a couple tours of duty and are coming
out and they are in their late 20s, early 30s, they are
obviously in a different situation. We need to make sure those
programs are tailored to address them, because there are two
things going on here, and I think you agree with that. Because
as we know, the capital investment to get into farming we talk
about the land, we talk about the machinery.
And then the other thing I would mention before I ask a
question is there are really two types of farming operations in
general. You have your commodity production, you produce corn,
beans, hogs, beef, or you are going to be larger. I know in
testimony you talked about the average farm of 400 acres. That
is true, but if you are in commodity production, efficiency to
be able to afford the equipment and everything, we see the
farmers getting several thousand acres if they are grain.
But then there is the niche farming, the people that found
a niche, when the veterans groups are working with the FSA and
everything and the programs, you need to keep that all in
perspective.
Colonel Lemondes, I don't know how you say your name. Yes,
Lemondes. I read through this. There are a couple things that
kind of roared out at me, and the one statement you made, I
hope it is not true. I am sure it is true to some extent, but I
hope we are over that era we had back in the 1960s. But you
talked about being a veteran farmer and the concern about in
your community it is an uphill battle and being a vet might not
be a positive thing going, you said this in your testimony. And
I hope that is not the case. I hope that our people in rural
America have the utmost respect for our veterans on that part
of your testimony.
But I guess the impediments and you talk about the
biosecurity. That is where veterans understand. I was a hog
farmer and I understand the biosecurity needs and the risks we
have out there, and I think that the American consumers, I know
that they want their food to be homegrown as much as possible,
and they take it for granted, we know that, but they want it to
be homegrown.
The question to you: is how do you feel? Do you feel
comfortable about these programs that we are being honest to
the veterans that want to think about getting into agriculture
production, and so they know the realities that it is not a
guaranteed success? Anybody want to respond? I have only 45
seconds.
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir. I think that is why it is important,
and we have all hit on the idea of education. Whoever wants to
get into agriculture, we have to give them a realistic
experience of what it is like, but we also have to set the
conditions for them to be successful and I did make mention of:
maybe pay them a small stipend and a little bit of benefits,
because that is what young folks, the folks that are getting
out of the military, not retirees, are most worried about is
how they are going to support themselves and their family. If
we can do that and link them to a farm to do it, we can make
some significant progress.
Mr. Gibbs. Yes, go ahead, ma'am.
Ms. Chastain. A lot of beginning farmers continue to work
outside of the farm initially, especially the younger ones
work, either their spouse or they work outside of the farm
while they are beginning to mitigate some of the risks. And
then when they get profitable enough, they can quit those
outside jobs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you again. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. McGovern, for 5 minutes.
Mr. McGovern. Well thank you very much, and I want to thank
all of you for being here today. This has been very
informative. I know that the focus of today's hearing has more
to do with veterans' contributions to farming and agriculture,
and let me be clear: I think they are tremendous, and I support
USDA's efforts to encourage veterans to get into farming and to
support them throughout the process. I think you have all
articulated the many, many benefits to veterans who actually go
into farming. We certainly want to do everything we can to make
it easier for that to happen.
But I just want to take a moment to talk about veteran
hunger, which is something that doesn't get as much attention.
You have all talked about the importance of what happens on a
farm. You grow food, people need food, and you can deal with
issues of food insecurity that so many in this country face.
But right now, over 1.5 million veterans receive SNAP benefits
annually, and post-9/11 in particular, veterans experience food
insecurity at a rate almost double the average rate for non-
veterans. There is a discussion going on here about making it
more difficult for what we call able-bodied adults without
dependents to be able to continue on SNAP benefits if their
time limit has run out, and taking away states' abilities to
grant waivers. And one of the things people here don't
appreciate is that amongst that population of able-bodied
adults without dependents, a lot of them are veterans. Tens of
thousands of them are veterans, 60,000, at the last count,
might lose their benefits if Congress goes down this road. Some
of there people are dealing with issues of post traumatic
stress. Some of them are trying to get into a job training
program and can't find one, and some of them are trying to find
a job or readjust. Life is complicated, especially for
veterans. It can be very, very difficult to kind of
reintegrate.
We know that food insecurity also results in a lack of
access to healthy foods and we see an increase in diabetes and
heart disease and other things. Some people have been talking
about ways to incentivize and better connect veterans with
farmers' markets, to incentivize markets to be held at VA
clinics, double SNAP dollars at VA clinics so veterans can have
more purchasing power.
I would ask your opinion on what some have suggested that
include a basic screening for hunger at VA facilities. Would it
be beneficial to connect veterans with programs to help reduce
food insecurity? I would like to know your kind of experience
in dealing with veterans and food insecurity, and do you have
any suggestions on ways we might consider better connecting
veterans with food assistance? Any of you?
Mr. Grandon. One thing that we have done as a program, sir,
is we have identified some of those individuals and we have
taught them to grow their own food. One thing you can do is,
again, we go out and we actively recruit people. The idea you
had if there were farmers' markets at the VA hospitals or the
VA clinics is an excellent idea. We also have a farmers' market
in one of the National Guard armories that we do every week,
and that would be an excellent time to do the two times the
SNAP dollars and the program like that. But we have taught
several people to grow their own food. Even in an area as small
as this table, you can grow food.
Mr. McGovern. Yes, and I think that is a great idea. The
question is how do you expand that so that we reach the
population that it continues to grow?
I just think the notion that we have people in this country
who have served our country, put their lives on the line who
have difficulty in accessing food is something that is
unacceptable. And to the extent that veteran farmers can be
better connected to VA facilities or the places where veterans
are to be able to find ways to increase purchasing power to
veterans when it comes to their SNAP dollars, but certainly to
not cut them off of benefits that are essential to making sure
they get access to food.
This is a big issue, and I hope that if any of you guys
have any suggestions along the way, I hope that you share them
with this Committee because it is an issue that doesn't get
talked about nearly enough.
Mr. Grandon. Yes, sir, I agree, and right off the top of my
head, I don't have any experience with that issue, but I can
understand the problem. So I would love to work with your staff
to help work that problem.
Mr. McGovern. I look forward to it. Thank you. I yield back
my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Austin Scott, 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Colonel Chastain, I understand that most of the veterans
you work with come from rural communities, maybe were on the
farm, whether from a family that farmed or farmed on the farm
during summer in high school and before they went into the
military. What percentage of the people that you worked with
are totally new to the field?
Ms. Chastain. I don't have a percentage number to give you,
but if I was guessing, I would say around 50 percent are people
that have absolutely no experience farming. The other side is
those that grew up around it, maybe worked their summers doing
some farming things, or that came from a family farm. But I
would say about 50 percent have a desire to farm but have had
absolutely no experience. And maybe their first experience was
a backyard garden, and it grew from there. But yes, I am just
guessing at that amount, but I would say probably about 50
percent.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Really? Well thank you. That
is significantly higher than I would have thought it was.
Ms. Chastain. I am talking about veterans, too. That is
what I have observed.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, ma'am. What is the
average age of the veteran that you work with? Do you know
that, and years of service, maybe?
Ms. Chastain. I have a few Vietnam veterans, some older
that come to some of our programs, but we have younger ones
also. We have from 19 to probably in the mid to late 60s. So
the majority are younger, but there are some older veterans
that maybe inherited a piece of land or purchased a piece of
land after they retired from another job and want to start
farming now. There is quite a range.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. It seems it would be
significantly easier if you actually had the piece of land in
the family, and you knew that you had access to it and were
going to have access to it for a couple of years. That is
obviously one of the challenges for anybody getting started in
farming is we can invest the money in this piece of land, even
if we rent it, but if we don't know that we are going to have
it next year, it becomes a much, much different equation with
regard to whether or not you are able to turn that profit. You
can turn the dirt, but turning the dirt and turning a profit is
totally different in farming.
I want to ask, and you answered the majority of my
questions. Most of them have been asked already, Mr. Chairman,
but I will tell you that I don't believe that we as a country
are placing enough emphasis on the security of our food supply
and our agricultural industry as a whole that surrounds that
food supply. If we grow the crop and can't get it to market, we
are not doing anybody any good, including the farmer. But I am
interested in any comments any of you have about the security
of our food supply in the agricultural industry. Colonel
Lemondes? Did I get it right?
Mr. Lemondes. Yes, thank you. Very few people realize the
vulnerability that we face, especially in rural America, with
respect to bioterrorism, and the statistic is nine of the top
ten bioterrorist agents would be expected to come to us through
our farms and our food supply. And that is a daunting task. I
mean, these are things like brucellosis, anthrax, tularemia, et
cetera. If I am not mistaken, the only one that wouldn't is
smallpox.
So when you look at that, and from my perspective, the
infrastructure to protect that, as I said in my testimony, one
of the best ways to shore that up would be to use the VA system
as a vanguard for disease surveillance. And oftentimes, doctors
don't even know to look at zoonotic diseases among patients.
For example, when we take our kids to a hospital or to a doctor
in Syracuse, we tell them we have a farm because they may be
subjected to different things. Q fever is another one on that
list. There needs to be a lot more Federal emphasis primarily,
of course, state emphasis, but I think Federal because this our
food supply as a nation, and the way we are currently organized
to distribute our food supply, our supply chains are national
and that, in and of itself, poses a risk. We only have 3 to 5
days of food in our national food chain on any given day,
longer in the winter, shorter in the summer on that 3 to 5
days. And that is not a lot if there is a major disruption.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I appreciate your point,
especially the 3 to 5 days. That is something that most
Americans don't recognize.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remaining 19 seconds that I
am----
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Graham, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Graham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you so much
to the witnesses, and thank you, each of you, for your service.
I have the honor, as does Chairman Conaway, to serve on
both Armed Services and Agriculture. I found the opportunity to
serve on both of those an opportunity to develop good
legislation from talking with veterans across my district where
we can have the agencies coordinate together to help our
veterans enter the agriculture field. Congressman Yoho is not
here, my colleague from Florida. I represent the north part of
Florida which is the most rural in the entire state, and has a
lot of agriculture, and as I have traveled across the district,
and had an opportunity to talk to many veterans who have faced
significant challenges in terms of just wanting to get into
farming. And they want to be able to get into farming.
I remember a town hall essentially that we were having and
a veteran shared that if he could have one piece of equipment,
one piece of equipment, it would be a Bobcat, but the Bobcat
costs more than he could afford, even with some of the
opportunities that are provided to get assistance. And I asked
him, I said well in your service, did you ever use a Bobcat?
And he said yes, ma'am, even though I always want people to
call me Gwen, but I can't manage to do that. He said yes,
ma'am. I used a Bobcat to clear the runway in Iraq. And I
thought well, if that is the case, I wonder if there is
equipment that is sitting in some warehouse somewhere that
could be of use to our veterans and their dreams of farming.
And I am sorry, I am making a much longer statement than I
normally do, Mr. Chairman, but anyway, I wanted to give you all
some background to the legislation that Congressman Yoho and I
filed, and that was included in the National Defense
Authorization Act, at least the first steps.
Based on your experience, I would love to hear from you all
if you think a program such as that called the Ag Share
Program, would have been helpful as you entered the agriculture
field, specifically, Sergeant Grandon. And I was really
touched, as I know we all were, by your testimony. So would
this opportunity have been something that would have been
helpful to you?
Thank you. Sorry for such a long statement.
Mr. Grandon. Yes, ma'am, it would. I can't call you
anything but ma'am, actually in West Virginia, we have a
program like that now through our Veterans to Agriculture
Program. We have a partnership with the West Virginia
Department of Agriculture to use their equipment for veteran
farmers. It came to the point where I had already purchased the
equipment. I lost $47,000 on my farm last year, but I am a
third year farmer and I am still building infrastructure.
But for starting out, I would have much rather had an
opportunity to have equipment available and like I say, now we
do have that in place. So it is an excellent idea.
Ms. Graham. Do you know if the USDA is partnering with the
Department of Defense on that?
Mr. Grandon. I am not sure with that.
Ms. Graham. Okay. Well, we will follow up, because again,
it is often getting pieces together that are already present
and having them work more efficiently on behalf on the veteran
farmer.
Mr. Grandon. Right.
Ms. Graham. So we will follow up. And you are from West
Virginia?
Mr. Grandon. West Virginia. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Graham. Okay, thank you.
Does anyone else have a comment?
Ms. Chastain. Sure. Yes, ma'am. I think that is an awesome
idea. The request that I get most often are for small tractors
for beginning farmers, and utility vehicles for those that have
some sort of disability, which makes it hard for them to get
around their acreage. So those are things that are--and a
Bobcat would be awesome to beginning farmers and give them a
boost up, because a lot of them can't afford it.
Ms. Graham. That is exactly the thought behind the
legislation, so thank you.
Oh, yes, all in with this. I want to make sure I get your
name right. Colonel Lemondes?
Mr. Lemondes. Lemondes.
Ms. Graham. Lemondes. You mentioned something earlier that
you call the agencies and you hear, I will get back to you. Do
they get back to you?
Mr. Lemondes. Sometimes. And again, I put in my testimony,
my experience thus far, and keep in mind, I would call myself a
novice farmer at this point. We moved onto our farm in the end
of 2013 and it was an absolute mess. It is in five phases. We
had to start with reconstruction first in 2014 to rebuild the
house, and we are in stage three of a five phase plan.
But yes, they do get back to you sometimes, and as I said
earlier in a different remark today, I received an e-mail this
morning reminding me to file something, and this is from a
professional relationship that that person was looking out for
me. And that was favorable.
Ms. Graham. Well thank you. I am out of time, but let me
just say this. If a state agency or a Federal agency does not
get back to you, that is what we are here to do as your
Congressional Representatives. Call us and demand that we are
responsive to the citizens of this country, because we are
here, again, to serve the citizens and serve the veterans, not
vice versa. So call your Congressional Representative. I am
sorry to my friends in the room, but call them and say it is
unacceptable and have them reach out on your behalf.
So thank you. Thank you again for your service, and I yield
back the time I do not have.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Crawford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we have been talking, obviously there are some common
themes that come up as a barrier to entry into agriculture. If
you are a farm kid and you join the military, then maybe you
can go back to your family operation. Maybe you can't. Maybe
your parents were tenant farmers or maybe you just leave the
military with a dream and you say I want to be a farmer. So the
issues tend to be that barrier for entry with the access to
land and capital, pretty fair to say?
If I am asking you a question that you have already
considered then that is probably a good thing, but I have been
texting back and forth with our ag secretary, in Arkansas,
during this hearing who is also a veteran himself, and I tested
the idea of creating a veteran co-op to help facilitate the
access to capital and land. How does that idea strike you? Is
that viable? Sergeant Grandon, we will start with you.
Mr. Grandon. Yes, sir, that is something we have already
done in West Virginia and Ohio is to form, it is called the
Minuteman's Cooperative.
Mr. Crawford. Okay.
Mr. Grandon. And they have set aside about 800 acres for
training purposes. They are doing an apprenticeship program.
There is going to be an equipment exchange, and they have the
NRCS and the FSA involved with education. We have actually got
that up and started to roll now.
Mr. Crawford. Good. Any other thoughts, comments on that?
Colonel Chastain?
Ms. Chastain. I just would like to say that it is important
that veteran farmers create some kind of a network that they
can work together. Veterans, again, those that are suffering
from PTSD or other issues sometimes can't relate to the
community but they can relate to other veterans. And so
creating those network of farmer veterans that can rely on each
other is very important in a lot of ways. One is for financial
benefits, but also for just being able to advance.
Mr. Crawford. Excellent. Colonel Lemondes?
Mr. Lemondes. Sir, I would agree wholeheartedly. I think
any application that that could be executed in would be
helpful.
Mr. Crawford. Excellent. Colonel Fant, any comment?
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir, a couple things. One of the strengths
that the Farmer Veterans Coalition's efforts are in is towards
this effort of identifying the barriers to entry, and how do we
reduce them.
Ms. Graham was talking or Representative Graham was talking
about equipment. They have worked and partnered with Kubota to
try to provide equipment to veterans.
But I also think there is an opportunity to rethink how we
look at land. When we think about land access and again,
earlier I mentioned about there is a perception you have to own
the land, but I also do think, and this probably goes back to
my experience in South Korea where every piece of land was
being used for something productive.
So when you go around and you look at industrial parks or
schools or other areas that may traditionally have been
restricted, we may be able to then identify even edges of
parks. We may be able to identify land that is being under-
utilized that could be utilized specifically for a veteran to
be able to start a small farm.
So this idea, the mindset that we are in about accessing
land, we have to change that paradigm and start thinking about
what land is really available. And then when we start there it
opens up a whole lot more doors.
Mr. Crawford. Do you envision, Sergeant Grandon, you
mentioned your co-op model and you mentioned NRCS as one agency
that was helpful in that. What other role could the Federal
Government play in facilitating that? And I will be honest with
you. I would like to minimize the Federal role and let the
states be the primary drivers of this, but obviously, USDA is
going to have some purview here. But what would you envision?
Mr. Grandon. Is it what would I envision as a perfect
model?
Mr. Crawford. As the kind of model that you could apply.
You are talking about 800 acres. In my geography, 800 acres is
extremely small.
Mr. Grandon. Right. In rural West Virginia, it is extremely
huge.
Mr. Crawford. Right.
Mr. Grandon. My farm is 4 acres. I own 93, but that is all
and I have used, just like in South Korea, I have used
hillsides and everything like that. So that is actually huge
for us.
We have also partnered with the West Virginia National
Guard and the USDA for property, state-owned property to lease
out to the veterans. Again, that is not through the co-op or
anything, but that is something we have done through our
program.
The whole idea of the cooperative was for marketing
purposes initially, to have a veteran owned product that we
could sell, and I think that is where the idea first came from.
And like I say, it is still in the initial phase, but that is
what we have up and running as of right now.
Mr. Crawford. Excellent. My time has expired. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Ashford, 5 minutes.
Mr. Ashford. Thank you. I want to also commend the Chairman
for having this hearing. This is incredibly important.
And I don't have a question. Most of my questions have been
asked and answered, from my perspective in Nebraska, this is a
tremendous opportunity. There is quite a bit of work being done
at the University of Nebraska at our ag school on water
resources, how to most effectively and efficiently use water
resources. A new institute has been developed there. And there
is an opportunity there working with veterans who have had
experience working with water resources and just water
generally in the various places that they have been. So I just
want to commend the Committee, the Chairman, and all of you for
doing what you are doing.
The point that was made, Colonel Lemondes, regarding the
gap of time that, everybody has made the same point, the gap of
time that occurs from leaving the service and finding
employment. Staff Sergeant, you brought that up in your life,
in your experience. It is hugely important, and one of the
things we are doing in Omaha hopefully is developing a new
medical center as part of our Veterans Administration. It is an
interesting idea that I am asking my colleagues to support,
which is a private-public partnership where a donor group in
Omaha would, in effect, raise money to build the facility and
then give the facility back to the VA. So this concept would
enable this kind of facility to be built without going through
the veterans hospital list.
But the point I am making is that there we have a donor
group that is willing to raise tens of millions of dollars to
build a medical facility, and that same donor group if they are
willing to do something like that, they are going to be willing
to invest donor dollars in nonprofits to make that sort of
bridge between the military, the service, and then farming.
Nebraska is a great incubator for that.
So that sort of model of the VA providing resources and
research and the donor community weighing in, and we are very
fortunate in Omaha and Nebraska generally to have a very robust
donor community. So all these linkages are incredibly
important, and the comments you have made in bringing those
linkages to bear in agriculture, this is just very exciting. I
appreciate this hearing because I am going to go home and
explore some opportunities where we can engage our donor
community in creating nonprofits to build a bridge connecting
them to the University of Nebraska and our ag school there for
veterans. You have answered these questions, but to think about
this gap and how do we give our military the ability to be
trained in some of these techniques before they get out of the
service so they can go right in to these opportunities.
So Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to give a
little speech here, this is really great work. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. Gibson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gibson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate this
hearing. I am finding this testimony very helpful and
informative.
I want to thank the panelists, not only for your service, I
thank you deeply for that, but for your willingness to come
here and share. Colonel Lemondes, good to see you again.
Certainly, you are the pride of upstate New York. We appreciate
how you have flourished in challenging circumstances. Sergeant
Grandon, it is very encouraging and heartwarming to hear your
story. Thank you for sharing it.
The Members here on this Committee try really hard to come
together with these programs that can be helpful, and to hear
you explain how helpful it was to you, we all can take
inspiration from that.
So for Colonel Chastain and for Colonel Fant, I am
interested to know, based on your experiences, you grew up on
farms and you are back. Can you help lay out for us what
changed in that period of time from the time you left home to
join the military to the time you came back home? And across
those changes, what do you view as positive, sort of
facilitating and helpful, and what do you see as more
challenging? I think that would be helpful for us to hear, jut
your personal take from your experiences.
Ms. Chastain. I wanted to get as far away from the family
farm as I could when I graduated from college, so that was my
main goal at that point. And then throughout the years, and
again, I didn't plan on making the military career, but did.
Somehow it started creeping back in that being back home on the
family farm was what was in my blood and what I needed to come
back to. And it was solidified by my tour of duty in
Afghanistan where I was working with American farmers that were
fellow soldiers, as well as Afghan farmers that are subsistence
farmers and don't have a lot of the ability and the fortunes
that we have in this country.
So yes, things changed. The way of farming changed a lot in
those 30 years between when I left the farm and when I came
back. A lot of things changed. The dynamics of the family farm
have changed. Now I am in a leadership role in my family farm,
but not necessarily the operator, which enables me still to
work. But I needed to be back in the country, and maybe it is
because I grew up on a farm. I needed to be back in the
country. I needed to be able to walk to my mailbox in my
pajamas if I wanted to and nobody would see me.
So those are the things that I longed for my many years of
travel and being among lots of people all the time in my
military career.
Mr. Fant. When I left the farm, I didn't leave because, for
any other reason, you are going to go to college. Okay. That is
what I am going to do. And so as I progressed through, and our
farm had been in the family for a couple hundred years, so it
was there. We grew up there. It was just what it was.
But, as I progressed through my military career and I
started to begin to take interest in food issues and as we
moved around and lived in different places in the world, we
began to become interested in how food was grown and where it
was grown and how do we prepare it and all that kind of stuff.
And so a few years before we decided to transition out, we said
we have this farm back here. And my wife would probably say
that I have been talking about moving back there for years, but
it was just something I figured I would probably do at the end
of my career, whenever that was.
So when that time came, I began studying and trying to
understand what it was I needed. And as you know from your own
service, there are a lot of skill sets that you do on the farm
that you do in the Army, maintenance, planning, dirty. I mean,
we are all soldiers of the soil in a way, whether you are
farming or soldiering. So that is kind of what it seemed like a
logical progression for me, and somebody had to go do it. That
was the other piece of it. Somebody had to go back to the farm
and kind of take it over and run it. My folks are living there
now, but somebody had to do it.
So that is kind of why I did it and how I did it, but you
asked about a critical thing about a challenge, and it is not
specific to agriculture, but it is important to agriculture,
and that has to be access to markets and access to information.
And in rural America, broadband is critical in this day and age
to operations. So much technology in the military now are in
the ag. We are using GPS to properly apply fertilizer and all
these other things, and mowing where you don't need to mow. But
the access to information and to be able to find markets
through broadband, especially in rural areas and geographically
challenged areas, broadband in Kansas is different than
broadband in southwest Virginia, because mountains get a vote
on the electronic footprint.
If you are looking for a challenge to really help rural
America, regardless if you are in agriculture or if you are
just trying to make a living, it is that issue.
Mr. Gibson. Well thank you, and Mr. Chairman, my time has
expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Lujan Grisham, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I really
appreciate the opportunity to participate as a Member of this
Committee in this hearing, and having, again, an opportunity to
say thank you for your service to this country and for your
interest in the work of this Committee, and our efforts to make
sure that we have every opportunity available for everybody who
wants it to invest in ag and be farmers and ranchers and
producers. And I can tell you that it means a lot to us to get
testimony from you about what we can do better.
And in fact, representing New Mexico, we have significant
issues with under-served farmers and ranchers, minority
populations, veteran populations, and we have been working
diligently with USDA to deal with that a little more
productively. You are probably aware that in the farm bill, the
2014 Farm Bill, there is a section dedicated to under-served
ranchers and farmers, the Section 2501 Program. And I offered
an amendment; unfortunately, it failed because we have reduced
the amount of funding for the very things that you are working
to do.
And what I do love about this very bipartisan Committee is
this is another chance for us. I appreciate the Chairman so we
really think about what our investments really ought to look
like so that we are creating the avenues that you are proposing
to us here today. And I can tell you that they make a real
difference. Certainly in my district and my community and in my
state, and in fact, we have a program in the Albuquerque area.
It is a Veterans Farmers Project, and I hear from them all the
time. They work with a local grocery cooperative that has a
community farm. So veterans farm at the community farm, then
they sell at a veterans farmers' market and they have a link to
the cooperative grocery stores in the entire community. And one
of the veterans came to me, I am interested in feedback,
Colonel Lemondes, if you can let me know what you think. He was
really demoralized about the project he loves. He is completely
engaged in my community, but he says we don't apply for any
Federal grants. We steer clearly away from USDA, because he
can't manage the complexities. He said, ``I can manage my
troops. I can follow orders and directions that are complex,
that are critical issue moments in my career and in my life.
But I cannot successfully deal with the burden, and neither can
any of the business folks involved in this project deal with
USDA on a very simple investment in a project that we know
works and makes a difference, not only in my life, but in the
lives of veterans in this entire community.'' They apply for
state grants, which they get, but it would be great if we were
leveraging these funds because instead of, and I am going to
make this number up, instead of 20 veterans that we are
helping, it could be 200 veterans.
I would love for you to respond. We have been really
struggling with getting our regulatory and our outreach and
engagement efforts right through USDA.
Mr. Lemondes. Ma'am, thank you. I believe you said you are
from New Mexico?
Ms. Lujan Grisham. I am. You can tell because I am so tall.
Mr. Lemondes. Ironically, I used an example once when
talking about different programs, and I said the execution of a
Federal program with all of its parameters will not benefit a
farm, nor should it be applied the same way to a farm in New
Mexico as it would be in New York.
There are a ton of variables involved, and so oftentimes I
have found that it is very difficult dealing with these. I put
in my testimony, I applied for a ton of grants in 2014, and as
I said in my testimony, I ultimately realized had I just
allocated that time to simple labor on our farm, I would have
been better off. It was a waste of time. And you are talking to
someone with three master's degrees. My wife has two. So we can
handle the complexity. We can read questions and respond
accordingly, but that process of obtaining grants, the
execution of these programs is an enigma.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Do you think that they could be so
prescriptive and so complicated so that people don't access
those grants or funds so that we create exactly the opposite of
what we are intending to do? Is that a possibility in your
mind?
Mr. Lemondes. Perhaps, but I would think not intentionally.
I think because it is public money, in my career as a program
manager, the latter half of my military career I expended on
behalf of our country nearly $7 billion of taxpayer money, so I
understand that. I understand the rigor that has to be applied
to the use of public funds.
But nonetheless, sometimes, again, at the execution level,
which is our counties, at the execution level, if that can't be
interpreted in a way that the person representing the
government is not afraid of something that could come back to
them. Oh my god, you authorized an extra fencepost on that farm
20 years ago. By god, we are going to come and get it from you.
Then there could be some serious training issues there but
overall, these programs are well intended. They are well
purposed, but they sure are not easy, at least in my
experience.
Ms. Lujan Grisham. Well, I know we have the Chairman's
support to try to make that endeavor.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Newhouse, 5 minutes.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. I want to express my appreciation to all
of you for participating in this, and thank you all for your
service to our country as well.
I am a farmer myself, and so I am deeply interested in this
issue on a personal level. The bottom line is, in agriculture,
we need people. That is the one resource that we are running
short on, and so it seems like a natural marriage, so to speak,
if there are veterans that are interested in getting engaged in
agriculture, whether it is production agriculture or any other
aspect, there are a lot of other opportunities. I think this is
a tremendous thing that we could be spending our time with.
You all have done a great job of talking about, and many of
the questions are directed towards things like the government
programs, the different things that we are working on, and so I
appreciated that, but kind of on the line of Mr. Crawford's
questions that maybe other things outside of government that
could be helpful, and there are a couple of you that are
involved in those kind of projects.
I was just curious if there are any opportunities that are
already happening around the country that you may know of, or
if you have ideas on how private farms or agribusinesses could
engage in this and encourage and work with veterans if they are
interested in agriculture, whether it be--I look at the list of
characteristics like some of you were, personal discipline,
planning, communications, integrity, mission dedication,
decision making, all those things. You know what that spells to
me? An ideal employee, for one thing, a manager kind of a
position perhaps. So there are a lot of ways to get engaged in
the agricultural industry that can turn into, perhaps, farming
on your own at some point in time.
Do you have any suggestions or do you know of anything that
we could replicate around the country of engaging farms and
agribusinesses in this, not necessarily a government program,
but just a partnership that perhaps in both of your projects
and your efforts? Do you know of something or maybe any of you
that have heard of any opportunities that we could replicate,
or is that an opportunity that maybe we should explore?
Ms. Chastain. Well, we have talked about it a little bit
before, but current farmers out there can do a lot of things if
they want to help veterans, to be mentors, to open up their
farm for maybe an incubator farm for a beginning farmer. There
are a lot of not-for-profit organizations out there that can
partner with a farmer or a business that wants to sponsor a
veteran farmer. There are a lot of ways to help in that area,
but mentorship and internships are very important for veterans.
If I could have a list of agribusinesses that wanted to
hire a veteran for a short-term for training, that would a
great thing that I could give to my beginning veteran farmers
out there to get them started.
Mr. Newhouse. That would be great.
Mr. Fant. Sir, I guess two things come to mind. At the
local level, where a lot of work could be done and a lot of
things achieved, is the partnering of businesses, our local
government, and our school systems to improve our vocational
education system.
When I moved back, our vocational school system is not
really producing, everybody around where I live is looking for
a good plumber or somebody that can run a bulldozer, that kind
of stuff. And there is real opportunity for the local
businesses to partner with the school systems and the
vocational centers, career and technical education centers to
offer opportunities, work studies, whatever you want to call
it, but to help develop skills while these young people are in
high school, because a lot of folks don't want to go to
college. So use this opportunity to educate them all in what it
takes to be an auto mechanic, or what it takes to be a welder,
and you may foster an interest in this particular field that
this person didn't realize they had. But the other thing you
will show them, well maybe that is not what I want to do, which
is also very important.
At the next level though, the state and national level is
where Farmer Veteran Coalition has done a lot of good work. And
I frankly stopped struggling, and I am in the process like
Colonel Lemondes here is of trying to get a chapter in the
Commonwealth of Virginia started for this organization. But I
struggle with the value, and after studying it for a while,
because they are a coalition of those businesses at the
national level. And at the state level with the Virginia
Beginning Farmer Rancher Coalition that its purpose is to train
beginning farmers, they built a coalition of the willing, Farm
Bureau, Farm Credit, AgrAbility. So those coalitions are
starting to exist, and the effort is really to continue to
emphasize the importance of them, and then to expand them
throughout the nation. Because right now, FVC is national at
the national level, but it is not national at the state level.
And that is going to be the connector of that local farmer
veteran to this coalition that you described, in my opinion.
Mr. Newhouse. Thank you very much, and again, thanks for
your service and being here today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Kelly, 5 minutes.
Mr. Kelly. I want to thank all four of you for your service
to this great nation, and I mean that from the bottom of my
heart. I also want to thank you for being farmers.
Colonel Fant, and this is more of a statement. People don't
understand what Iraq, I think a lot of people think it is all
about the oil in Iraq, and you and I have been there, and we
have seen Mesopotamia. We have seen how beautiful and how rich
that farmland is, and we understand that the value of Iraq and
Mesopotamia, the reason people have fought over it for
centuries has nothing to do with oil. It has to do with water
and fertile soil. And sometimes people get confused. That is
why that area and that region of the world, Mesopotamia, is so
important to this nation or to strategic interests across the
world.
One of the things that bothers me about where I see our
nation going is the urbanization of America. It is almost--
people think it is a bad thing to be rural. People think it is
a bad thing to have a skilled trade where you can make a lot of
money instead of thinking that everybody should get a free
college education. But they think it is a bad thing to have a
trade.
I am in a wonderful area of Mississippi which is very
industrial and still has a lot of farming. I am also on the
Small Business Committee, and so I see that a lot of times
people can go get a 2 year trade or they can farm and they can
do things that make a great living and that actually create or
grow things and are productive to our nation and to our economy
as opposed to getting a 4 year degree in liberal arts and
praying that you can get a job flipping burgers for $20,000 a
year, which means nothing other than a piece of paper. We have
to get back to that American Dream that is not about what level
of education you have. It is more focused on what you are
contributing to America and what kind of life and living you
are making for your family.
Do you have any ideas where we can, as a small business,
which also reaches out to veterans with our beat box and
agriculture. Do you have any ideas where we can coordinate
together to use those things to create the mechanics and to
create the people who are maintaining our tractors or that are
running the small business that creates the seeds, all those
things. Any ideas how we can tie small business and agriculture
together?
Mr. Fant. The first thing, though, and this is why this
forum is important among all the other ones is that you have to
change the perception. A lot of folks think about farming is
something you do when you get home from work. It is not your
primary way of making a living. We have to demonstrate that you
can do it, and through our local schools, and back in my
county, our county is rural. The population is going down.
Young people are leaving because the jobs aren't there. There
used to be manufacturing. There used to be furniture. But the
strength that has always been in that county is agriculture.
And so the education that takes place, you don't have to be a
beef cattle farmer just because that is what everybody else
around here does. You can do a lot and make some pretty good
money on just a quarter acre or even on a piece of land this
size.
So the working together with the Economic Development
Authority, the local government, and the school system to make
sure, first, that we have identified that agriculture is a
critical point to economic development, and then second, we
tailor our school systems and our vocational training systems
so they are producing skills that are marketable to the local
producers. Because ultimately if we don't keep our young people
in the area where they grew up, we are not going to have a
place for anybody else to grow up.
Mr. Kelly. And one other thing. Historically, the first
thing that really made America grow or one the first things was
40 acres and a mule, land and implements, okay, which that is a
little bit different today, and then the next generational
change that kind of happened that changed us a little bit was
World War II. We sent all these farmers and they said once you
send a farmer to Peru and he has seen the world, he will never
go back to the farm. Well unfortunately, that was true. But we
came out with the GI Bill for all these soldiers and we gave
them the GI Bill, and somehow the American Dream transitioned
from having a farm and 40 acres and a mule to having a college
degree. And so that was kind of the focal point. It wasn't
manufacturing. It was education as opposed to a trade.
We need to get back to where a trade is what is important,
okay, making a great living and being very proud of what we are
creating and what we are growing. Any idea as to how we can use
USDA to get back to where having a trade and making a living is
more important than having a piece of paper that earns you no
trade?
Mr. Lemondes. Sir, I would say simply raising the profile
of agriculture in all peripheral industries, and there are many
different ways to do that, myriad of ways. But, raising the
profile, educating the public, inculcating school programs with
where food comes from and how it is made. It is as simple as
that.
Mr. Kelly. Mr. Chairman, my time has expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Davis, 5 minutes.
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to each
and every one of you, first for your service to our great
country; and second, for being here today to talk to us about
the importance of engaging our veterans in a field that, as you
can tell from all the questioning you have had before, that we
feel strongly exists to not only help grow jobs and grow our
economy, but also make sure we have the safest and most
abundant food supply in the world that allows us to feed the
world. And we would like to work with you after this to
encourage more veterans to get involved in agriculture.
I come from the State of Illinois. I am friends with a
gentleman named R.D. Elder. R.D. is disabled. He has used the
AgrAbility program himself. He works with the program in
Illinois. Colonel Chastain, I would like to actually start with
a question to you.
You mentioned you had not even heard of the AgrAbility
program 2 years ago. Are you concerned that others who could
benefit from the program are also unaware of its existence and
benefits, and how are you working through your current role to
get the word out?
Ms. Chastain. That is a good question. The reason this job
came about is because veterans like me did not know about the
program. My job is outreach and finding those veterans out
there. I am not a rehabilitation specialist that can go out and
assess the technological needs of a farmer, because I don't
have that experience. My job is to reach out to veterans around
the country and make sure that they know about our program and
the benefits it provides.
Mr. Davis. Right, and you don't think enough veterans
actually know it is there?
Ms. Chastain. Correct. I was one of them, and I would guess
that probably the three other gentlemen up here with me did not
know a whole lot about the AgrAbility program either.
We do a lot of things. AgrAbility has served veterans for
probably 30 years. The pre-program before the AgrAbility
program, and so we have served veterans, but they found out
about it through myriad different ways. Right now what we do,
we are having special programs for veterans and working with
the Farmer Veteran Coalition and other organizations that serve
veterans. So our state programs around the country are doing
all kinds of things to reach out to veterans: working with the
State Farmer Veteran Coalitions, working with their state
agriculture department to reach out to veterans also. So that
is kind of what we are doing is trying to locate veterans
around our states that would like to be farmers or are already
farmers and need support.
Mr. Davis. Oh, and I talk to my constituents who are
engaged in the AgrAbility program in Illinois. The problem they
bring up is the lack of funding to be able to access. You
mention that we want to expand the program. We want to make
sure more people are eligible, but it seems like states like
Illinois aren't able to do that. Are there other states that do
it better? Do the states have to provide a match to the program
that the Federal Government is helping to provide?
Ms. Chastain. No. Some of our state programs do find other
donors and other organizations that they work with to increase
their funding, but funding is an issue. That is why we only
have 20 programs in 20 states, not the whole country, because
of funding. There is a fine line between reaching out and
finding all of the veterans that we want to support, and not
being able to support them because we don't have enough funding
to do so.
Mr. Davis. So the current states that utilize the
AgrAbility program, how was the funding decision made to go to
those states versus states like Illinois who have been lacking?
Ms. Chastain. It is a competitive grant. Every 4 years they
have to reapply, and it is competitive for whoever wants to
apply, and it is within a land-grant university, partnered with
a land-grant university. But it is a competitive grant, so
AgrAbility in Illinois just received their grant back. They
were without the grant for several years.
Mr. Davis. Right.
Ms. Chastain. So programs can come and go in different
states, depending on the strength of their grant proposals.
Mr. Davis. So they worked with our land-grant university,
University of Illinois, the University of Illinois extension to
be able to access those funds again that they hadn't had in the
past. So hopefully the next time you come here to speak with us
in front of the House Agriculture Committee, I have some other
new stories to tell because of the success of this new award in
the State of Illinois.
So with that, I want to thank you all again. My time has
expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
Mr. LaMalfa, 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to this
panel. You are very esteemed panelists for us here and we do
greatly appreciate the many, many years of service to all of us
here and the ability to have this conversation to see how
better do we aid with your efforts and others for helping other
veterans who have come home and are looking for these
opportunities in agriculture.
A year ago as part of the Homegrown by Heroes event, I met
with a constituent from my district named Chris Gallian who
talked about his experience returning from two tours in Iraq.
He credited his smooth transition to finding immediate work in
the transition of getting home. He is a manager on a farm now,
and tries to help out by hiring more veterans to help out to
get them integrated into society once again. As great as his
intent is, he is still running into barriers. Local VSOs are
hesitant to give him contact info for veterans in the area.
While USDA has initiatives to help more veterans and find ag
careers, there is no formal program.
So this really struck me as a need because there is a
desire out there by people to fill the need. The benefits are
available to veteran farmers under the farm bill, but I am
concerned we are leaving many of them behind, especially as
most of this affects rural veterans who may have the greatest
need.
So many of the skills gained as a soldier are easily
transferred to farmers and a farming operation, which again
helps with their transition but can also, as our farming
community ages, it is what, somewhere in the early 60s now,
something like a new generation is going to be needed if we are
going to continue in this country. So it is a goal shared by
many in this room here today, including our panel. Thank you
again for being here. What I am looking for is that the
specialized training they receive in the military on, of course
there is running equipment, doing repairs, but there is also
some pretty high tech, technically advanced training they have
here, what do you see, and all four on the panel, please take a
whack at this in the 2\1/2\ minutes we are going to have left,
to use these more technical opportunities to apply that to
agriculture there. Do you see windows for that, to make that
even more desirable for farmers, that they have this technical
training, maybe not necessarily directly in agriculture, but
probably fairly easily adaptable with a little bit of training?
Is that important? Do you see that as a very usable thing, and
that is a good transition? Please?
Mr. Fant. Yes, sir, two real quick things. First, GPS has
really transformed how farmers do business, both from the data
that they can use in application of fertilizer or whatever, but
the data that they get off of it from an accuracy standpoint so
they are not wasting resources and going places they don't need
to go. And the second thing is going to be the next thing that
is going to transform agriculture is drones. Your ability, even
if it is simply flying them out there to check your cattle
instead of having to drive out there or other applications that
I can't imagine right now. But, that is the next thing that is
being used in the military right now that will make its way,
and already is in a lot of places, is drones.
Mr. Lemondes. Sir, thank you. Before you even get to the
technology, the things that popped into my mind as you were
asking that question were simple physical discipline, the
things that you need to run a business that, in my case, I had
done the latter half of my career, program management, directly
transferable to anything. Simple problem solving, having worked
through very, very difficult problems, decision making
processes, all of which we all have ingrained in our heads from
a very good culture that instills that, and it is, again,
directly transferable to anything.
Ms. Chastain. I don't think it is required that a farmer
have a lot of technological experience. It is helpful. We
talked about drones. I just met a pilot, still active duty
pilot that is using drones on his farm now and it has,
especially since I work with a lot of disabilities, it has a
great application to a farmer that is disabled is the drones to
check your cattle, to do things that you can't possibly
physically do at some times. So there are some great
applications.
Mr. Grandon. On my farm, it is very simple. We don't use
technology in any way, other than computers for tracking sales
and invoices and QuickBooks.
Mr. LaMalfa. All right, thank you. I find that on our farm,
we have auto steer on the tractors and GPS for tracking yield
and integrated with the yield coming in the combine, and of
course, land leveling using GPS. And when I find out some of
the guys have no idea how to run it and they are just out there
running it the old way and wondering what did I spend that
money for to have this precision for efficiency, and also for
the fatigue of the drivers and such because they are having to
concentrate less.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
At the start of the questioning, I didn't let Colonel
Chastain or Staff Sergeant Grandon talk to us about your
experiences overseas and what you saw there from an
agricultural standpoint, and what you think Americans take for
granted. Colonel Chastain, any thoughts that you prepared for
that question?
Ms. Chastain. I have some experience with Afghan farmers,
and of course, food insecurity in Afghanistan. So I saw first
hand what subsistence farming looks like, and I don't know that
there are too many farmers in Afghanistan that aren't
subsistence farmers. A lot of their food insecurity comes from
the lack of government ever touching those individuals. Part of
our job was to connect the farmer to their government. That was
part of our counter-insurgency plan. So a lot of the farmers
had never received any support from their government in their
entire lives, so knowing that their government was there to
help them, to support them in a few different ways, and it was
very minor, that is what we tried to encourage.
The food insecurity issue is compounded by the fact that
there was no government support or government backing to any
farmer in that country. Seeing that firsthand made me look at
our own country and the strengths that we have, both in
structure and in land, and of course, the water issues are
significant, in Afghanistan, and if there is not water, there
will be no agriculture.
So there are a lot of issues besides being an extremely
poor country, but farmers in subsistence agriculture, that
country is going to struggle ever getting out of that system. I
think that it makes you appreciate what we have here and that
we have the government that can touch that farmer and can help
that farmer.
The Chairman. Staff Sergeant?
Mr. Grandon. Sir, like I said earlier, my experience with
farming just happened 3 years ago, and my last tour was 12
years ago, so I really don't have an answer for you.
The Chairman. I appreciate that.
Well, I want to thank our witnesses for coming today and
sharing with us. Staff Sergeant, I particularly appreciate you
sharing your personal walk and journey with us, and how you
have been successful in dealing with this, the way agriculture
has helped that.
We are all a product of experiences. I spent a Sunday
afternoon in Jalal-Abad, one Sunday afternoon with the folks of
the 101st Airborne, and they were sitting around a table trying
to kind of prosper that part of Afghanistan. They had
agriculture, but they had no processing. They didn't have
electricity that was consistent, no coal storage. They thought
they had markets in Kuwait and other places they could sell
what was being grown in that area, but these were infantrymen,
and quite frankly, about helping a community like that to
prosper. They were engaged in the problem. They were trying to
figure out what they could do, how they can make that happen.
It was all about agriculture. The ironic thing was that the day
before, they had been in an 8 hour gun fight throughout that
whole day. Took those hats off on Sunday afternoon and were
sitting around a table trying to figure it out. There was a
group from Missouri, a group of National Guardsmen who were
coming to that part of Afghanistan in about a month and a half,
and they were all production farmers who just also happened to
be in the National Guard. They were way excited about getting
those folks in country to be able to see if they could actually
get done what they wanted to get done. So our military men and
women are just stunningly impressive across this globe, and we
have four good examples today.
A couple of weeks ago I led a CODEL to Hagatna to see a 4-H
program that is in existence there. We have an AgriCorps group
that is U.S. recent graduates from agriculture degrees who
volunteered to spend a year trying to promote 4-H programs in
these schools, and in spite of how poor the agriculture is for
that country, once their kids get educated, they don't want to
come back and farm either. Farming is not cool, and so by using
the 4-H model to help these kids understand you can actually
make money at it and do those kind of things. So this fight we
have to reset America's mindset as to what is successful and
not successful, vis-a-vis 4 year college degrees, trades, and
other things is not unique just to the United States.
One of our challenges for the 2018 Farm Bill is to how to
connect urban America with why it is important to have a safety
net. Colonel Chastain, you just mentioned that you have these
subsistence farmers out there who are not doing as well as they
could have if they were getting some resource help from their
government. We have a great plan in place with the existing
farm bill that has a variety of programs, from conservation to
the programs you talked about this morning, but also a safety
net for production agriculture. We have urbanized our country.
Most folks don't understand where their food comes from, think
it just shows up at the market by magic, and they don't
appreciate it. What they do benefit from, though, is the great
work of our men and women in production agriculture. They just
don't know why they have the cheapest or most affordable food
supply in the developed world. And so how do we get that
message out? How does production agriculture, how do farmers
and ranchers tell your story? You have great stories to tell,
and the way we feed America and feed the rest of the world, so
how do we help urban America understand that it is not directly
linked into the SNAP program as we have done in the past.
So you are all deputized to try to continue to tell your
story, try to convince Americans so they know where their food
comes from, and how important it is that we keep the American
farmer in the fight through good times and bad times. And that
is the purpose of the farm bill. I guess Mr. Davis and I are
the only two remaining Members, but we will be engaged in that.
I appreciate all of you, again, for coming. Thank you for
your service to our country. I know you are proud of that
segment of your careers, and congratulations on that on moving
forward. But again, thank you for being here.
Under the rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive
additional material, supplemental written responses from the
witnesses to any questions posed by Members. This hearing of
the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned. Thank you all.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

[all]
