- ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE 114TH CONGRESS: COMMITTEE RULES; OVERSIGHT PLAN; PARKING POLICY; AND RESOLUTION TO DECLARE THE ELECTRONIC REPOSITORY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE 114TH CONGRESS; COMMITTEE RULES;
OVERSIGHT PLAN; PARKING POLICY; AND RESOLUTION TO DECLARE THE
ELECTRONIC REPOSITORY

=======================================================================

ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE
ADMINISTRATION
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JANUARY 27, 2015

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on House Administration

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available on the Internet:
www.fdsys.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

93-209                   WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION

CANDICE S. MILLER, Michigan, Chairman
GREGG HARPER, Mississippi            ROBERT A. BRADY, Pennsylvania
BARBARA COMSTOCK, Virginia             Ranking Minority Member
AARON SCHOCK, Illinois               ZOE LOFGREN, California
RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois               JUAN VARGAS, California
RICHARD B. NUGENT, Florida

Professional Staff

Sean Moran, Staff Director
Kyle Anderson, Minority Staff Director

ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING FOR THE 114TH CONGRESS: COMMITTEE RULES;
OVERSIGHT PLAN; PARKING POLICY; AND RESOLUTION TO DECLARE THE
ELECTRONIC REPOSITORY

----------

TUESDAY, JANUARY 27, 2015

House of Representatives,
Committee on House Administration,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:30 a.m., in room
1310, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Candice S. Miller
(chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller, Harper, Nugent, Davis,
Comstock, Brady, and Vargas.
Staff Present: Sean Moran, Staff Director; John Clocker,
Deputy Staff Director; Bob Sensenbrenner, Deputy General
Counsel; John L. Dickhaus, Legislative Clerk; Erin Sayago,
Communications Director; Kyle Anderson, Minority Staff
Director; Matt Pinkus, Minority Senior Policy Advisor; Khalil
Abboud, Minority Deputy Staff Director/Director of Legislative
Operations; Mike Harrison, Minority Chief Counsel; and Eddie
Flaherty, Minority Chief Clerk.
The Chairman. I call to order the Committee on House
Administration for its organizational meeting for the 114th
Congress. A quorum is present, so we will proceed. We are here
today to formally adopt for the 114th Congress the rules of the
committee, our oversight plan, the parking policy for this
Congress, and a resolution to designate the location for
electronically posted documents for the purpose of continuing
our efforts to improve transparency and public access to
legislative materials.
I certainly want to begin by thanking everyone for their
attendance here this morning and service to our committee as
well, both our returning Members and our two new Members as
well. Our mission is to ensure the House of Representatives
runs efficiently, effectively, and in a way that keeps the
people's House accessible to the people. We have to accomplish
all of these goals in a very open and transparent way to make
sure that Members of Congress have the tools that they need to
serve their constituents and our Nation as a whole.
Our committee is principally charged with guarding the
foundation of our system of democracy and government, the
sacred right to vote. Our committee is responsible for
oversight of the Federal Elections Commission and the Elections
Assistance Commission, which is something this committee has
been, on our side anyway, been trying to eliminate. But at any
rate, we are responsible for making certain that our Federal
elections process remains open; and free and fair; and operates
with the highest level of integrity.
Our committee also has an oversight role in protecting the
House side of the Capitol, security of the campus here on our
side, and certainly determining the operating budgets as well
for each Member of the House and every committee. Most of what
our committee's work does doesn't make headlines, but that does
not make our work any less important. We work with our House
officers to ensure the safety and security of every Member of
Congress, their staff, and the millions of visitors who visit
our Nation's Capitol each year.
In addition to serving as chair of House Admin here, I also
serve as vice chair of the House Committee on Homeland
Security. So I certainly understand that security can never be
taken for granted, that we always need to constantly evaluate
and reevaluate our policies and security protocols, including
cybersecurity. We have to make certain we are doing everything
we can to guard this sacred institution.
We have had a very sobering reminder of just how real the
threats are just 2 weeks ago, when the FBI arrested an
individual in Ohio for plotting to attack the U.S. Capitol--and
that was a result of well coordinated efforts by our law
enforcement agencies, including the U.S. Capitol Police--as a
reminder that we always need to remain vigilant.
Another large portion of our workload consists of
identifying ways to assist Members and their staff, both here
in D.C. and back in their districts, with their daily
operations and communications with their constituents. Each
member of this committee was asked to serve because of his or
her unique skills and ability to help run this institution in
an efficient, transparent way, and to protect the integrity of
our Nation's Federal election system and campaign system as
well. So we have an opportunity here to make a very positive,
lasting impact on the way that this institution operates and
the way that Members serve their constituents.
We are here to move this institution forward in a
meaningful way, in a service-oriented way, by promoting
innovation and, of course, always holding ourselves to the
highest levels of accountability to the American people.
Lastly, our committee does a significant amount of work
with oversight over the Library of Congress and the Smithsonian
Institution. Both of those, institutions, of course, provide a
tremendous amount of resources to everyone. These institutions
open the doors toward learning and wonder. And I know I speak
for every Member here when I say that it is continually
important that we work together to ensure that these resources
are available for generations to come.
A particular point that I would like to briefly mention is
that we were unable last Congress to hold a hearing on the
Latino museum due to scheduling conflicts as we got toward the
end of the session. But this is something that we would like to
consider this Congress. I know the ranking member and I have
talked about that at length.
Let me just take a moment, before we go to our resolutions
here, to briefly recognize the Republican members of this
committee. Returning for the 114th, first of all, is
Congressman Gregg Harper, who represents Mississippi's third
District. He is in his fourth term in Congress, fourth term on
this committee. And we were just chatting about the fantastic
job he does, particularly with the Library of Congress, as he
serves on that joint committee. And any time anyone asks me a
question about the Library of Congress, I just ask Gregg
because he knows everything about it, I think. And they love
him at the Library of Congress and have a very high regard and
respect for the work that you do there. So we appreciate that.
Aaron Schock, who is not with us--I think he is in another
committee right now--but also represents the 18th Congressional
District of Illinois; fourth term on the House and third on
this committee, and does just a great job for us.
Rich Nugent represents the 11th Congressional District in
Florida; third term in the House and on this committee. With
his background as a former county sheriff, I know you were
speaking this morning to all of the sheriffs and the law
enforcement, of which there are many, many who are in town
today. We are going to avail ourselves of your expertise on
security as we were just talking about oversight with the U.S.
Capitol Police.
Then our two new Members as well, Rodney Davis, who
represents the 13th Congressional District in Illinois; second
term in the House and first term on this committee. But as a
former staffer, actually, before you were elected as a Member
of Congress.
You and I have had many conversations already about various
things that happen in the House that could be improved. So as
we really focus this committee's attention on Member services
and how we can do a better job, we will be looking for you to--
with all of those conversations--and implement some of your
great ideas.
Then Barbara Comstock, welcome her to the committee as
well. She represents the 10th Congressional District in
Virginia; first term of course in the House. And she has had a
very interesting career, but also was at one point a former
staffer in the House.
So, as I said about Representative Davis, we will be
looking for you for all kinds of various things that we can do
to improve Member services, as well as everything else that
this committee does. You have really a wealth of government
experience and business background as well; that I think will
be very, very helpful to us.
So we are looking forward for the next 2 years as we
certainly put the taxpayers first and our institution, how we
can run it more effectively, more cost-efficiently as well and
working with all of our House officers. This is truly a
nonpartisan goal I think and I know one, as I say, that our
ranking member and all the members of the committee share.
So, at this time, I would like to recognize the ranking
member, Mr. Brady, from Pennsylvania, for his comments.
Mr. Brady. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I am happy to be able to join you and my colleagues as we
officially begin our work for the 114th Congress. I would like
to welcome back my friends Ms. Lofgren, who, without question,
is the smartest lady that I know. Just ask her a question on
any aspect of the law and she can let you know right away
whether we are on the right track or the wrong track.
Mr. Vargas, again, thank you for coming back. You have got
a great background in education. It is my pleasure--any time I
can, I will let you do a bill for me. You know, you do a great
job. If you keep doing such a good job, I might get you a
bigger car. We have to get you a truck or something. But I
appreciate you coming back and serving.
To as well my friends on the other side of the aisle,
including our new additions, Mr. Davis from Illinois and Ms.
Comstock of Virginia, welcome.
This is a committee that serves all our Members. We have
been doing that for as long as I have been on this committee.
And we make sure that our Members get the right information at
the right and proper time, and make sure--we ask them all the
time to make sure that they do contact us before they get
contacted by any other committee. We don't want to see that
happen.
Our primary purpose is to serve Members and the
institution; 95 percent of what we do as a committee is done on
a bipartisan basis. I am very pleased that we have developed a
strong working relationship that allows us to get things done.
Our Democratic and Republican staffs work extremely well
together, as we saw in their ability to organize and execute
last year's new Member orientation, which is a lot of work.
They did a great job. And every new Member always comes up to
me--and I am sure they come up to you--and said what a great
job our staffs have done.
While some other committees boasted about their ability to
work together on a bipartisan basis, our committee actually
accomplished that goal. I would like to recommend that the
Democratic Members support the four resolutions before us
today. The committee rules, oversight plan, electronic
repository resolution, and parking policies have been developed
with our input. And I encourage their adoption.
Once again, welcome to the new Members.
Welcome you all back, the old Members.
And, Madam Chair, all our returning Members, I look forward
to the important work of this committee, and needless to say
that we work together for a simple reason, because you are a
class lady and a pleasure to work with. And, from time to time,
we do know our pay scales. And when it is over our head, we
recognize that. You recognize that with me, and I certainly
recognize that with you. We do have to disagree from time to
time, but I have never seen any time we were disagreeable.
So thank you, thanks for returning, and thank you, again,
for working with us.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman very, very much for his
comments.
It has been a pleasure to work with you for the last
Congress certainly. As you say, sometimes we don't agree on
every issue, but certainly this committee for the very most
part is a very bipartisan committee, and we are united really
in a common goal of service to our Members.
I also appreciate what you said about the staff.
Representative Comstock can tell us firsthand about the new
Members orientation and the staff work that happened on this
committee, both our staff on our side, and Kyle sitting behind
you; and everybody that works for him. Really, I think that was
one of the more effective new Members orientations that we have
had--at least I heard that from a number of folks. I can
remember laying awake at night thinking, Oh, my gosh, I wonder
if we forgot to tell them this. But then I thought, How would
they know? They are brand new. They wouldn't know if we forgot.
But I think we covered everything as well as we could. But we
can always improve. So we look forward to some comments on
that.
Is there any other Member that would like to make any
comments before we go to the resolutions? Okay.
The first item on the agenda is the consideration of the
Committee Resolution 114-1, which is the proposed committee
rules for the 114th Congress. I now call before the committee
Committee Resolution 114-1, the committee rules.
Without objection, the first reading of the resolution is
dispensed with, and the resolution is considered read and open
for amendment at any point.
[The information follows:]

COMMITTEE RESOLUTION 114-1

Resolved, that the rules of the Committee on House
Administration for the 114th Congress are hereby adopted, as
follows:

Rules of the Committee on House Administration

One Hundred Fourteenth Congress

RULE NO. 1

General Provisions

(a) The Rules of the House are the rules of the Committee
so far as applicable, except that a motion to recess from day
to day is a privileged motion in the Committee.
(b) The Committee is authorized at any time to conduct such
investigations and studies as it may consider necessary or
appropriate in the exercise of its responsibilities under House
Rule X and, subject to the adoption of expense resolutions as
required by House Rule X, clause 6, to incur expenses
(including travel expenses) in connection therewith.
(c) The Committee is authorized to have printed and bound
testimony and other data presented at hearings held by the
Committee, and to make such information available to the
public. All costs of stenographic services and transcripts in
connection with any meeting or hearing of the Committee shall
be paid from the appropriate House account.
(d) The Committee shall submit to the House, not later than
January 2 of each odd-numbered year, a report on the activities
of the committee under House Rules X and XI.
(e) The Committee's rules shall be made publicly available
in electronic form and published in the Congressional Record
not later than 30 days after the Committee is elected in each
odd-numbered year.

RULE NO. 2

Regular and Special Meetings

(a) The regular meeting date of the Committee on House
Administration shall be the second Wednesday of every month
when the House is in session in accordance with Clause 2(b) of
House Rule XI. If the House is not in session on the second
Wednesday of a month, the regular meeting date shall be the
third Wednesday of that month. Additional meetings may be
called by the Chair of the Committee as she or he may deem
necessary or at the request of a majority of the members of the
Committee in accordance with Clause 2(c) of House Rule XI. The
determination of the business to be considered at each meeting
shall be made by the Chair subject to Clause 2(c) of House Rule
XI. A regularly scheduled meeting may be dispensed with if, in
the judgment of the Chair, there is no need for the meeting.
(b) If the Chair is not present at any meeting of the
Committee, the ranking member of the majority party who is
present shall preside at the meeting.
(c) The Chair, in the case of meetings to be conducted by
the Committee shall make public announcement of the date,
place, and subject matter of any meeting to be conducted on any
measure or matter. Such meeting shall not commence earlier than
the third day on which members have notice thereof. If the
Chair, with the concurrence of the ranking minority member,
determines that there is good cause to begin the meeting
sooner, or if the Committee so determines by majority vote, a
quorum being present, the Chair shall make the announcement at
the earliest possible date. The announcement shall promptly be
made publicly available in electronic form and published in the
Daily Digest.
(d) The Chair, in the case of meetings to be conducted by
the Committee shall make available on the Committee's web site
the text of any legislation to be marked up at a meeting at
least 24 hours before such meeting (or at the time of an
announcement made within 24 hours of such meeting). This
requirement shall also apply to any resolution or regulation to
be considered at a meeting.

RULE NO. 3

Open Meetings

As required by Clause 2(g), of House Rule XI, each meeting
for the transaction of business, including the markup of
legislation of the Committee shall be open to the public except
when the Committee in open session and with a quorum present
determines by record vote that all or part of the remainder of
the meeting on that day shall be closed to the public because
disclosure of matters to be considered would endanger national
security, would compromise sensitive law enforcement
information, or would tend to defame, degrade or incriminate
any person, or otherwise would violate any law or rule of the
House. Provided, however, that no person other than members of
the Committee, and such congressional staff and such other
persons as the Committee may authorize, shall be present in any
business or markup session which has been closed to the public.
To the maximum extent practicable, the Chair shall cause to be
provided audio and video coverage of each hearing or meeting
that allows the public to easily listen to and view the
proceedings and maintain the recordings of such coverage in a
manner that is easily accessible to the public.

RULE NO. 4

Records and Rollcalls

(a)(1) A record vote shall be held if requested by any
member of the Committee.
(2) The result of each record vote in any meeting of the
Committee shall be made available for inspection by the public
at reasonable times at the Committee offices, including a
description of the amendment, motion, order or other
proposition; the name of each member voting for and against;
and the members present but not voting.
(3) The Chairman shall make the record of the votes on any
question on which a record vote is demanded available on the
Committee's website not later than 48 hours after such vote is
taken (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays). Such
record shall include a description of the amendment, motion,
order, or other proposition, the name of each member voting for
and each member voting against such amendment, motion, order,
or proposition, and the names of those members of the Committee
present but not voting.
(4) The Chairman shall make available on the Committee's
website not later than 24 hours (excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and legal holidays) after the adoption of any amendment to a
measure or matter the text of such amendment.
(b)(1) Subject to subparagraph (2), the Chairman may
postpone further proceedings when a record vote is ordered on
the question of approving any measure or matter or adopting an
amendment. The Chair may resume proceedings on a postponed
request at any time.
(2) In exercising postponement authority under subparagraph
(1), the Chairman shall take all reasonable steps necessary to
notify members on the resumption of proceedings on any
postponed record vote.
(3) When proceedings resume on a postponed question,
notwithstanding any intervening order for the previous
question, an underlying proposition shall remain subject to
further debate or amendment to the same extent as when the
question was postponed.
(c) All Committee hearings, records, data, charts, and
files shall be kept separate and distinct from the
congressional office records of the member serving as Chair;
and such records shall be the property of the House and all
members of the House shall have access thereto.
(d) House records of the Committee which are at the
National Archives shall be made available pursuant to House
Rule VII. The Chairman shall notify the ranking minority member
of any decision to withhold a record pursuant to the rule, and
shall present the matter to the Committee upon written request
of any Committee member.
(e) To the maximum extent feasible, the Committee shall
make its publications available in electronic form.

RULE NO. 5

Proxies

No vote by any member in the Committee may be cast by
proxy.

RULE NO. 6

Power To Sit and Act; Subpoena Power

(a) For the purpose of carrying out any of its functions
and duties under House Rules X and XI, the Committee is
authorized (subject to subparagraph (b)(1) of this paragraph)--
(1) to sit and act at such times and places within the
United States, whether the House is in session, has recessed,
or has adjourned, and to hold such hearings; and (2) to
require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony
of such witnesses and the production of such books, records,
correspondence, memorandums, papers, documents and other
materials as it deems necessary, including materials in
electronic form. The Chair, or any member designated by the
Chair, may administer oaths to any witness.
(b)(1) A subpoena may be authorized and issued by the
Committee in the conduct of any investigation or series of
investigations or activities, only when authorized by a
majority of the members voting, a majority being present. The
power to authorize and issue subpoenas under subparagraph
(a)(2) may be delegated to the Chair pursuant to such rules and
under such limitations as the Committee may prescribe.
Authorized subpoenas shall be signed by the Chair or by any
member designated by the Committee, and may be served by any
person designated by the Chair or such member.
(2) Compliance with any subpoena issued by the Committee
may be enforced only as authorized or directed by the House.

RULE NO. 7

Quorums

No measure or recommendation shall be reported to the House
unless a majority of the Committee is actually present. For the
purposes of taking any action other than reporting any measure,
issuance of a subpoena, closing meetings, promulgating
Committee orders, or changing the rules of the Committee, one-
third of the members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum. For purposes of taking testimony and receiving
evidence, two members shall constitute a quorum.

RULE NO. 8

Amendments

Any amendment offered to any pending legislation before the
Committee must be made available in written form when requested
by any member of the Committee. If such amendment is not
available in written form when requested, the Chair will allow
an appropriate period of time for the provision thereof.

RULE NO. 9

Hearing Procedures

(a) The Chair, in the case of hearings to be conducted by
the Committee shall make public announcement of the date,
place, and subject matter of any hearing to be conducted on any
measure or matter at least one (1) week before the commencement
of that hearing. If the Chair, with the concurrence of the
ranking minority member, determines that there is good cause to
begin the hearing sooner, or if the Committee so determines by
majority vote, a quorum being present, the Chair shall make the
announcement at the earliest possible date. The clerk of the
Committee shall promptly notify the Daily Digest Clerk of the
Congressional Record as soon as possible after such public
announcement is made.
(b) Unless excused by the Chair, each witness who is to
appear before the Committee shall file with the clerk of the
Committee, at least 48 hours in advance of his or her
appearance, a written statement of his or her proposed
testimony and shall limit his or her oral presentation to a
summary of his or her statement.
(c) When any hearing is conducted by the Committee upon any
measure or matter, the minority party members on the Committee
shall be entitled, upon request to the Chair by a majority of
those minority members before the completion of such hearing,
to call witnesses selected by the minority to testify with
respect to that measure or matter during at least one day of
hearings thereon.
(d) Reserved.
(e) Committee members may question witnesses only when they
have been recognized by the Chair for that purpose, and only
for a 5-minute period until all members present have had an
opportunity to question a witness. The 5-minute period for
questioning a witness by any one member can be extended as
provided by House Rules. The questioning of a witness in
Committee hearings shall be initiated by the Chair, followed by
the ranking minority member and all other members alternating
between the majority and minority. In recognizing members to
question witnesses in this fashion, the Chair shall take into
consideration the ratio of the majority to minority members
present and shall establish the order of recognition for
questioning in such a manner as not to disadvantage the members
of the majority. The Chair may accomplish this by recognizing
two majority members for each minority member recognized.
(f) The following additional rules shall apply to hearings
of the Committee as applicable:
(1) The Chair at a hearing shall announce in an opening
statement the subject of the investigation.
(2) A copy of the Committee rules and this clause shall be
made available to each witness as provided by clause 2(k)(2) of
Rule XI.
(3) Witnesses at hearings may be accompanied by their own
counsel for the purpose of advising them concerning their
constitutional rights.
(4) The Chair may punish breaches of order and decorum, and
of professional ethics on the part of counsel, by censure and
exclusion from the hearings; and the Committee may cite the
offender to the House for contempt.
(5) If the Committee determines that evidence or testimony
at a hearing may tend to defame, degrade, or incriminate any
person, it shall--
(A) afford such person an opportunity voluntarily to appear
as a witness;
(B) receive such evidence or testimony in executive
session; and
(C) receive and dispose of requests from such person to
subpoena additional witnesses.
(6) Except as provided in subparagraph (f)(5), the Chair
shall receive and the Committee shall dispose of requests to
subpoena additional witnesses.
(7) No evidence or testimony taken in executive session may
be released or used in public sessions without the consent of
the Committee.
(8) In the discretion of the Committee, witnesses may
submit brief and pertinent sworn statements in writing for
inclusion in the record. The Committee is the sole judge of the
pertinence of testimony and evidence adduced at its hearing.
(9) A witness may obtain a transcript copy of his testimony
given at a public session or, if given at an executive session,
when authorized by the Committee.

RULE NO. 10

Procedures for Reporting Measures or Matters

(a)(1) It shall be the duty of the Chair to report or cause
to be reported promptly to the House any measure approved by
the Committee and to take or cause to be taken necessary steps
to bring the matter to a vote.
(2) In any event, the report of the Committee on a measure
which has been approved by the Committee shall be filed within
7 calendar days (exclusive of days on which the House is not in
session) after the day on which there has been filed with the
clerk of the Committee a written request, signed by a majority
of the members of the Committee, for the reporting of that
measure. Upon the filing of any such request, the clerk of the
Committee shall transmit immediately to the Chair notice of the
filing of that request.
(b)(1) No measure or recommendation shall be reported to
the House unless a majority of the Committee is actually
present.
(2) With respect to each record vote on a motion to report
any measure or matter of a public character, and on any
amendment offered to the measure or matter, the total number of
votes cast for and against, and the names of those members
voting for and against, shall be included in the Committee
report on the measure or matter.
(c) The report of the Committee on a measure or matter
which has been approved by the Committee shall include the
matters required by Clause 3(c) of Rule XIII of the Rules of
the House.
(d) If, at the time any measure or matter is ordered
reported by the Committee, any member of the Committee gives
notice of intention to file supplemental, minority, additional,
or dissenting views, that member shall be entitled to not less
than two additional calendar days after the day of such notice,
commencing on the day on which the measure or matter(s) was
approved, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, in
which to file such views, in writing and signed by that member,
with the clerk of the Committee. All such views so filed by one
or more members of the Committee shall be included within, and
shall be a part of, the report filed by the Committee with
respect to that measure or matter. The report of the Committee
upon that measure or matter shall be printed in a single volume
which--
(1) shall include all supplemental, minority, additional or
dissenting views, in the form submitted, by the time of the
filing of the report, and
(2) shall bear upon its cover a recital that any such
supplemental, minority, additional, or dissenting views (and
any material submitted under subparagraph (c)) are included as
part of the report. This subparagraph does not preclude--
(A) the immediate filing or printing of a Committee report
unless timely request for the opportunity to file supplemental,
minority, additional, or dissenting views has been made as
provided by paragraph (c); or
(B) the filing of any supplemental report upon any measure
or matter which may be required for the correction of any
technical error in a previous report made by the Committee upon
that measure or matter.
(3) shall, when appropriate, contain the documents required
by Clause 3(e) of Rule XIII of the Rules of the House.
(e) The Chair, following consultation with the ranking
minority member, is directed to offer a motion under clause 1
of Rule XXII of the Rules of the House, relating to going to
conference with the Senate, whenever the Chair considers it
appropriate.
(f) If hearings have been held on any such measure or
matter so reported, the Committee shall make every reasonable
effort to have such hearings published and available to the
members of the House prior to the consideration of such measure
or matter in the House.
(g) The Chair may designate any majority member of the
Committee to act as ``floor manager'' of a bill or resolution
during its consideration in the House.

RULE NO. 11

Committee Oversight

The Committee shall conduct oversight of matters within the
jurisdiction of the Committee in accordance with House Rule X,
clause 2 and clause 4. Not later than February 15 of the first
session of a Congress, the Committee shall, in a meeting that
is open to the public and with a quorum present, adopt its
oversight plan for that Congress in accordance with House Rule
X, clause 2(d).

RULE NO. 12

Review of Continuing Programs; Budget Act Provisions

(a) The Committee shall, in its consideration of all bills
and joint resolutions of a public character within its
jurisdiction, ensure that appropriation for continuing programs
and activities of the Federal Government will be made annually
to the maximum extent feasible and consistent with the nature,
requirement, and objectives of the programs and activities
involved. For the purposes of this paragraph a Government
agency includes the organizational units of government listed
in Clause 4(e) of Rule X of House Rules.
(b) The Committee shall review, from time to time, each
continuing program within its jurisdiction for which
appropriations are not made annually in order to ascertain
whether such program could be modified so that appropriations
therefore would be made annually.
(c) The Committee shall, on or before February 25 of each
year, submit to the Committee on the Budget (1) its views and
estimates with respect to all matters to be set forth in the
concurrent resolution on the budget for the ensuing fiscal year
which are within its jurisdiction or functions, and (2) an
estimate of the total amounts of new budget authority, and
budget outlays resulting there from, to be provided or
authorized in all bills and resolutions within its jurisdiction
which it intends to be effective during that fiscal year.
(d) As soon as practicable after a concurrent resolution on
the budget for any fiscal year is agreed to, the Committee
(after consulting with the appropriate committee or committees
of the Senate) shall subdivide any allocation made to it in the
joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report
on such resolution, and promptly report such subdivisions to
the House, in the manner provided by section 302 of the
Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
(e) Whenever the Committee is directed in a concurrent
resolution on the budget to determine and recommend changes in
laws, bills, or resolutions under the reconciliation process it
shall promptly make such determination and recommendations, and
report a reconciliation bill or resolution (or both) to the
House or submit such recommendations to the Committee on the
Budget, in accordance with the Congressional Budget Act of
1974.

RULE NO. 13

Broadcasting of Committee Hearings and Meetings

Whenever any hearing or meeting conducted by the Committee
is open to the public, those proceedings shall be open to
coverage by television, radio, and still photography, as
provided in Clause 4 of House Rule XI, subject to the
limitations therein. Operation and use of any Committee
Internet broadcast system shall be fair and nonpartisan and in
accordance with Clause 4(b) of rule XI and all other applicable
rules of the Committee and the House.

RULE NO. 14

Committee Staff

The staff of the Committee on House Administration shall be
appointed as follows:
(a) The staff shall be appointed by the Chair except as
provided in paragraph (b), and may be removed by the Chair, and
shall work under the general supervision and direction of the
Chair;
(b) All staff provided to the minority party members of the
Committee shall be appointed by the ranking minority member,
and may be removed by the ranking minority member of the
Committee, and shall work under the general supervision and
direction of such member;
(c) The appointment of all professional staff shall be
subject to the approval of the Committee as provided by, and
subject to the provisions of, clause 9 of Rule X of the Rules
of the House;
(d) The Chair shall fix the compensation of all staff of
the Committee, after consultation with the ranking minority
member regarding any minority party staff, within the budget
approved for such purposes for the Committee.

RULE NO. 15

Travel of Members and Staff

(a) Consistent with the primary expense resolution and such
additional expense resolutions as may have been approved, the
provisions of this rule shall govern travel of Committee
members and staff. Travel for any member or any staff member
shall be paid only upon the prior authorization of the Chair or
her or his designee. Travel may be authorized by the Chair for
any member and any staff member in connection with the
attendance at hearings conducted by the Committee and meetings,
conferences, and investigations which involve activities or
subject matter under the general jurisdiction of the Committee.
Before such authorization is given there shall be submitted to
the Chair in writing the following:
(1) The purpose of the travel;
(2) The dates during which the travel will occur;
(3) The locations to be visited and the length of time to
be spent in each; and
(4) The names of members and staff seeking authorization.
(b)(1) In the case of travel outside the United States of
members and staff of the Committee for the purpose of
conducting hearings, investigations, studies, or attending
meetings and conferences involving activities or subject matter
under the legislative assignment of the committee, prior
authorization must be obtained from the Chair. Before such
authorization is given, there shall be submitted to the Chair,
in writing, a request for such authorization. Each request,
which shall be filed in a manner that allows for a reasonable
period of time for review before such travel is scheduled to
begin, shall include the following:
(A) the purpose of the travel;
(B) the dates during which the travel will occur;
(C) the names of the countries to be visited and the length
of time to be spent in each;
(D) an agenda of anticipated activities for each country
for which travel is authorized together with a description of
the purpose to be served and the areas of committee
jurisdiction involved; and
(E) the names of members and staff for whom authorization
is sought.
(2) At the conclusion of any hearing, investigation, study,
meeting or conference for which travel outside the United
States has been authorized pursuant to this rule, members and
staff attending meetings or conferences shall submit a written
report to the Chair covering the activities and other pertinent
observations or information gained as a result of such travel.
(c) Members and staff of the Committee performing
authorized travel on official business shall be governed by
applicable laws, resolutions, or regulations of the House and
of the Committee on House Administration pertaining to such
travel.

RULE NO. 16

Reserved.

RULE NO. 17

Reserved.

RULE NO. 18

Other Procedures and Regulations

The Chair may establish such other procedures and take such
actions as may be necessary to carry out the foregoing rules or
to facilitate the effective operation of the committee.

RULE NO. 19

Designation of Clerk of the Committee

For the purposes of these rules and the Rules of the House
of Representatives, the staff director of the Committee shall
act as the clerk of the Committee.
The Chairman. Pursuant to House rule XI, clause 2, the
Committee on House Administration will adopt written rules
governing its procedures. The proposed rules are similar to the
rules adopted by this committee during the last Congress, and
they conform with the recent changes to the House rules, as
amended, in this Congress.
Overall, our committee rules provide for a strong structure
to accomplish our oversight and goals for pushing forward
legislative initiatives. As we mentioned, we worked with Mr.
Brady's staff very closely to update our rules. We appreciate
their input, and I am hoping that all Members will support
them.
I would recognize the ranking member, Mr. Brady, if he
would like to make any comment.
Mr. Brady. No.
The Chairman. Okay.
Any other comment?
Any amendment?
If not, then I move that the committee adopt the committee
resolution.
The question is on the motion to adopt the resolution.
I ask all the Members who are in favor of the motion,
signify by saying aye.
Any opposed?
If not, in the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it.
The ayes have it.
The motion is agreed to. Without objection, the motion to
reconsider is laid upon the table.
The next item on the agenda is consideration of Committee
Resolution 114-2, the committee oversight plan.
I now call before the committee Committee Resolution 114-2,
the committee oversight plan.
Without objection, the first reading of the resolution is
dispensed with, and the resolution is considered read and open
for amendment at any other point.
[The information follows:]

COMMITTEE RESOLUTION 114-XX

Resolved, that the Oversight Plan of the Committee on House
Administration for the 114th Congress, as required pursuant to
clause 2(d)(1) of Rule X, is hereby adopted, as follows:

Committee on House Administration 114th Congress Oversight Plan

MEMBER SERVICES

Oversee Members' allowance amounts, including
structure and regulations.

Provide guidance and outreach to congressional
offices to ensure compliance with Committee regulations.

Review and revise the Guide to Outfitting and
Maintaining an Office of the U.S. House of Representatives, a
set of regulations governing the acquisition, transfer, and
disposal of furnishings, equipment, software, and related
services.

Review the calculation of the Members'
Representational Allowances and ensure that all Members have
adequate resources for representing their constituents.

Oversee the processing of vouchers and direct
payments, including those for payroll. Continue to monitor the
migration to the use of the electronic vouchering system.

New Member Orientation

Plan, implement, and oversee the New Member
Orientation Program for newly-elected Members of Congress.

Oversee the planning and implementation of the
Congressional Research Service New Member Issues Seminar in
Williamsburg.

Intern Program

In coordination with the Senate Committee on Rules
and Administration, organize, administer, and oversee the
Intern Lecture Series.

Review and consider revising the Intern Handbook
and other publications and communication materials used in
support of the Intern Program.

Continue and expand the Congressional Internship
Program for Individuals with Intellectual Disabilities.

COMMITTEE FUNDING AND OVERSIGHT

Review Monthly Reports on committee activities and
expenditures.

Review the Committees' Congressional Handbook
regulations governing expenditure of committee funds and update
regulations as needed.

Review Primary and any Secondary Expense
Resolutions and approve authorization of committee-funding
levels in committee and by House Resolution.

Review Committees' Franking expenditures.

Monitor continued implementation of the Committee
broadcast program.

CONGRESSIONAL ACCOUNTABILITY ACT OF 1995

Monitor application of the Congressional
Accountability Act of 1995 (CAA) (PL 104-1).

Review regulations adopted by the Office of
Compliance.

Evaluate resources available to the Office of
Compliance and House employing offices to facilitate
implementation of the Act.

Conduct general oversight of the Office of
Compliance.

Monitor ongoing judicial proceedings to determine
the impact on the CAA.

FRANKING COMMISSION

Oversee the Members' use of the congressional
frank by providing guidance, advice, and counsel through
consultation or advisory opinion on the frankability of
congressional mail.

Review proposals to reform mass mailing practices
of Members, and regulations governing such mailings, and
monitor current prohibition on mass mailings 90 days before a
primary or general election.

Review previously implemented rules to increase
disclosure and improve the accounting of franked mail costs.

Revise the Regulations on the Use of the
Congressional Frank and Rules on Practice in Proceedings Before
the House Commission on Congressional Mailing Standards.

HOUSE OFFICERS AND HOUSE OPERATIONS

Coordinate with House officers and officials to
develop long term goals for the administrative, financial and
administrative functions of the House.

Work with House officers to identify and reduce
spending and create more cost effective and efficient
operations within the House.

Analyze management improvement proposals and other
initiatives submitted by the House Officers, the Inspector
General, the Capitol Police Board, the Architect of the
Capitol, the Library of Congress, and other legislative branch
agencies.

Coordinate with the Subcommittee on Legislative
Appropriations on matters impacting operations of the House and
joint entities.

Provide policy guidance to the House Officers,
Inspector General and the joint entities as appropriate.

Oversee compliance with the House Employee
Classification Act (2 U.S.C. 291 et seq.).

Assure coordination among officers and joint
entities on administrative and technology matters.

Continue review of congressional continuity
issues, including organizing sessions of Congress at alternate
locations, technological support for Member communications and
chamber operations and filling vacancies in the House.

Provide policy guidance and conduct oversight of
security and safety issues and congressional entities charged
with such roles.

Chief Administrative Officer

Provide policy direction for the Chief
Administrative Officer. Continue the review of functions and
administrative operations assigned to the Chief Administrative
Officer.

Review House procurement policies and monitor the
effectiveness of the Chief Administrative Officer's procurement
and contract management functions. Review procedures for
processing contracts with the House that exceed the threshold
of $350,000.

Continue to review ongoing process and technology
upgrades to the House financial management system.

Continue to monitor compliance with House Audit.
Review the structure of House Information Resources and
determine organizational direction of technology services in
the House.

Review and oversee information technology services
provided, maintained or hosted by House Information Resources.
Continue oversight of failsafe procedures to guarantee
continuity of operations.

Review new technology initiatives to better serve
Members, committees, and the public.

Review semi-annual financial and operational
status reports; oversee implementation of changes in operations
to improve services and increase efficiencies.

Review the operations of the House gift shop and
its management.

Continued review of House restaurant operations;
furniture policy, inventory and selection; and alternatives to
the current mail delivery process in order to strengthen the
services and tools available to Members and staff.

Examine Chief Administrative Officer's role in
assuring accessibility to the House wing of the Capitol, the
House Office Buildings and other House facilities consistent
with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Review staff benefits offered by the House and
proposals to modify benefits.

Clerk of the House

Review and approve contracts and requests for
proposals by the Clerk that exceed the $350,000 spending
threshold.

Oversee the House Document Repository.

Review standards for the electronic exchange of
legislative information among the Houses of Congress and
legislative-branch agencies.

Coordinate on matters under the jurisdiction of
the House Fine Arts Board.

Continue review of functions and administrative
operations assigned to the Clerk.

Review of semi-annual financial and operational
status reports; recommend changes in operations to improve
services and increase efficiencies.

Review the printing needs of the Clerk to evaluate
the potential for eliminating duplication.

Oversee preparation of congressionally-authorized
publications.

Sergeant-at-Arms

Review and oversee security operations in the
House, including the House chamber, the galleries, the Capitol,
House Office Buildings, Capitol Grounds, and District offices.

Review and oversee initiatives designed to
increase security and security awareness for Members and staff
in district offices.

Review annual financial and operational status
reports; recommend changes in operations to improve services
and increase efficiencies.

Review impact of electronic access to controlled
spaces.

Continue review of functions and administrative
operations assigned to the Sergeant-at-Arms.

Review the security operation of House parking
facilities, regulations, and allocation of parking spaces.

Consult with the Sergeant-at-Arms on policies
adopted by the Capitol Police Board.

Review the policies and procedures for visitor
access to the Capitol.

Review the printing needs of the Sergeant-at-Arms
and the Capitol Police Board to identify the potential for
eliminating duplication.

Examine Sergeant-at-Arms' role in assuring
accessibility to the House wing of the Capitol, the House
Office Buildings, and other House facilities consistent with
the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Review the use of technology generally in the
protection of the House of Representatives.

Oversee the Office of Emergency Management,
including the implementation of coordinated plans for emergency
evacuation and response.

House Inspector General

Review proposed audit plan and audit reports,
including the annual financial statements audit.

Review comprehensive financial and operational
audits of the House, investigate any irregularities uncovered,
and monitor necessary improvements.

Monitor progress of House audits.

Continue review of functions and administrative
operations assigned to the Inspector General.

Direct Inspector General to conduct management
advisories to improve implementation and operation of key House
functions.

OVERSIGHT OF LEGISLATIVE BRANCH AND OTHER ENTITIES

Information and Technology Coordination

Oversee, in conjunction with the Senate, forums
for the sharing of technology plans and capabilities among the
legislative branch agencies.

Oversee, in conjunction with the Senate, the
Legislative Branch Telecommunications group.

Oversee management of the Congress.gov website.

Oversee work of the Legislative Branch Financial
Managers' Council.

Oversee, in conjunction with the Senate, proposals
to reduce technology costs through consolidation and use of
internet-based resources.

Library of Congress

Conduct a review of the progress that the Library
has made in providing public access to government information,
especially in electronic form.

Continue oversight of Library of Congress
operations, including inventory and cataloguing systems.

Continue oversight of Law Library operations.

Continue oversight of Congressional Research
Service operations, and consider any need to modify management
of the Service.

Review implementation of the Library of Congress
Fiscal Operations Improvement Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-481),
the Veterans' Oral History Project Act (Public Law 106-380),
the National Recording Preservation Act of 2000 (Public Law No:
106-474), and the History of the House Awareness and
Preservation Act (Public Law 106-99).

Consider human-resources legislation proposed by
the Library.

Review the use of technology generally in Library
of Congress operations.

Review printing policies of the Library of
Congress to assure compliance with Title 44 of the U.S. Code.

Review reports by Library of Congress Inspector
General and implementation of audit recommendations. Examine
options to improve operation and structure of the Library of
Congress Inspector General's office.

United States Capitol Police

Monitor administrative operations of the agency,
including budgetary management, civilian component, attrition
rates, recruitment efforts and incentive programs for officers
and civilian employees.

Review proposals for additional USCP facilities
and equipment.

Review analysis of uniformed officer post/duty
assignments to determine and authorize force levels to meet the
agency's security requirements within the Capitol complex to
include the Capitol Visitor Center, the Library of Congress and
U.S. Botanic Garden.

Review and consider proposals to improve USCP
training program for new recruits, and in-service training.

Authorize and oversee the installation and
maintenance of new security systems and devices proposed by the
Police Board.

Review and authorize regulations prescribed by the
Police Board for use of law enforcement authority by the
Capitol Police.

Examine Capitol Police role in assuring
accessibility to the House wing of the Capitol, House Office
Buildings and other facilities consistent with the Americans
with Disabilities Act.

Monitor the ongoing implementation of the Radio
Modernization Project.

Review reports by USCP Inspector General and
implementation of audit recommendations. Examine options to
improve operation and structure of the USCP Inspector General's
office.

Government Publishing Office

Oversee operations of the Government Publishing
Office, including the Superintendent of Documents.

Review and adopt legislative proposals to reform
government printing by eliminating redundancies and unnecessary
printing, increasing efficiency, and enhancing public access to
government publications.

Monitor implementation of remedial actions taken
by management to address audit issues identified by the GPO
Inspector General.

Review the printing needs of the House of
Representatives to identify the potential for eliminating
duplication.

Examine current GPO printing and binding
regulations to determine advisability of change.

Oversee Superintendent of Documents' Sales and
Depository Library Programs.

Review GPO labor practices and labor agreements.

Review use of GPO facilities and other assets to
identify possible alternatives enhancing value to the Congress
and the public.

Architect of the Capitol

Review the operations of the office of the
Architect.

Review the electronic and procured services
provided by the Architect.

Oversee Architect of the Capitol's maintenance of
House buildings and the House side of the Capitol, and review
plans for rehabilitation of House buildings, including
oversight over the Cannon House Office Building renovation.

Continue oversight of life safety measures,
accessibility measures, and improved evacuation mechanisms in
House buildings.

Review the AOC Office of Sustainability's efforts
to reduce energy consumption by the Capitol complex.

Oversee operations of the Capitol Visitors Center,
in conjunction with the Senate Committee on Rules and
Administration.

Review reports by Architect of the Capitol
Inspector General and implementation of audit recommendations.
Examine options to improve operation and structure of the
Architect of the Capitol Inspector General's office.

Office of Congressional Accessibility Services

Oversee management and operations of Office of
Congressional Accessibility Services, such as the
implementation of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), in
conjunction with Senate Committee on Rules and Administration.

Smithsonian Institution

Review the Smithsonian Inspector General's reports
on the status of the Smithsonian.

Oversee general museum and research facility
operations of the Smithsonian Institution.

Review and evaluate the Smithsonian Institution's
use of authorized public funds.

Review proposed appointments of Citizen Regents to
the Smithsonian Institution's Board of Regents.

Review proposals for authorization of new
Smithsonian facilities. Review Smithsonian policies regarding
initiation of planning, design and construction of projects.

Review operations of the National Zoo.

Review operations and conduct oversight of
Smithsonian Enterprises.

Review the use of technology generally in
Smithsonian operations.

Review any proposals to charge fees for admission
to any Smithsonian exhibits.

TECHNOLOGY USE BY THE HOUSE

Continue oversight of House Information Resources
and other technology functions of the House to improve
technology governance, services and the electronic
dissemination of information.

Oversee implementation of House Rule XI 2(e)(4)
requiring committee documentation to be made available
electronically, to the maximum extent feasible.

Review cyber security measures.

Review technology standards for hearing rooms as
they relate to the Committee broadcast program.

Oversee and continue to implement an enterprise
House Disaster Recovery Program for House offices, standing and
select committees and Member offices.

Oversee implementation of the House Office of
Legislative Counsel & Law Revision Counsel's Modernization
Project.

Oversee and coordinate the House strategic
technology plan.

Oversee continuation of House technology
assessment in both new media and cloud services.

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL ELECTION LAW AND PROCEDURES

Recommend disposition of House election contests
pending before the Committee; monitor any disputed election
counts.

Review operations of the Federal Election
Commission (FEC) and evaluate possible changes to improve
efficiency, improve enforcement of the Federal Election
Campaign Act, and improve procedures for the disclosure of
contributions and expenditures. Consider authorization issues
and make recommendations on the FEC's budget.

Review federal campaign-finance laws and
regulations, including Presidential public financing, and
consider potential reforms.

Examine the role and impact of political
organizations on federal elections.

Review operations of the Election Assistance
Commission (EAC) and evaluate possible changes to improve
efficiency and improve implementation of the Help America Vote
Act (HAVA). Consider authorization issues and make
recommendations on the EAC's budget.

Examine the impact of amendments made by HAVA and
the Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act (MOVE Act) to
the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act
(UOCAVA), and consider proposals to improve voting methods for
those serving and living abroad.

Review state and federal activities under the
National Voter Registration Act to identify potential for
improvement to voter registration and education programs and
reducing costs of compliance for state and local government.

Review all aspects of registration and voting
practices in federal elections. Monitor allegations of fraud
and misconduct during all phases of federal elections and
evaluate measures to improve the integrity of the electoral
process.
The Chairman. rule X, clause 2(d) of the House rules state
that, no later than February 15 of the first session of
Congress, the committee shall adopt an oversight plan for that
Congress. The oversight plan will focus on carefully examining
House operations and identifying ways to innovate and control
costs. The committee will also work with the agencies that it
has direct oversight of by establishing best practices to
improve their services to the Members and their staffs, and
both in-person and digital access to information for the
millions of constituents visiting these agencies each and every
year.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Brady, if he has
any statement on the resolution.
Mr. Brady. No, thank you.
The Chairman. Any other comments?
If not and there is no further debate, then the question is
on whether the committee will adopt the resolution.
All in favor of the amendment will signify by saying aye.
Opposed will say nay.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it.
The ayes have it. The amendment is agreed to.
Now I move that the committee adopt the committee
resolution, as amended. And the question is on the motion to
adopt the resolution.
All in favor, signify by saying aye.
Opposed, say nay.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it, and the
motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon
the table.
Third item on the agenda is the Committee Resolution 114-3,
the parking policy for the 114th Congress. Pursuant to House
rule X, clause 1, the Committee on House Administration has
jurisdiction over the parking facilities used by Members,
staff, and authorized personnel of the House of
Representatives.
I call before committee Committee Resolution 114-3, the
committee parking policy.
Without objection, the first reading of the resolution is
dispensed with, and the resolution is considered read and open
for amendment at any point.
[The information follows:]

COMMITTEE ON HOUSE ADMINISTRATION RESOLUTION 114-XX

Parking Policy 114th Congress

(Effective Date January 27, 2015)

Resolved, that the Committee on House Administration
Parking Policy is hereby adopted as follows:

PARKING POLICY OVERVIEW

1. Parking in the United States House of Representatives
garages, lots, and designated parking areas is a privilege for
Members, staff, and authorized personnel in support of the
House of Representatives. Parking in these areas shall be on a
permit only basis.
2. All vehicles parked in House permit-only areas must
display both valid license plates and a current House parking
permit. Current permits must be displayed visibly on
motorcycles and on bicycles. All parking permits must be
clearly displayed while parked on House premises. In addition
to a current permit, all staff may be required to show a valid
House ID upon entering House parking areas within the secured
perimeter. Staff members, in addition to carrying a current
permit, must show a valid House ID when entering all other
House parking areas.
3. The House will not be liable for any damage or theft
caused to any motor vehicle, or contents thereof, while parked
in a House parking garage or on a House parking lot, whether or
not the garage or lot is staffed.
4. Any situation or circumstance not defined within this
parking policy will be decided upon by the Committee on House
Administration in consultation with House Parking Security.

PERMITS

1. Parking permits must be authorized through the office of
a House employing authority and are available only to current
House Members and staff holding a valid Congressional ID and
current license plate. Shared employees may be authorized a
permit from any of their employing offices. Permits are
exclusively for the use of the employing offices and House
staff. Employing officers and House staff may not transfer
permits.
2. Members and staff receiving a mass transit benefit are
not eligible for parking permits (permanent or temporary)
unless approval is obtained from the Committee on House
Administration. If approval is granted, the requestor shall
pick-up the temporary permit from the House Parking Security
office (G2-28 Rayburn HOB) and park in a lot designated by
House Parking Security (HPS). Approval is not needed for
weekend and holiday parking, however, a temporary permit must
be obtained from the House Parking Security office (G2-28,
RHOB) and can only be requested one business day in advance of
the desired date of use. Members and staff who utilize mass
transit benefits can obtain a bicycle permit for the permit-
only bicycle racks and still retain their mass transit
benefits.
3. Spouses of Members may park in any garage or lot, on a
space available basis and will be issued temporary permits if
they are not using the Member plate. In addition, spouses will
be required to present a Spouse ID. Due to the lack of
available spaces, Spouses of Members may only park in the
Cannon Garage if they use the Cannon-designated Member plate.
4. Permits cannot be assigned without written notification
from an employing office on office letterhead and signed by
office parking coordinator or Member of the issuing office.
5. It is the responsibility of the employing office to
retrieve parking permits when staff departs from their office.
Employing offices whose departing staff have not returned their
parking permits will be subject to a 30-day hold before re-
assignment of the permit. (Note: Departing employees may
receive a temporary parking permit for their last day(s) of
employment in order for the permit to be removed in a timely
manner.)
6. Non-staff temporary permits may be issued at the request
of an official parking coordinator or Member. The location of
parking will be determined by House Parking Security. Requests
should be on the office letterhead, signed by the official
parking coordinator or Member and provide the user's name and
vehicle information (make, model, color, and license plate
information). The maximum duration of a temporary permit is 14
business days in a 6 month period. Any individual needing a
temporary permit for more than 14 business days in a 6 month
period must submit a request to the Committee on House
Administration for approval. Registered lobbyists will not
receive temporary permits. Transit benefit recipients will only
be granted temporary permits when approved by the Committee on
House Administration.
7. Authorized permit holders who temporarily need to use an
alternate vehicle should visit House Parking Security to obtain
a temporary permit for that vehicle.

MULTIPLE VEHICLES

1. Members and staff may register more than one vehicle to
a single parking permit.
2. Individuals with a House ID that have multiple vehicles
should register their additional vehicle(s) with their
employing office's parking coordinator who will notify the
Office of House Garages and Parking Security. Permits will be
applied to each registered vehicle by the Office of House
Garages and Parking Security (G2-28 Rayburn).
3. An individual with House ID may not have multiple
vehicles parked in House permit-only areas at all times. A
Member and their spouse may simultaneously have vehicles parked
in House permit-only areas provided that each has a House ID.
4. Staff registering more than one (1) vehicle will be
required to show vehicle registration for all vehicles as proof
of ownership before a permit is affixed to the windshield.

UNRESERVED PARKING

1. House Members may choose their unreserved parking space
from any available space in the various garages/lots/streets.
2. Unreserved staff parking is available on a first-come,
first-served basis in the designated parking areas assigned to
the employing office. This does not include special needs and
reserved spaces.
3. Vehicles, including motorcycles and bicycles, cannot be
stored in any unreserved space in a House parking area, except
Member vehicles parked during periods when the House is not in
session, the Member is traveling on official business, Member
illness or similar circumstances. Stored is defined as being
continuously parked in an unreserved space for more than thirty
(30) consecutive calendar days. A vehicle not displaying both a
current parking permit and valid license plates will also be
considered a stored vehicle.

RESERVED PARKING

1. Members of the House may choose their reserved parking
spaces from any unassigned space in the various garages. Only
Members whose offices are in Cannon may choose a Cannon space.
2. Staff must choose their reserved space from the
designated parking areas indicated on their permit.
3. Each person who reserves or shares a reserved indoor
space incurs additional taxable income as a working condition
fringe benefit. Under the tax code and IRS regulations, Members
and their employees have imputed taxable income to the extent
that the fair market value of Government-provided parking
exceeds $215.00/month. The fair market value of a space at the
House of Representatives is $290.00/month and therefore, as of
January 3, 2015, the imputed taxable income is $40.00/month.
These amounts are subject to change. (Contact Office of Payroll
and Benefits for current rates at extension 5-1435.)
4. Only individuals with reserved parking will be permitted
to park their vehicles in their designated spaces for an
indefinite period of time with valid license plates.
5. The Committee on House Administration reserves the right
to limit the number of reserved spaces at any time.

MEMBER PARKING PLATES

Member parking plates are only for the use of the Member
and spouse, as well as for immediate transportation of the
Member by staff. Only Members whose plates contain a Cannon-
designation may park in the Cannon garage using the Member
plate. Former Members (except registered lobbyists) will be
permitted to park using either temporary permits or Member
parking plates from previous Congresses, but must also present
a former Member ID.

CARPOOL PARKING

House employees interested in carpool parking should
contact the Office of House Garages and Parking Security
(extension 5-6749). Carpools must have a minimum of two
employees from House employing offices. The carpool permit must
come from the employing office's parking roster of one of the
carpool members.
If multiple vehicles associated with a carpool are found in
the House parking areas, simultaneously, individuals associated
with this carpool will lose their carpool privileges for the
remainder of the current Congress.

EVENING AND NIGHT PARKING

Swing shift employees, (work schedule 2:00 pm to 7:30 am)
should park in areas designated by House Parking Security.
Certain parking areas designated by House Parking Security will
be made accessible to swing shift employees starting at 4 pm
based on space availability. Swing shift employees who are held
over on assignment will be required to move to a designated lot
before 7:30 am. Parking coordinators who are interested in
parking for Swing shift employees should contact House Parking
Security (extension 5-6749). All swing shift employees' parking
must be authorized via their office's parking coordinator.

AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT

Staff authorized a parking permit by their employing
authority that require accessible parking based on special
needs considerations will be accommodated on an as-needed basis
in spaces clearly marked for that purpose. Such permits will
come from the pool of permits assigned to the office. Staff
will be required to display the State-assigned handicap
designation.

GROUP AND EVENT PARKING

Requested group and event parking may be approved on House
parking areas for morning events prior to 8:30 am and events
after 5:30 pm. The request should be made, in writing on office
letterhead and signed by the Member or parking coordinator of
the requesting entity. The letter should contain the name of
the group, event date, time, location, and approximate number
of vehicles requesting parking. If approved, other information
may be required for security reasons. Requests should be
emailed or faxed to House Garages and Parking Security (G2-28
Rayburn, fax 6-1950). Group parking needs will be accommodated
in House parking areas designated by House Parking Security.

VIOLATIONS

Violations include, but are not limited to:

Failure to display proper identification (license
plates and parking permit or Member plate) while in a garage,
lot, or designated on-street parking area;

Failure to park in the assigned space, garage,
lot, or parking area;

Failure to park within marked spaces;

Improper use of a Member plate;

Unauthorized parking in reserved spaces;

Storing of a vehicle in any House garage, lot, or
designated parking area.
Generally, notice of violation(s) will be provided as
follows:

First Violation: Written notice from House Garages
and Parking Security placed on vehicle;

Second Violation: E-mail or letter to permit
holder;

Third Violation: E-mail or letter to employing
authority and permit holder;

Fourth Violation: Suspension of parking privileges
for thirty (30) days. The employing authority may not issue
this permit to another employee during the suspension.

Fifth Violation: Suspension of parking privileges
for sixty (60) days. The employing authority may not issue this
permit to another employee during the suspension.

Sixth Violation: Suspension of parking privileges
for the remainder of the Congress or 180 days (whichever is
greater). The employing authority may not issue this permit to
another employee for 90 days.
Any non-temporary permit user on the mass transit list with
a vehicle in permit-only areas will have their permit
immediately removed from their vehicle.
Vehicles that are determined to be a security risk or
create a hazard as determined by the Capitol Police, will be
immediately towed.
The Chairman. The parking policy for this Congress was
created, again, in consultation with the minority.
I certainly want to thank them for their suggestions, the
bipartisan work on the parking policy.
I further want to thank the House parking security for
working with the committee in developing the policy.
Of course, due to the Cannon construction, only Members
with a Cannon-designated Member plate can now park in the
Cannon garage, which is new this year, this Congress, as we
have our construction beginning there.
I recognize Mr. Brady, ranking member, if he has any
comment.
Hearing none, would any other Member like to make a comment
or amendment?
I move that the committee adopt the Committee Resolution.
The question is on the motion to adopt the resolution.
All Members in favor, signify by saying aye.
Opposed, say no.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it.
The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to. And, without
objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon the table.
The last item on the agenda is Committee Resolution 114-4.
This is a designation of an electronic repository. Without
objection, the first reading of the resolution is dispensed
with, and the resolution is considered read and open for
amendment at any point.
[The information follows:]

COMMITTEE RESOLUTION 114-XX

Resolved, that the U.S. House of Representatives Document
Repository located at docs.house.gov shall be the location for
public availability in electronic form of documents specified
in clause 3 of House Rule XXIX.
The Chairman. Pursuant to House Resolution 4, section 30,
the Committee on House Administration designates the permanent
electronic repository for the public availability of documents,
as required by clause 3 of rule XXIV. This resolution
designates a Web site, which is docs.house.gov, as the
repository. Having this electronic repository allows our House
to continually improve the ways that we provide information to
our constituents. There is certainly nothing more important
than holding ourselves accountable to the American people and
ensuring the public has easy access to legislative material.
That only furthers our efforts to improve transparency, I
think, in this institution. Docs.house.gov, the committee live-
streaming program, and other transparency measures have made
the House more transparent than ever before.
I want to thank the Speaker's Office and the House officers
as well for their efforts in this area.
I would like to ask Mr. Brady if he has any comments.
Mr. Brady. No.
The Chairman. Hearing none, any other Member have a comment
or amendment?
Then I move the committee adopt the committee resolution.
The question is on the motion to adopt the resolution.
All Members in favor, signify by saying aye.
All Members opposed will say nay.
In the opinion of the chair, the ayes have it.
The ayes have it. The motion is agreed to. Without
objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon the table.
This concludes all the matters before the committee. Again,
I want to thank all of the Members for their participation this
morning in this very expedient hearing that we had this
morning.
I certainly look forward to working with each and every one
of you as we go forward into the 114th Congress.
Mr. Ranking Member, we have a lot of work to do. But as you
say, we work together very well, and we are looking forward to
all of the challenges that are facing our Nation and this
committee as well.
Thank you all very much.
With that, the meeting is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:47 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
