- CLOSING THE RACIAL AND GENDER WEALTH GAP THROUGH COMPENSATION EQUITY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CLOSING THE RACIAL AND GENDER WEALTH
GAP THROUGH COMPENSATION EQUITY

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DIVERSITY

AND INCLUSION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 29, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 117-20

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-835 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2021

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANN WAGNER, Missouri
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ANDY BARR, Kentucky
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California              TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     TED BUDD, North Carolina
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
RITCHIE TORRES, New York             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              LANCE GOODEN, Texas
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   VAN TAYLOR, Texas
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Diversity and Inclusion

JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio, Chairwoman

AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       ANN WAGNER, Missouri, Ranking
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts          Member
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         TED BUDD, North Carolina
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio, Vice
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia                 Ranking Member
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts      JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
LANCE GOODEN, Texas
WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
April 29, 2021...............................................     1
Appendix:
April 29, 2021...............................................    31

WITNESSES
Thursday, April 29, 2021

Chamberlain, Andrew, Chief Economist, Glassdoor..................     4
Dickens, Emily M., Chief of Staff, Head, Government Affairs, and
Corporate Secretary, Society for Human Resource Management
(SHRM).........................................................     6
Franklin-Davis, Dwana, Chief Executive Officer, Reboot
Representation.................................................    10
Raghu, Maya, Director of Workplace Equality, and Senior Counsel,
National Women's Law Center....................................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Chamberlain, Andrew..........................................    32
Dickens, Emily M.............................................   157
Franklin-Davis, Dwana........................................   164
Raghu, Maya..................................................   169

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Beatty, Hon. Joyce:
Written statement of the National Asian Pacific American
Women's Forum (NAPAWF).....................................   190
Written statement of Public Citizen..........................   193
UnidosUS report entitled, ``Closing the Latina Wealth Gap:
Building an Inclusive Economic Recovery After COVID........   199
Raghu, Maya:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted by
Representative Sylvia Garcia and Representative Nikema
Williams...................................................   240

CLOSING THE RACIAL AND GENDER WEALTH
GAP THROUGH COMPENSATION EQUITY

----------

Thursday, April 29, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Diversity
and Inclusion,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, DC
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 12 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Joyce Beatty [chairwoman of the subcommittee]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Beatty, Pressley, Lynch,
Tlaib, Dean, Garcia of Texas, Auchincloss; Wagner, Lucas,
Gonzalez of Ohio, and Timmons.
Ex officio present: Representative McHenry.
Chairwoman Beatty. The Subcommittee on Diversity and
Inclusion will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the subcommittee at any time.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Closing the Racial and
Gender Wealth Gap Through Compensation Equity.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Today's hearing will examine how discrimination based on
gender, race, sexual orientation, and disability contributes to
compensation and pay disparities in America.
Despite having similar qualifications, data shows that
women, people of color, members of the LGBTQ community, and
individuals and persons with disabilities earn lower wages than
their straight, White, and non-disabled and male counterparts.
Our collective future must be one in which we eliminate
discrimination against any American based on their gender,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation.
In President Biden's address to Congress last night, he
didn't just offer platitudes. In the early days of his
Administration, President Biden signed Executive Orders
addressing racial equity that acknowledged the government's
responsibility to affirm equity, civil rights, racial justice,
and equal opportunity. Under the leadership of the Office of
Management and Budget, the President launched an audit of 15
Federal agencies to examine how their policies and practices
may create or contribute to systemic racism. Like the Biden
Administration, the Congress must do its part to root out
policies and practices that perpetuate systemic racism and the
gender and racial wealth gaps.
Compensation inequity is discrimination, and injustice
anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. It exacerbates the
gender and racial wealth gaps by hampering the ability of women
and people of color to increase savings and build wealth
through their homeownership rates. These disparities are
highest for women of color, with Black and Latina women earning
just $62 and $54, respectively, for each dollar earned by a
similar qualified White male.
Although we have seen marginal gains in the closure of the
compensation gap in recent years, most women will not achieve
pay equity in their lifetime, as it will take 50 years for
White women, 350 years for Black women, and, yes, 432 years for
Latina women to close the pay gap at the current pace.
Since the onset of the pandemic, women have lost over 5
million jobs, and these losses are disproportionately impacting
working mothers, women in senior leadership roles, and Black
women. Compensation gaps will only make it harder to recruit
these important leaders back into the workforce in the years to
come.
Members of the LGBTQ community also face wage disparities,
as gay and bisexual men earn 10 percent to 32 percent less than
similarly qualified heterosexual men.
In our country, all Americans should be valued and
compensated equitably for their expertise and labor.
Eliminating pay discrimination is long overdue. Thus, this
hearing today is so important because I know the disparities in
wealth creation in our economy, and we will hear those
realities echoed in our witnesses' testimony.
We must not just look to companies; we must look to
government. Just 2 days ago, the soon-to-be Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB) Director said that he also is holding
government accountable. And so, all companies should take
proactive measures towards closing compensation gaps in their
workforce by conducting pay equity audits and publicly
disclosing their diversity data.
I am hopeful that the full Financial Services Committee
will take up legislation requiring the Federal financial
regulatory agencies to conduct pay equity audits every 2 years,
as well. And let me just tell you, there is study after study
that will show you how many trillions of dollars we have lost
in the GDP overall, due to the compensation gap, and
potentially a loss of $2.7 trillion annually due to the Black
wage gap alone.
We also know how it has affected us, and thus that is why,
in part, this subcommittee is so important, and we have had
great witnesses. And today, I look forward to the testimonies
of our witnesses. I have read them, and I am very pleased with
the education and awareness that they are providing. Thank you.
At this time, I will now yield 5 minutes to the ranking
member of the subcommittee, my good friend and colleague,
Congresswoman Ann Wagner from Missouri. The Chair now
recognizes her for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
We all agree that every American, regardless of race or
gender, should have access to economic opportunities, and I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses to better understand
how financial firms can expand access to high-paying jobs and
also better implement their own policies that reduce the wage
gap and enhance financial literacy.
In order to address the wage gap, private-sector firms are
proactively adjusting their culture to break down barriers and
advance economic opportunities for women by advocating for pay
equity, affordable child care, and paid sick and family leave.
But there is still much to be done, particularly in addressing
the wealth gap and the manager's gap and ensuring that the
American workforce is more flexible and family-friendly so that
mothers can thrive in their careers without facing unnecessary
hurdles.
As a working woman, I worked before, during, and after I
had my children. I have always been a passionate defender of
equal pay for equal work. In the past few years, we have seen a
shift in the private sector to offer paid parental leave
policies. These policies are particularly beneficial to women,
whom we know are more likely to take on the primary caregiver
role within a family.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, women left the workforce at a
rate 4 times that of men. When a woman leaves the workforce in
order to raise children or care for family members, she not
only diminishes her earning capacity at present, but when she
does return to the workforce, she tends to make less than her
male peers, who have advanced and grown their earning capacity
during that same period of time. Offering paid parental leave
enables those women to remain in the workforce and avoid
lagging behind their peers, and it helps close the gender wage
gap.
Another factor that is correlated to the gender wage gap is
the disparity between men and women who earn degrees in
science, technology, engineering and math, the STEM fields.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, STEM occupations
are projected to grow over 2 times faster than the total for
all occupations in the next decade. We need these high-paying
jobs in every industry, including financial services, and yet
fewer women are receiving STEM degrees than men. Creating
greater diversity in STEM education is critical not only for
improving opportunities for women and minorities in finance but
across all workforce sectors. It is the key to sustaining
robust economic growth in the United States.
In 2019, I requested a Government Accountability Office
(GAO) study to assess how firms are supporting increased
participation among women in STEM programs at the secondary,
undergraduate, and graduate levels, and what best practices
firms are using to recruit and retain women with STEM degrees.
This study will help us continue to find solutions as we
strengthen the U.S. financial services industry, and I look
forward to reviewing it when it is published this year.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and I yield the remainder of
my time to the ranking member of the Full Committee, Ranking
Member McHenry.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you to my colleague for yielding.
And now, I will recognize Full Committee Ranking Member
Patrick McHenry from North Carolina..
Mr. McHenry. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. I want to thank Ranking Member Wagner for
yielding, as well.
There is no doubt that disparities in compensation set our
nation back, and the pandemic has only exacerbated these
disparities. For example, there are two things that are on my
mind here. We know that millions of women left the workforce
last year. Disproportionately, child care is a family issue
now. We should think of it as a family issue now. But
unfortunately, we have seen during the pandemic that it is
still largely falling on female workers to bear that load.
We know that pre-COVID, the research shows that the U.S.
economy would be $1.6 trillion larger if women entered the
workforce and remained in the workforce at higher rates. That
is what I am thinking about today. But we also have to think
about the way that people are working and how they are working
differently. One full-time job that will last as a career is
not in the offing for most people, so people have part-time
jobs or multiple jobs in order to make things work.
I think one solution is my Gig Worker Equity Compensation
Act, which expands the category of workers who can benefit from
equity compensation in the fast-growing non-traditional
workforce. So, I think we have to think through these
solutions, and I am glad we are having these discussions.
Thanks so much, Madam Chairwoman. I yield back.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Today, we welcome the testimony of our distinguished
witnesses.
First, we have Dr. Andrew Chamberlain, the chief economist
of Glassdoor.
Second, we have Emily Dickens, the chief of staff, head of
government affairs, and corporate secretary for the Society of
Human Resource Management.
Third, we have Maya Raghu, the director of workplace
equality, and senior counsel at the National Women's Law
Center.
And finally, we have Dwana Franklin-Davis, the chief
executive officer of Reboot Representation.
Witnesses are reminded that their oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. You should be able to see a timer on your
screen that will indicate how much time you have left, and a
chime will go off at the end of your time. I would ask that you
be mindful of the timer, and quickly wrap up your testimony if
you hear the chime, so that we can be respectful of both the
witnesses' and the committee members' time. And without
objection, your written statements will be made a part of the
record.
Dr. Chamberlain, you now are recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW CHAMBERLAIN, CHIEF ECONOMIST, GLASSDOOR

Mr. Chamberlain. Chairwoman Beatty, Ranking Member Wagner,
and members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify this afternoon. I am here today on behalf of Glassdoor,
where I am a chief economist. We are an online hiring platform
that lets employees freely and anonymously review their
employer and share pay information with others. Our core belief
is that pay transparency is good for employees, good for
employers, and it is good for the broader economy.
I lead our company's not-for-profit think tank, and for 6
years, I have been researching the topic we are here to talk
about today, which is pay equity in the labor market by gender
and race.
Now, to set the stage, when I think about pay equity, I
imagine looking across a large and diverse gathering of
kindergarten kids from across America. I think of all the
future possibilities before them. No reasonable person would
look at those smiling faces and say, ``You will earn 86 cents
on the dollar when you are an adult because you are an Hispanic
child.'' Or, similarly, ``You will earn 71 cents on the dollar
of what your friend will earn because you are a Black or
African-American girl.''
Saying that, of course, would be outrageously unfair, but
something like that really happens between kindergarten and the
adult workforce today that creates dramatic, surprising and, in
my view, morally troubling patterns of pay inequity. As a
researcher, I have seen these patterns in every data that I
have seen in my career, from Federal surveys to company payroll
data to data from our own online platform. I have come to
believe it is our moral imperative to understand the causes of
these gaps and to diminish them.
How big are today's gender and racial pay gaps? Our most
recent study looked at 425,000 U.S. employees. We found that
men as a group earn about 21.4 percent higher pay than women.
That amounts to about 79 cents per dollar earned by men. We
call that the unadjusted pay gap.
To understand what is causing that gap, we also calculate
an adjusted pay gap, and it separately measures the impact of
all of these factors, like education, experience, job location,
and how much might be leftover due to bias in the workplace.
It turns out that education and experience explains some of
the gender pay gap, about 7.9 percent. But the big cause of the
gender pay gap, by far, is occupational sorting. Women, for
example, make up about one-fourth of the CEOs in the economy,
but they make up more than 70 percent of retail cashiers. That
type of gender-based job sorting in our research explains about
56.5 percent of the gender pay gap, and that, in our view, is
where solutions have to start.
The most striking finding from my research is how pervasive
the gender pay gap is. Even when we compare men and women in
the most apples-to-apples way possible--same job, same
employer, same age, same experience--the pay gap still hovers
around 4.9 percent. So for a woman earning today's median pay
of about $47,300 per year, that can amount to a pay cut of more
than $70,000 over a 30-year career, with the same job, same
company, and same background.
These pay gaps are even bigger when we layer on race and
ethnicity. The Glassdoor data show that Black or African-
American women earn just 71 cents on the dollar compared to
White men as a comparison. Indigenous-American women earn just
69 cents per dollar, and so on. Race and gender pay gaps are
two sides of the economic coin in the workforce.
Pay equity is the focus of this hearing, but I want to
remind you there are other gaps in the workplace in employee
culture that also affect our ability to solve compensation
gaps. In new Glassdoor research we published today, we found
that Black or African-American workers rate workplace diversity
and inclusion nearly 8 percent lower than their White
colleagues, a highly statistically significant gap, and this
gap has actually worsened since 2019 despite rising corporate
investment in diversity & inclusion (DNI). So solving racial
pay gaps, in our view, requires addressing DNI issues in
tandem.
Making real progress on gender and racial pay gaps, in my
view, requires something like a three-pronged approach: better
transparency from employers; empowering better free
occupational choice from workers; and other changes like better
work flexibility, better child care and elder care, and more
gender and race diversity among college majors.
Pay equity is about fairness, but it also helps us build a
more dynamic and prosperous U.S. economy. It clears the way for
every American to make their best contribution to our
prosperity, which is a win-win for workers and employers, and
it can also be a pro-growth agenda for America.
On behalf of Glassdoor, I would like to thank you for
inviting me before the subcommittee today. We look forward to
answering your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Chamberlain can be found on
page 32 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much, Dr. Chamberlain.
Ms. Dickens, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
an oral presentatiof on your testimony.

STATEMENT OF EMILY M. DICKENS, CHIEF OF STAFF, HEAD OF
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS, AND CORPORATE SECRETARY, SOCIETY FOR HUMAN
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT (SHRM)

Ms. Dickens. Thank you, Chairwoman Beatty, Ranking Member
Wagner, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee on
Diversity and Inclusion. This is a great opportunity to testify
on an important issue. I appear before you on behalf of
300,000-plus Human Resources (HR) professionals and business
executives who together impact the lives of more than 115
million workers and their families. HR professionals design and
implement compensation strategies. This work is so nuanced that
many organizations have specialists within who are charged
solely with developing the compensation philosophy. This is no
easy task, and it is a facet of our work experience that most
know little about.
In my testimony, I will address total compensation,
effective practices, and the importance of leveraging these
practices to address inequities.
When we are discussing compensation versus total
compensation, the development of an organizational philosophy
or the explanation for how the organization manages
compensation is important because it explains the, ``why,''
behind employee pay and is based on organizational size,
industry, and business objectives.
Reviewing an organization's compensation philosophy
periodically and updating it based on current business factors
is also key. Most importantly, the organization must
communicate this philosophy to employees and applicants. This
level of transparency builds trust with employees and it
provides awareness for job candidates, allowing them to make
more informed decisions about whether the workplace and its
compensation philosophy meets their expectations.
We have been taught to focus on one number: base pay. It is
the number that most people use to determine whether they are
being fairly compensated. However, the full cost of
compensation for an employee can include many variables. For
the industries over which this subcommittee has oversight,
those variables will likely be cash bonuses, commissions, and
company stock awards. But for the majority of those represented
in SHRM's membership--small and mid-sized businesses--those
variables are likely to be a premium over their regular wages
and incentives for working after regular hours or being on call
or performing a lead function.
Benefits are an important and often overlooked aspect of
total compensation. SHRM's annual employee benefits survey
includes hundreds of different offerings, with health care and
retirement being the most popular. Other lesser-known benefits
that will be crucial as we re-skill and up-skill the American
workforce are student loan and tuition reimbursement, tuition
assistance, and employer-sponsored scholarships. An employer
may also provide subsidized child care benefits. The above-
mentioned examples equate to money that an employer contributes
to the employee's overall compensation package.
When we discuss effective compensation practices, one in
five American workers feel their organization doesn't use fair
criteria to make advancement and promotion decisions. To be
fair and inclusive, employers must use consistent and
actionable compensation practices. Examples include being
transparent and clear in communications to all employees about
pay decisions, providing hands-on compensation training to
supervisors and hiring managers, educating employees about the
organization's compensation package, and conducting
comprehensive pay equity reviews, as well as examining
promotion decisions for evidence of pay bias.
HR professionals have a pivotal role in advising on
systemic compensation equity changes. Other than the factors
you will hear more about today, there are other things driving
compensation inequity including recruitment, job descriptions,
performance reviews, age and tenure, incentive pay, educational
level, promotion opportunities, social demographic factors, and
industry and career paths.
Let us also not forget that employees make personal choices
that impact their compensation, as well. The choice to step out
of the workplace to go back to school, to start a family, the
choice to follow a purpose, to work for a non-profit rather
than a for-profit, the choice to have a work/life balance, all
of these impact earning potential and are often overlooked as
reasons why compensation differs from person to person.
Human resource professionals must balance personal choices,
employee expectations, and the needs of the business.
Finally, the path toward equity requires a laser focus on
educating more people on the compensation process. I am
fortunate to have received this education, but I am keenly
aware that most don't have this exposure. People cannot
advocate for themselves without knowledge. The work of this
subcommittee is a major step in alerting the public that they
must actively seek information about total compensation if they
are expected to use the resources that provide this
information, and the workplace will be a key partner in
educating employees about compensation.
Thank you for the opportunity to present.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dickens can be found on page
157 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you, Ms. Dickens.
Ms. Raghu, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MAYA RAGHU, DIRECTOR OF WORKPLACE EQUALITY, AND
SENIOR COUNSEL, NATIONAL WOMEN'S LAW CENTER

Ms. Raghu. Thank you, Chairwoman Beatty, Ranking Member
Wagner, and members of the subcommittee. I am the director of
workplace equality at the National Women's Law Center, where we
fight for gender justice in the courts, in public policy, and
in our society, working across the issues that are central to
the lives of women and girls.
Over the last year, the effects of the pandemic have fallen
particularly hard on women and women of color. They are front-
line workers risking their lives for minimum wage and
disproportionately bear devastating job losses, and they are
shouldering the responsibility for caregiving as our jerry-
rigged caregiving infrastructure imploded this last year.
Millions of women, but especially Black and Brown women,
have long worked in essential but undervalued jobs that leave
them struggling to make ends meet. Now, lost earnings due to
the gender wage gap are intensifying the impact of the pandemic
and robbing women and their families of a financial cushion
just when they need it the most, and also to build wealth for
future security.
A key driver of gender and race wage gaps is women's
overrepresentation in low-wage jobs in particular fields.
Another is bias, whether overt or implicit, and stereotypes,
including of caregivers, which can impact employer decisions at
critical points: hiring; performance evaluations and
promotions; and leadership development opportunities.
Pay disparities, once created, are often hidden by the
widespread pay secrecy policies and perpetuated and magnified
over time by practices such as reliance on someone's prior
salary. This affects compensation bonuses and retirement
contributions.
The pandemic has deepened existing challenges that
individuals face that may widen wage gaps as they re-enter the
workforce. A labor market where some jobs are going to
permanently disappear, the loss of seniority, long periods of
unemployment due to caregiving or other responsibilities, the
need for paid leave, affordable care, greater flexibility, and
new training and education all leave individuals with less
bargaining power when they re-enter the workplace.
On top of that, employers hold far more information than
applicants and workers about pay. This information asymmetry
can be a particular problem for women, people of color, and
other groups, making it less likely to have extensive networks
within some sectors for accessing that crucial information, and
that is made worse by pay secrecy. Pay secrecy is bad for
business. It leads to employee dissatisfaction and lower
motivation and mistrust of management.
Pay equity is an issue of increasing importance to
shareholders and to younger generations who are potential
employees and consumers. Transparency and equity are important
corporate values. I want to highlight a few key promising
practices and legislative trends to increase transparency and
collective efforts.
First, eliminate pay secrecy policies and provide salary
ranges. Allowing employees to discuss pay without retaliation
and providing more information to applicants about salary
ranges for jobs reduces the information asymmetry and helps
attract diverse talents, and numerous States have enacted
legislation recently to address these issues.
To significantly narrow the gender wage gap for employees
working in the public sector, where pay secrecy rules are
uncommon and salary ranges are often publicly disclosed,
suggests the difference that transparency can make in closing
wage gaps.
Second, regularly conduct equal pay audits and compensation
metrics. Activist shareholders are being increasingly
successful in dragging businesses to conduct these analyses to
help uncover and correct pay disparity, and to disclose wage
gap metrics. But in the absence of Federal action, States,
including California, Illinois, New Jersey, and others have
enacted pay data reporting requirements. And in the U.K. and
Europe, legislation requires analysis and reporting of pay
information, and also public disclosure of gender wage gap
metrics. And research shows that these mandates have helped
drive employer pay analyses and proactive efforts to close wage
gaps.
Third, establish consistent, objective compensation-setting
practices and reduce reliance on salary negotiation and prior
salary. Allowing negotiation and an applicant's prior salary to
drive compensation often can create gender and racial wage
disparities that follow people from job to job. An objective,
transparent compensation-setting practice can narrow wage
disparities for women, people of color, and between current and
new employees, and this can also help recruit and retain
diverse talent.
Finally, it is important to use and communicate objective,
measureable metrics for performance evaluations. Objective
performance evaluation criteria can help minimize the influence
of unconscious bias at important points where there is
discretion in decision-making, like promotions, which create
and drive wage gaps. Sharing that evaluation criteria with
employees helps increase trust of management and creates
greater engagement and retention.
These recommendations and others are discussed in greater
detail in my written testimony, and I welcome your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Raghu can be found on page
169 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much, Ms. Raghu.
And Ms. Franklin-Davis, you are now recognized for 5
minutes to give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DWANA FRANKLIN-DAVIS, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
REBOOT REPRESENTATION

Ms. Franklin-Davis. Chairwoman Beatty, Ranking Member
Wagner, and distinguished members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. I am the chief
executive officer of Reboot Representation Tech Coalition, a
partnership of leading tech companies that have pooled funding
and committed to a goal of doubling the number of Black,
Latina, and Native American women graduating with computing
Bachelor's degrees by 2025.
I am going to speak about my background, including the
organization I now lead, and then describe the issues my
organization works on and how they will affect compensation
equity.
Prior to joining Reboot, I worked at a top financial
services corporation, leading global technology teams, and I
have a background in technology. My experience and expertise
are through the lens of the tech sector. However, the concepts
and principles can be applied across industries because, after
all, tech transcends industry.
Reboot Representation was launched alongside the report,
``Rebooting Representation: Using CSR and Philanthropy to Close
the Gender Gap in Tech,'' published in September 2018. The
report's goal was to conduct research on how tech companies
approach gender diversity using corporate philanthropy. The
media had indicated that companies were, ``throwing money at
this diversity problem,'' but the report gathered data on how
much companies were actually spending on gender diversity. The
research surveyed 32 leading tech companies representing over
$500 billion in revenue and over $500 million in philanthropic
giving, and found that they were only spending 5 percent
towards gender diversity and tech, and less than .1 percent,
which is $335,000 annually, focused on women and girls of
color, specifically. It is projected that there will be 3.6
million U.S. computing-related jobs opening by 2029, with only
24 percent of these jobs that could be filled by U.S. computing
Bachelor's degree recipients.
These numbers alone should tell us that we need to do more
to prepare individuals in this country for these high-paying
jobs and to better position our companies to compete on the
global stage.
Studies also show that when high school students have
access to take advanced placement computer science principles,
they are 3 times more likely to major in computer science in
college. College freshmen who declare a computer science major
take a critical step toward receiving the second-highest paid
college degree in the nation. States should continue to broaden
participation in computer science by passing policies that make
it a fundamental part of the K-12 education system. Today, only
40 percent of States require high schools to teach computer
science.
I support the nine policies that many agree are necessary
to make computer science fundamental to a State's K-12
education system. To name two: create a plan for K-12 computer
science; and establish dedicated computer science positions in
State and local education agencies.
Let's also remember that data is key. It is important that
companies and organizations are collecting and disaggregating
data, in addition to taking an intersectional approach, while
creating targeted solutions to make an impact that needs to be
woven into policy. To address the intersectional barriers that
so many experience, we cannot treat racial groups as monoliths.
But it is not enough to collect and disaggregate the data.
We must also measure it. This measurement holds organizations
accountable for the data they are collecting and reporting. In
a corporation, it would not be acceptable for a business' year-
over-year return on investment to never increase. So why is
this acceptable for the organization's DNI growth, when there
have been countless studies that have proven that diverse teams
are more productive and overall contribute to a higher return
on investment (ROI)? Corporations must be inclusive through
both diverse hiring methods and programs that support
retention, which will lead to equitable outcomes and greater
retention.
An intentional intersectional approach is also necessary
when creating policy. When programs and policies are informed
and implemented for the least-represented, they also benefit
the greater population because rising tides raise all ships.
We are at a critical inflection point. Meaningful solutions
are impossible without collective action. Bold leadership from
the public and private sectors must step up, acknowledge the
policies and practices that are contributing to inequity, and
lead the change that is long overdue. Technology empowers,
innovates, and adapts. It is the responsibility of all of us to
ensure that our policies and companies do the same.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here, and to speak to
something that is near and dear to my heart.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Franklin-Davis can be found
on page 164 of the appendix.]
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much, Ms. Franklin-Davis,
for your testimony.
And thank you to all of the witnesses.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Ms. Dickens and Ms. Raghu, since the onset of the COVID
pandemic, a significant number of women have left the
workforce. Many of you talked about that in your testimony.
This is particularly true for working mothers, women, seniors,
and also for Black women.
How does compensation inequity contribute to workforce
attrition, and how will it impact the recruitment of these
leaders back into the workforce?
And either one of you can start.
Ms. Dickens. Thank you for the question, Chairwoman Beatty.
It does impact recruitment. Right now, we are seeing a number
of jobs open, but it is a hard time for us to be able to
fulfill and to find the talent we need for those jobs. So right
now, there is a lot of opportunity for people who have been out
of the workforce, especially women, to enter the workforce in
positions that are paying more than when they left because of
demand. We are sitting in a period of demand right now.
We are also sitting in a period for HR professionals where
there is a lot of thoughtfulness into how we are diversifying
our workplaces and making sure we are creating cultures that
are more inclusive, where people are now considering
organizations where they understand the culture is going to
welcome them and they are going to succeed. I think we have an
opportunity now with the thousands of HR professionals who are
thinking differently of leading the culture and trying to
create inclusive environments for more diverse employees and
more opportunities.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you. For purposes of time, I am
going to ask for shorter answers.
We will go to you, Ms. Raghu.
Ms. Raghu. Thank you. I agree with Ms. Dickens in that I
think this moment is an incredible opportunity for
organizations to re-think workplaces. We recognize now, thanks
to the pandemic, that women, and especially women of color, are
increasingly the primary breadwinners and caregivers, and if
workplaces want to attract and retain them, they are going to
have to adjust their workplace expectations to that reality.
The gender wage gap is one reason that many women went out
of the labor force as families had to choose who could let go
of their job in order to pick up the caregiving
responsibilities when our infrastructure imploded.
Chairwoman Beatty. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chamberlain, companies who ignore pay disparities in
their workforce face increased reputational risk. How has pay
discrimination been reflected in the anecdotal information
reported by some of the former employees on Glassdoor's
platform?
Mr. Chamberlain. We know from surveys of job seekers that
employees pay a lot of attention to pay equity. It is one of
the top factors they look at when choosing where to work.
People say they will not work at places where there is either a
real or a perceived inequity in pay, either by gender or race.
So it definitely affects talent attraction, and there is
abundant research showing that.
One of the powerful things pay transparency can do is it
can ignite public pressure on companies to do good for
themselves, like they realize it is actually in their own
business interest to handle these issues before they become a
recruiting problem, because it affects their competitiveness
and ability to get the talent they need on board.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you.
Ms. Franklin-Davis, we have noticed that women and people
of color have made great strides in educational attainment,
especially since the year 2000. Yet, their compensation
inequities still persist, over, oftentimes, their male White
counterparts with the exact same skills. Do you think that pay
equity audits could be leveraged to address these disparities,
or any other thing you would like to give us advice on?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Yes, I do think that audits can do a
lot with regard to fixing the past. I also believe that pay
scales should be transparent so someone going into an
organization will be able to know where they should stand and
not have to rely on their past pay or the history with regards
to the opportunities they are applying for.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you.
And I have 20 seconds left, so this is a yes-or-no round
robin to each of you. Do you think we are on the right track
with this hearing, yes or no?
Mr. Chamberlain. Yes.
Ms. Dickens. Yes.
Ms. Raghu. Yes.
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Yes.
Chairwoman Beatty. While that may have seemed like a light
question, trust me, it will be invaluable to me as the Chair as
we move forward to bring legislation around this.
Thank you.
And now, I have the distinct pleasure of yielding to my
ranking member from the great State of Missouri, Ranking Member
Wagner.
Mrs. Wagner. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Beatty.
And I will register a, ``yes,'' too; how about that?
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you; so noted.
Mrs. Wagner. Ms. Dickens, as the chairwoman stated at the
beginning of her questioning, the pandemic and its lockdowns
have resulted in millions of women leaving the workforce. Do
you believe we will see a gap between men and women's job
recovery post-pandemic? And how important is it to fully reopen
our economy to ensure women continue to have economic
opportunities?
Ms. Dickens. Thank you for the question, Madam Ranking
Member. Yes, there is going to be a gap in the short term. We
will have to acknowledge that. This is then called the, ``she-
cession,'' as everyone alluded to today, that we have lost the
greatest number of women in the workforce since around 1988.
But I think we can address this quickly by getting more
businesses to be open, and we are already seeing demand.
We also have to understand that we have so much talent out
there available that we will have to compete for that talent
while creating workplaces with better cultures that have more
flexibility, and understand that in the short term, we may need
that worker to work remotely, or we may think about providing
child care on-site services, or elderly care. And we also may
need to do some upscaling and rescaling because of the new
demands that we are seeing in the marketplace.
Mrs. Wagner. So, flexibility is going to be very important,
it sounds like, in the workplace.
Ms. Dickens, in your testimony you mentioned SHRM's annual
employee benefits survey of its 300,000-plus members. In this
survey it showed that 34 percent of organizations offered paid
maternity leave, and 30 percent offer paid paternity leave. In
your experience, what sorts of factors impact the ability of an
employer to offer paid parental leave?
Ms. Dickens. Multiple factors, including the number of
people you have who are able to work in the organization. We
have a number of organizations that have a shortage of
employees at the time. So, it is not always about the financial
resources. It is, do we have the labor to continue to run the
business as it runs today with more people out?
Mrs. Wagner. And to that point, do you believe that the
cost of losing and replacing an employee generally outweighs
the cost of providing parental leave?
Ms. Dickens. We always say that it costs to acquire a new
staff person. So, it is important that we look at the culture,
mission, and value of an organization for them to make a
decision about the value of that employee to the overall bottom
line.
Mrs. Wagner. Ms. Franklin-Davis, what efforts are companies
proactively taking to increase the number of women and
minorities earning degrees in STEM programs? And what more can
we do to increase that number?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Companies are taking multiple
approaches with regard to how they are investing through their
philanthropic giving, as well as what they are looking at on
the corporate side of their house. Through the lens of legal
representation, we are focused more on an untapped pathway at
the higher end, recommending that early exposure to STEM is key
for K-12, but also right now, as the pipeline really is
shrinking, making sure that we have as many women of color
entering into the STEM fields, specifically computing fields,
and graduating with Bachelor's degrees is our goal and mission.
Mrs. Wagner. Well, while education is important, there must
also be readily available employment, as well. Ms. Franklin-
Davis, are there barriers in the current STEM industries which
discourage females and minorities from entering the workforce,
do you believe?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Yes.
Mrs. Wagner. Please elaborate.
Ms. Franklin-Davis. I only have 25 seconds, so I will talk
through that the lack of representation is one of the major
things. Also, the barrier with regards to equal access. So,
exposure and opportunity. I could go on and on, but I will stop
there.
Mrs. Wagner. We are already out of time, and I would
encourage you to submit your thoughts, please, any of you, in
writing regarding that question for the record. I would
appreciate it.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you very much.
I now recognize the distinguished gentlelady from
Massachusetts, Congresswoman Pressley.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you to our distinguished and honorable
Chair for convening this important hearing, and thank you to
our esteemed witnesses.
Madam Chairwoman, we know that the minimum wage in America
is not a living wage. Even before this pandemic, families were
on the brink: $7.25 an hour simply wasn't enough to make ends
meet. There has been much discussion about this recently in
Congress, and I vehemently support ending the Jim Crow
filibuster so we can pass a $15.00-an-hour minimum wage.
Today, I want to bring front and center the experiences, as
has been elevated throughout this hearing, of women of color,
but specifically women of color with disabilities. Not only do
they face the pay gaps women of color experience, but layered
on top of that are their experiences with disabilities. So,
they face a jarring level of wage discrimination and compounded
pay inequities.
Moreover, in the United States, it is considered legal to
pay workers far less, with reports indicating those with
disabilities were paid a sub-minimum wage, earning an average
of $3.34 to $3.40 per hour of work. The Federal minimum wage is
already unlivable and inhumane. One in four people who call
this nation home have a disability. It is absolutely
unacceptable that we have sanctioned their financial
marginalization.
While the disability community is not a monolith, I raise
the sub-minimum wage to highlight just one archaic and ableist
practice. As of October, more than 1,200 employers held or
applied for 14(c) certificates, allowing them to pay workers
with disabilities sub-minimum wages.
Ms. Raghu, allowing people with disabilities to be paid a
sub-minimum wage is a failure of government and uplifts archaic
and ableist judgments of productivity. How has Section 14(c)
impacted people with disabilities, particularly Black women and
other people of color with disabilities?
Ms. Raghu. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman, but I
will have to admit that I am not familiar with the details of
that particular piece of legislation. What I will say is that I
agree with you that the Federal minimum wage and different sub-
minimum wages in our Federal law have a profound impact on
women of color and people with disabilities, and that has
perpetuated wage gaps for decades.
One of the issues that is affecting people with
disabilities particularly during the pandemic is the ability to
work and continue working while also receiving the care and
assistance that they need, especially in their homes. So one
thing I would say that we could do on a policy level is to
ensure that people with disabilities are able to obtain pay
equity and work for the minimum wage, like everyone else, but
also to ensure that they have opportunities to receive the
assistance and care they need in the context that makes sense
for them and their families and their ability to work, and that
will be part of a solution to them working towards their
economic security.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
I am a proud co-sponsor of HR 2373, the Raise the Wage Act,
which would eliminate those Section 14(c) certificates once and
for all. My colleagues who know me well, know that I am very
passionate about data, because I do believe that that which
gets measured gets done, and the lack of complete, non-biased,
disaggregated data about disability employment and wage gaps
really is standing in the way of progress. While the Bureau of
Labor Statistics and the American Community Survey and Current
Population Survey Census data provides disability employment
data, this data is not disaggregated by race. So without a
doubt, this disaggregated data would be valuable in our
continued pursuit of worker justice.
Dr. Chamberlain, Glassdoor has served as a tool for job
seekers and employers and collected key data on employment.
Thank you for testifying today about your data on the gender
and race pay gap. Dr. Chamberlain, what percentage of job
postings on Glassdoor proactively include information about
accessibility and accommodations for workers with disabilities?
Mr. Chamberlain. Most job postings follow the normal
guidelines for ADA compliance in saying that they do not
discriminate. However, the real information many job seekers
need, including disabled job seekers, is information about
compensation and benefits. And while benefits are often listed
on job postings, pay is extremely rare. Only 10 percent of job
postings ever list pay openly, and so we try to fill in the
gaps by estimating it ourselves.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. And you mentioned in your testimony
that in this recently launched feature for your company,
diversity, equity, and inclusion practices are part of that.
How are the experiences of workers with disabilities weighted
in your assessment?
Mr. Chamberlain. We finally have begun collecting
information about employee disability, LGBTQ status, veteran
status, and other features, and we are displaying all of the
information on Glassdoor, all of the reviews, all of the
salaries, by those characteristics. So, this lets people, on an
intersectional basis, see exactly what they should be
compensated for their particular situation, which is quite
empowering. We have never had it before now.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much.
And now, I recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Oklahoma, Congressman Lucas, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
To meet our economic potential, I think we all agree that
we need an inclusive and diverse workforce that draws on the
full talent pool available in this country. In addition to my
responsibilities on the Financial Services Committee, I also
serve on the Science Committee, and we are working frantically
there trying to address the shortage of STEM resources in the
pipeline through the National Science Foundation and a variety
of other efforts.
So I would ask this question to Ms. Franklin-Davis. Could
you speak on how improving the diverse representation in the
STEM fields will enable increased representation and higher
incomes for women across-the-board? Because sometimes, you do
things that have amazing consequences down the road.
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Increasing representation in all of the
STEM fields--the STEM fields, especially when it pertains to
Bachelor's degrees, are the highest-paid degrees for
undergrads, with engineering being first, computer science
being second, and math and the other sciences being third. So
increasing access for students, especially students of color,
to those high-paying wage jobs will not have any negative
consequences with regard to future output but will increase
representation in all of those fields and impact communities in
which those people live.
Mr. Lucas. Absolutely. And it has become quite clear to us
on the Science Committee that not just our economic prosperity
but our very economic survival in this increasingly complex
world will depend on that stream of STEM people prepared to
take up the challenge.
Continuing with you, Ms. Franklin-Davis, in your testimony
you outline nine policies that are very important to ensure
that computer science is fundamental to a State's K-12
education system. Could you further discuss the importance of
implementing a clear certification pathway for computer science
teachers and unique approaches across different States? What is
working out there? What should we be looking at, for example,
so we can make this progress?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Yes, thank you for that question.
Access and opportunity I alluded to, and that is not equal
across the country. So preparing our teachers with the tools
that they need to teach the students is absolutely critical.
The exposure and just having students be able to have it not
count against them, knowing that it is now core and not an
elective and not optional, should be something that we focus
on, just like we do for history or math basics.
As we are going to be looking forward to the future, as I
made mention, technology transcends all industry. So having
this fundamental and baseline in computer science is going to
propel our nation's future in all areas of industry across-the-
board.
Do you want me to go into what those nine were?
Mr. Lucas. If you can touch on those in a few minutes, the
things that you consider to be really important highlights in
that group that we could consider and work with our folks back
in our States.
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Having a consistent State plan for
kids, both making sure that access is equal for all students,
and also being intentional. It is not enough just to have a
program for computer science; we found out through programs
that we fund and research, that you have to be specific with
regard to women and girls, as well as underrepresented
students. It is not enough to, ``if you build it, they will
come.'' If you build it, generally only the boys will come. So,
how are we being specific with regard to girls and girls of
color?
Defining what computer science means, and that rigorous
standard that we want to set across-the-board, it should be
equal across States as well as in urban and rural areas.
Making sure that proper funding is allocated so that we can
make sure that our science teachers and professionals have the
opportunity to continue to learn and support.
Being able to make sure that there is a clear certification
pathway for our teachers, and creating an institution of higher
education to offer computer science to pre-service teachers.
In addition to that, making sure that we establish computer
science positions in State and local education agencies so that
continues to maintain and manage the high level of visibility
that it needs.
And then, when you go and look at the schools, requiring
that all secondary schools offer computer science with
appropriate implementation timelines, allowing those classes to
satisfy core graduation requirements, as well as allowing them
to satisfy the mission requirements for institutions of higher
education.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you very much.
And thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much, Congressman Lucas.
Now, I recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Massachusetts, Congressman Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate that.
And I thank Ranking Member Wagner, as well. I really do
appreciate you pulling this hearing together.
I want to thank the staff for their work, both the Minority
and Majority staffs, for putting together this panel of
excellent witnesses.
I am a firm believer that transparency itself can have a
really profound and positive impact on the way people behave.
If you know someone is looking over your shoulder and is going
to review your decisions, I think that will help a lot.
I know that all of the witnesses have worked on this issue
for some time. Dr. Chamberlain, I know you have done a lot of
research with Glassdoor, and I know that Director Raghu with
the National Women's Law Center has, as well. I wanted to ask
you if there are examples that you have seen, even from another
country, examples that we could use in putting a plan together
to actually correct this situation. We all want to get there,
but what we are lacking really is a plan that can be
accomplished legislatively, as well as, as the Chair mentioned,
reputational pressure on these companies to do the right thing.
But are there examples out there that you have come across that
might inform our decision-making?
Dr. Chamberlain?
Mr. Chamberlain. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Yes. Any long-term solution to the pay gap has to address
transparency and compensation equity. But as I mentioned in my
testimony, one of the other serious issues we have to deal with
is occupational sorting, which is something some of the other
panelists have talked about today, the fact that men and women
tend to major in different majors in college, which puts them
on different tracks in the labor market and they end up in
different jobs.
The solution really has to address both of those things. I
have not seen any one policy that specifically addresses all of
them, but what I am trying to encourage today is what my
research shows, that you have to address them together because
they work in tandem.
I will say that we have looked internationally. We do see
smaller gender pay gaps. Just to take one example, in some
countries--for example, Singapore has a much lower pay gap than
the United States, and so does France, and one of the reasons
is they actively support gender-neutral parental leave. They
offer incentives for companies to give flexible work
arrangements. Those are some lessons we can learn. Thank you.
Mr. Lynch. That is great, very helpful.
Director Raghu, is there anything you have seen that might
help us deal with this problem here in the United States?
Ms. Raghu. Thank you, Congressman. Yes. We can look to
examples from what States and other countries have been doing
in terms of implementing requirements for companies to conduct
pay analyses, and then in some cases, also creating a sort of
public disclosure requirement.
One example that I will highlight right now is the example
of the U.K., which a few years ago instituted a requirement for
large companies to collect and report compensation metrics--
this is only gender--to a government agency. But what was new
is that they also included a requirement for companies to take
some of those ratios and post them on their websites so that
they were available to the public.
What that led the companies to do is then to also submit a
report on their website that attempted to give context to those
numbers and how they got there, and also to devise plans to
address any gender wage gaps that were revealed.
And the other thing that I thought was important about
those disclosure requirements is it wasn't just about the rate
of pay. As has been said before, compensation has many
different parts. So, it also required some reporting about the
ratio of bonuses between men and women, male and female
employees who received bonus pay; and also, importantly,
looking at the distribution of men and women in four different
salary bands to get a sense of, were women concentrated in
lower-paying jobs and men in higher-paying jobs?
I think all of that information is critical to unpacking
some of the problems and addressing gender and racial wage
gaps.
Mr. Lynch. That is great. Thank you.
Ms. Dickens, I know your organization as well has been
doing a lot of the same work. Any recommendations that you
might offer to us?
Ms. Dickens. I am going to recommend that we focus more on
our people managers. Today, your individual contributor,
tomorrow, your manager. We need to train people in how to make
sure they understand compensation, how to identify pay
inequities, how to create professional development
opportunities and stretch assignments for their employees. So I
think focusing on people managers more readily would be
important.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much.
I now recognize the distinguished gentleman from the great
State of Ohio, Congressman Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairwoman Beatty. And
thank you, Ranking Member Wagner, and our panel today.
This pandemic has highlighted many of the challenges that
we are talking about, unquestionably. I always say that the
pandemic has been very difficult on pretty much everyone, but
it has been particularly difficult on women and minorities in
my district and across the country. So I am grateful that we
are having this hearing, and I want to start my questions with
Ms. Franklin-Davis.
In 2019, as you may be aware, Google, in the course of
their workforce study, found that they were actually
underpaying men relative to women, and then they corrected it.
It sounds like they do this every year--in years when women are
getting more, they correct it, and when men are getting more,
they correct it, and they normalize going forward as sort of a
best practice. Do I have that right?
And second, if that is true, what can we learn? Because it
sounds like they may be doing this better than most, in
particular in the technology space. So, what should we learn?
What takeaway should we take from that? Maybe you have a
different take on the data, but that was something I was just
reading. I will turn it over to you.
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Thank you for the question,
Congressman. Yes, it is becoming more common practice in the
tech space for there to be that internal audit of how both men
and women are being paid and to make that adjustment where
necessary. It is also starting to be more of a common practice
for the pay scales for the job ranges to be publicized, at
least within the organization. So, that should help employees
know where they stand for their specific position.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. It is sort of a transparency thing
for the employees, and then an intentionality on the part of
the company, is that the right way to think about it?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Yes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Great. And in a prior life, I ran a
small tech company, one that probably nobody here has ever
heard of, but a very good one, with two female co-founders, and
we had a lot of conversations about some of these issues
specifically. And what they always said--they were women of
color--was that there are cultural issues, there is the lack of
intentionality, there is the awareness gap, and then there is
just open discrimination, in particular when they are going out
to pitch about getting funding for the company.
When you look at the tech industry, where do you think we
have the biggest gap, and where should we be focused in terms
of making technology a more inclusive environment?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. There are a lot of places that we need
to focus on, specific to the tech industry. Recruiting and
retention should be two sides of the same coin, as mentioned
earlier. It is not enough to just recruit diverse people, women
and underrepresented parties, into the organization. You have
the same number of people walking out what is called the back
door. Focusing on how organizations can be inclusive and
equitable, and that is in their recruiting, in their hiring, in
how are they providing mentor sponsorships, special
assignments, and being able to give those key programs that
help, elevate those parties throughout their organization.
I already mentioned that it is expensive to hire people
over and over again, so retaining the members that you have,
the employees that you have, will help with that, as well as
increase the company's culture and that feeling of belonging
inside the organization.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Yes, thank you. That is very helpful.
I share the concerns that many have voiced with respect to
making it a more inclusive tech industry.
Ms. Franklin-Davis, I love the quote behind you: ``She
needed a hero, so that's what she became.'' I think that is
awesome.
But, in any event, Dr. Chamberlain, for my final question,
in your testimony you spoke at length about much of the data
surrounding the pay gap for not only gender but how it relates
to ethnicities. Were there any specific professions or
industries that had larger gaps in representation than others,
and what are those industries?
Mr. Chamberlain. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Yes. Our full study does show breakdowns by industry. We saw
fairly large gaps in the retail industry, for example. Among
jobs, we see some lower-paying roles such as chefs with very
large pay gaps. So it varies a lot, and there is no one single
explanation for what is behind the gaps. But we definitely do
see huge differences among jobs and industries.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Great. I would love to follow up--my
time is up--to hear more about that specifically. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Chairwoman Beatty. I now recognize the distinguished
gentlelady from Michigan, Congresswoman Tlaib.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you so much, Chairwoman Beatty, for
holding this hearing on such an urgent and important topic for
so many women in my community.
I know research from the National Women's Law Center shows
that while women make up just under half the workforce in the
United States, they represent nearly two-thirds of the
workforce in the 40 lowest-paying jobs. Most of them are
working mothers and primary breadwinners of their families.
Their work has gone unseen and undervalued for so long, and
they have been hit the hardest during this pandemic.
So, Ms. Raghu, one of the things I want to know is what
more can employers and policymakers like ourselves do to
support women through the pandemic and ensure that existing
compensation gaps for women of color specifically are not
exacerbated by the effects of the pandemic?
Ms. Raghu. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman. I
think some of the policy solutions can meet some of the issues
that have already been raised today. As you noted, women are
overrepresented in minimum wage jobs and jobs that pay the tip
minimum wage. One of the issues with these jobs is not only the
low wage but the fact that these jobs generally don't provide
the important kinds of support that allow women of color who
are in these jobs to be both the breadwinner and the caregiver.
By that, I mean that these jobs generally don't provide access
to paid sick days, to paid family and medical leave. Many of
these jobs, particularly now, must be performed in person and
cannot be performed remotely. Workers in those jobs often find
it difficult to have access to affordable child and family
care. Those jobs often don't have stable schedules, which can
wreak havoc with caregiving arrangements.
So, workers with caregiving responsibilities in these jobs
are often placed in the very difficult position of choosing
between caring for a loved one or going to work, and that is
why you saw so many women, and particularly women of color,
either cut back on their hours or leave the workforce
altogether this year.
If we are going to think about things that employers can
do, I think it is extremely helpful to not only think about
people who are in professional settings or white-collar jobs
but to center our policy responses on women and people of color
and people with disabilities in these jobs that have the fewest
supports and are paying the lowest wages. And, as someone else
has said today, the rising tide is going to lift all boats, and
that includes--
Ms. Tlaib. I agree. I have seen firsthand so many women
with an education, for whom hard work alone has not been enough
to climb above the poverty line. And I know a lot of that is
directly related to the cost of raising a child in our country.
It is among the highest in the world, and that is before you
take into account the impact it has on women's wages and the
gender pay gap. Some women take less demanding, less lucrative
jobs just so they are able to raise their families. Others face
explicit discrimination. I know that personally, I have, for
being a mother in the workplace, receiving fewer
responsibilities under the assumption that they will have
babies and take time off. I was even asked in an interview
whether I planned to be pregnant, which is illegal. But even
among all of that, we continue to see us not addressing the
cost of having a family.
I want to open this up to all of the witnesses here. During
the depths of last year's economic crisis, we found that
women's participation in the workforce fell to levels not seen
since the 1980s, and has rebounded lower than what we see among
men. And even now, nearly 1.5 million mothers are still missing
from the workplace.
So again, I want to open it up, what policy steps should
Congress take to make sure women do not pay a price in the
workplace for choosing to raise a family?
That is for anybody on the panel.
Ms. Raghu. Congresswoman, thank you for the question. I
will say that we talk a lot about workplace flexibility, and I
think we have to get employers to think about a framework for
allowing flexibility in the workplace, and Congress can help by
putting together a framework without mandates, allowing for
innovation so that it works within that particular industry,
and that the owners and employers and employees can work
together to meet the specific needs of that particular
workplace.
Aframework that is different, that can be used across the
country by all industries and not subject to different State
laws, would be really helpful in trying to address this issue.
Ms. Tlaib. Thank you.
Before I yield back, what has been completely frustrating
is the fact that we have to force companies to do these things,
we have to force certain sectors to do these things. But that
is why I appreciate being part of this important subcommittee.
Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you very much.
I am trying to see if Congressman Timmons is on.
Mrs. Wagner. Madam Chairwoman, I don't think--he was having
some slight issues, and I don't believe he is on just yet. So
why don't you go on to your next witness, and we will see if
Mr. Timmons is able to make it. Thank you.
Chairwoman Beatty. Okay, thank you.
I would now like to recognize the gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Congresswoman Dean, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman, and thank you for
pulling together this important hearing with this set of
terrific experts.
I appreciate the chance to identify the problem and also
talk about solutions. This week, I had the chance to
participate in a briefing alongside Ms. Dickens as we discussed
the ways the pandemic has impacted women in the workforce. I am
happy to continue that conversation and hear how we can create
a more equitable future for women and people of color and those
who have been disabled, because they are disproportionately
impacted, especially this past year.
This week, maybe you all saw a report in the Washington
Post announcing that 25 percent of women say they are fiscally
worse off a year into this pandemic, compared with 18 percent
of men. Most striking, 27 percent of non-White Americans say
they are worse off, compared to 18 percent of White Americans.
We also know the past year has been particularly hard on
mothers and is often used to explain the number of women
leaving the workforce. But we know that is not the case across-
the-board in this recession, or ``she-cession,'' as some call
it.
Ms. Dickens, at your briefing the other day you mentioned
that women in the workplace are not a monolith and that we run
into difficulties if we consider them so. It is not synonymous
with motherhood or caregiving. What risks do we run when trying
to explain the impact of the pandemic on women and the
compensation gap through a singular lens instead of the many
facets that contribute to pay disparity for women?
Ms. Dickens. Congresswoman, thank you so much for the
question. It was a great conversation. And thank you for
acknowledging that we are not a monolith. We shared some data
about mental health. There are women who are being triggered by
this over-focus on just the motherhood aspect of women in the
workplace. In addition, there are women who are sitting in
workplaces as leaders who have been faced with trying to keep
businesses afloat during this period, and who have been faced
with caring for their parents and for their spouses during this
period.
So, we want to look at issues that will impact the most
people, not just people who also happen to have the important
duty of being mothers, but women who are in the workplace
dealing with other issues that men deal with and that, again,
when we talk about rising tides float all boats, if we think of
all the issues that we can address related to women, everyone
has a story, everyone needs empathy. We need to make sure that
this is a person-to-person issue and not just put us all in one
group.
Again, I can just say that for HR professionals who have
been so resilient, and on the frontlines of all the crises that
have been happening over the last year, they are trying to make
sure they are meeting the individual needs of their employees,
and we should be thinking about this issue much bigger than
just the issues related to those who are mothers, but also
caregivers and supporters and leaders in the workplace. Thank
you for the question.
Ms. Dean. Thank you, Ms. Dickens.
Dr. Chamberlain, you report that more than 50 percent of
the overall U.S. gender pay gap is explained by occupational
sorting and that any long-term solution to the gender pay gap
must address this issue. You mention that starting right after
college, women and men with the same major will end up on
different career tracks.
I would like to examine even before college, maybe
culturally, maybe in your town, maybe some of the occupational
sorting that happens unintentionally, perhaps early on in
girls' and women's lives. Can you expand on this gender-based
job sorting, occupational sorting, a little more?
Mr. Chamberlain. Yes. Thank you for the question,
Congresswoman. As we have discussed here, what happens in the
education system, particularly in colleges, has a big impact on
the pay gap because men and women sort into different majors,
and that puts them in different jobs.
But as you mentioned, many of these trends start long
before. There is a gendered component to many jobs. Even within
my own family, boys and girls in my household ended up in
different types of roles, with clear gender stamps on them, and
we are not even totally sure why. So, this is an extremely
difficult problem to solve within individual families.
The best thing you can do is you can ensure that when men
and women show up in jobs, that they believe they will be
treated fairly and they will not get the short end of the stick
once they arrive. Solving compensation equity can also solve
occupational sorting by creating a more fair tournament for men
and women.
Ms. Dean. Do you have any ideas on how we interrupt that
behavior of occupational sorting earlier, before a person
appears at the doorstep of an employer?
Where do the minutes go? I yield back. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much.
I now have the honor to recognize the distinguished
gentlelady from Texas, Congresswoman Garcia, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And
again, thank you for bringing this panel together and focusing
on an issue that has been in the forefront of many of our minds
since many of us have lived and breathed and fought it.
Pay equity is an issue that should take priority for all of
us. Equal pay means equal access to building wealth for future
generations.
The pay gap has been researched and proven, and I
appreciate all of the documentation that our witnesses
presented with their testimony, but it definitely does show
that pay disparities are especially harmful to Black and Latina
women.
This issue transcends party lines because it affects
individuals across every industry and geography, in every
region of our country. Unjustified pay gaps hurt women, LGBTQ+
and non-binary individuals, and everyone at all different
levels of experience. As a result, it hurts the families they
support and the children they provide for.
I want to start with you, Dr. Chamberlain. I know we have
all talked about transparency and how that would have a
positive impact in closing the pay gap. But it seems to me that
we can do that, at least with some of these SEC filings. I know
that has been a proposal. What other ways could we make things
more transparent beyond people who can do the corporate
filings? Because many of the essential workers--many Latinas
and African-American women work. They may not have access to
that, and their employers do not make those kinds of filings.
So where else could we look at to make more companies more
transparent?
Mr. Chamberlain. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
This is very important. Transparency does play a critical role
in closing the compensation gap, and for years information has
been almost impossible to find for workers. Our business at
Glassdoor is basically built on this idea that we can make
transparency available on an app on people's phones by
encouraging people to anonymously share what they earn and then
allowing them to read what others earn.
I believe using crowdsourced information like that can
powerfully correct the biases, and we do have some research
showing that. We have shown that people, when we give pay
information to workers, later on, they report higher
compensation. They have actually used that information to
negotiate and close gaps for themselves. So this is in advance
of any kind of legal argument or argument about pay inequity
that can close it up-front with negotiation.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Raghu, I have a question for you in terms of the
research you have done at the Center. My frustration has always
been that a lot of women in my district, which is 77 percent
Latina, working-class people who have maybe an 8th grade
education, the jobs they get are very different maybe than some
of the jobs you have been talking about and that you all have
been studying. You are talking about bonuses and commissions
and stock options. These folks just want to get paid because
they face wage theft, they face people not paying them or
trying to pay them cash because they don't want to deal with
paying for fees and taxes and things that they may owe the
Federal or State Government.
What studies have you seen that have really looked at
those, and again to try to make the inequities there more
transparent? And what can we do to make sure that when we talk
about pay equity and equal pay, that it is really about
everybody, from the poor woman who is working at a nursing home
to the owner of the nursing home?
Ms. Raghu. Thank you, Congresswoman, and thank you for
bringing up the issue that frequently pay equity conversations
are not always centered on people in different types of jobs
and people in the lowest-paying jobs and the circumstances that
can make it difficult for them to uncover and go to their
employer and ask about pay disparities.
I think there are a lot of different peripheral issues that
play in, some of which we have already discussed here. There
are cultural and historical assumptions that underlie what kind
of work women should be doing, how it should be valued, what is
appropriate, and particularly the work of women of color.
I think enforcement of our existing laws around wage theft
or wage and hour laws is incredibly important, so making sure
that our enforcement agencies are properly resourced to do
that. There are also education campaigns for workers so that
they know wage theft is wrong and that they are provided with
the tools to contest that.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Madam Chairwoman, we are out of time.
Can we let her finish?
Chairwoman Beatty. I will yield for her to finish that
quickly.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Thank you, ma'am.
Ms. Raghu. And I am happy to follow up in writing for the
record. What I will say quickly is in the Obama Administration,
there was an effort to provide more paycheck transparency for
workers in low-wage jobs who work for Federal contractors by
letting them know what their wages were supposed to be by
printing it in material that they received, so they would know
if they were being subject to wage theft.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Thank you.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you very much, and thank you for
that. Certainly, if you want to follow up with more data, we
will get it to all of the Members.
Ms. Garcia of Texas. Thank you.
Chairwoman Beatty. Ranking Member Wagner, is Congressman
Timmons on? I got a note that he is with us.
Mrs. Wagner. He made it. He is next. Thank you, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Beatty. I am glad to see him on the screen. So,
it is my honor to recognize the distinguished gentleman from
South Carolina, Congressman Timmons.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I am very
fortunate that I made it. My flight was delayed, and I
literally just got home. So, I appreciate that I am getting the
opportunity to be a part of this.
I just want to begin by saying I think it is helpful to
just acknowledge the reality that we still have a lot of work
to do in order to close the gender and race wealth gap. As of
2018, women's wages were 85 percent of men's. Men on average
have 3 times the retirement savings that women do. Women make
up 63 percent of minimum wage jobs but only 5 percent of
Fortune 500 CEO jobs.
White families on average have 41 times the wealth of Black
families, and 22 times the wealth of Latino families. And to
make matters worse, family wealth for Latinos and Black people
has been stagnant since the 1990s.
These are all facts that need to be addressed, and I am
willing to work with my colleagues on both sides of the aisle
to do so.
But I also think it is worth noting the two different
visions that were on display just last night. We heard from
President Biden--I was there in the House Chamber--that the way
to solve all of our problems is to essentially throw money at
them. In other words, no matter the problem, we can tax and
spend our way out of it. I was not impressed or inspired by
this approach.
Shortly thereafter, we heard from one of my Senators,
someone who has experienced true poverty and climbed the
economic success ladder and who, more than anyone I know,
personifies the American Dream. I just want to share a few of
the quotes he had from last night.
He said, ``The beauty of the American Dream is that
families get to define it for themselves. We should be
expanding options and opportunities for all families, not
throwing money at certain issues because my colleagues across
the aisle think that they know best.''
Two speeches, two ways forward: tax and spend; versus
educational empowerment and economic opportunity.
Another thing he said was, ``Education is the closest thing
that we have to magic.''
Again, it seems obvious to me which approach will work.
Unfortunately, COVID has only exacerbated these very
problems. Minority workers and women have paid the price more
than anyone for the needless and seemingly unending school
closures and Draconian economic restrictions in certain States.
I have a question for Ms. Franklin-Davis. As many
businesses shut down, women either left or lost their jobs at a
rate 4 times as high as men either because they worked in
customer-facing industries which closed due to COVID or because
they needed to care for children and family members during
quarantine. I expect this fact will only exacerbate the wage
and wealth gap.
As we re-open our economy, how can we ensure that women who
held high-skilled jobs are able to return to those jobs? And
even for those who are not in high-skilled jobs, how can we
ensure that they do not lag behind their peers upon re-entry?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. Thank you for that question,
Congressman. I think what we are seeing is key and top
organizations are looking at ways that--they recognize the
``she-cession'' that we keep talking about and referring to and
want to find a way to--want to reskill and upskill workers so
that they can: one, have access to higher-paying jobs; and two,
be able to have women specifically be able to re-enter.
That means that we need to think outside the box with
regard to the gaps that may be in timelines of resumes. That
means how do we look at the skills that people have and know
that the specific description for the job that they are
applying to, how the skills on their resume can translate or
transcend into what the job is actually requiring and more than
what it is asking for?
Mr. Timmons. Sure, I appreciate that. I just want to
reiterate to my colleagues on both sides of the aisle that this
is a problem that is only going to get worse with every passing
day and week. Last night, I was at the joint address, and we
were in a room where everyone who wanted a vaccine has been
able to get one, and I would bet 80 to 90 percent of the room
has received one, and yet we were forced to wear not only
masks, but KN95 masks.
We have to get back open. I know that every American who
wants a vaccine has had at least a week or two, and maybe we
give them another week or two, but once everyone who wants a
vaccine has gotten one, we have to get back to work. We can
take precautions to protect those who are most vulnerable, the
older and people who have health issues. But everyone else has
to get back to work because these challenges that we have been
talking about are only going to get worse the longer we stay
closed.
And with that, Madam Chairwoman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much.
I now recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Massachusetts, Congressman Auchincloss.
Mr. Auchincloss. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. I appreciate
this panel. It has been a good discussion.
I am the father of a 1-year-old, and we have another one on
the way, due in August. My wife works long hours. So, this is
an issue that is near and dear to me, and absolutely to my
constituents as well in Massachusetts, and that is about paid
family and medical leave and its effect on parents, and moms in
particular.
For Ms. Franklin-Davis, and also Ms. Dickens, what would be
the effect of incorporating what President Biden called for
last night in his American Families Plan, for national paid
family and medical leave, on the ability of working moms to
close the gender wage gap?
Ms. Franklin-Davis. I can start. The ability of a person,
not just a woman, to be able to care not just for children but
aging parents, do her job, do it well, and still live life is
absolutely necessary. I too have two amazing little people and
have the ability to work, as well as be able to think of and
look after the needs of my parents, and without that ability, I
would not be able to sit here today comfortably and have this
conversation with you, like so many others across the country.
Ms. Dickens. Congressman, thank you for the question. As I
mentioned earlier, we are in support of some Federal framework
that allows for paid family leave. We think that flexibility is
so important in the workplace. But as I mentioned earlier too,
60 percent of our members represent small and medium-sized
businesses, and the needs of a very small business and their
ability to cover the cost or to fill in, to have other people
hired in their place, there are just different instances and
issues that business owner has to think about, as opposed to a
medium-sized or very large business.
So a framework to get us all started, and a Federal
framework at that, will allow for innovation and for the
business and employees who work for them to find the best
solution for their immediate needs.
Mr. Auchincloss. And I think Federal support for paid
family and medical leave is appropriate for exactly that
reason. It is not just businesses that benefit. It is not just
the individual parents who benefit from that flexibility. It is
society at large that is having our kids raised in healthier
environments, and it is giving moms and dads the opportunity
early on to care for their new family members.
This is an issue that increasingly, the business community
is rallying behind. In my home State of Massachusetts, the
Massachusetts Business Coalition for Early Childhood Education
has formed because they recognize the importance of early
education and child care for their own workforce.
What are some policies that businesses should prioritize to
ensure pay equity among their workforce, in addition to early
education for 3- and 4-year-olds?
Ms. Dickens, that is for you again.
Ms. Dickens. Okay. I'm sorry.
Mr. Auchincloss. My apologies.
Ms. Dickens. No, that is okay. Can you repeat that? I'm
sorry. I was trying to write it down while you were speaking.
Mr. Auchincloss. In addition to advocating for early
education, which is a major consideration for businesses in my
home State of Massachusetts, what are some other policies that
they could prioritize which would ensure pay equity amongst
their workforce? In the business community, not in the
government.
Ms. Dickens. Reskilling and upskilling is something that we
are laser focused on right now. We all know that the world and
the demands and the needs of the market can change in a blink.
We saw this happen last March. We need businesses and the
government to focus on ways to quickly get people educated on
what is new and what skills and talents they need there. There
are businesses that provide professional development and on-
site training, but we need a bigger focus on getting people to
think earlier about how they can upskill. If you are in a place
and you are able to get additional skills that can get you to
another level to be compensated at that level, I think that can
address the issue. So, a laser focus now on reskilling and
upskilling would be so crucial.
Mr. Auchincloss. I agree with you. Again, in Massachusetts,
a great example of this is in clear impact funds, and
increasingly, we are seeing non-profit entities upskill and
reskill blue-collar and white-collar professions, and doing so
with both State support and business support, and I hope to see
those synergies accelerate over the next 10 years because it is
an investment that has started to really work here in the
Commonwealth.
Madam Chairwoman, I yield back.
Chairwoman Beatty. Thank you so much.
I would like to thank all of our witnesses for their
testimony today.
Without objection, I would like to enter statements into
the record from the National Asian Pacific American Women's
Forum, UnidosUS, and Public Citizen.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
The hearing is now adjourned. And thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:34 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

April 29, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
