- BEYOND I, ROBOT: ETHICS, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE, AND THE DIGITAL AGE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BEYOND I, ROBOT: ETHICS,
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE,
AND THE DIGITAL AGE

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 13, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 117-52

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
46-195 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JUAN VARGAS, California              LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            TED BUDD, North Carolina
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
RITCHIE TORRES, New York             JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           LANCE GOODEN, Texas
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         VAN TAYLOR, Texas
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   PETE SESSIONS, Texas
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio, Ranking
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                    Member
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           TED BUDD, North Carolina
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts      VAN TAYLOR, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
October 13, 2021.............................................     1
Appendix:
October 13, 2021.............................................    25

WITNESSES
Wednesday, October 13, 2021

Broussard, Meredith, Associate Professor, Arthur L. Carter
Journalism Institute of New York University....................     4
Cooper, Aaron, Vice President, Global Policy, BSA--The Software
Alliance.......................................................    12
King, Meg, Director, Science and Technology Innovation Program,
The Wilson Center..............................................     8
Vogel, Miriam, President and CEO, EqualAI........................     6
Yong, Jeffery, Principal Advisor, Financial Stability Institute,
Bank for International Settlements.............................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Broussard, Meredith..........................................    26
Cooper, Aaron................................................    33
King, Meg....................................................    74
Vogel, Miriam................................................    79
Yong, Jeffery................................................    88

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Garcia, Hon. Sylvia:
Written responses to questions for the record submitted to
Jeffery Yong...............................................    90

BEYOND I, ROBOT: ETHICS,
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE,
AND THE DIGITAL AGE

----------

Wednesday, October 13, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Task Force on Artificial Intelligence,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The task force met, pursuant to notice, at 12 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Bill Foster [chairman of the task force] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Foster, Casten, Pressley,
Adams, Garcia of Texas, Auchincloss; Gonzalez of Ohio,
Loudermilk, Budd, and Taylor.
Chairman Foster. The Task Force on Artificial Intelligence
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the task force at any time. Also, without objection,
members of the full Financial Services Committee who are not
members of this task force are authorized to participate in
today's hearing.
As a reminder, I ask all Members to keep themselves muted
when they are not being recognized by the Chair. The staff has
been instructed not to mute Members, except when a Member is
not being recognized by the Chair and there is inadvertent
background noise.
Members are also reminded that they may only participate in
one remote proceeding at a time. If you are participating
today, please keep your camera on, and if you choose to attend
a different remote proceeding, please turn your camera off.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Beyond I, Robot: Ethics,
Artificial Intelligence, and the Digital Age.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us today at a time when
the power and perils of artificial intelligence (AI) are very
much on people's minds. Each generation has its own cautionary
tales about AI. Recent big-screen adaptations--The Matrix,
Terminator, and Tron--echo the episodes of the old 1960s Star
Trek starring William Shatner as Captain James D. Kirk of the
Starship Enterprise, and those episodes themselves were taken
from the short stories of Isaac Asimov, Arthur Clarke, and all
of the old masters of 1950s sci-fi pulp magazines. And
parenthetically, I should offer our congratulations that today,
William Shatner was able to boldly go into suborbital near
space where X-15 pilots have been boldly going since the late
1950s. But I digress. Asimov's classic, I, Robot, showed us
what can happen when we deploy technology or AI without fully
comprehending its consequences.
There is an ancient joke in AI that I first heard as an
undergraduate back in the 1970s about an all-powerful AI that
was given a simple command: Maximize paperclip production. It
thought about it for a moment and then began killing off all
humans on Earth because humans interfere with paperclip
production.
Now, it may have taken us 50 years, but we are kind of
there. Facebook's AI was given the simple command, ``maximize
Facebook's profits,'' whereupon they thought for a moment and
then began killing off all rational political debate in our
country because that interferes with Facebook's profits. And
the situations with social media in Myanmar and around the
world are even uglier and more deadly.
In previous hearings of this task force, we have looked at
the biases and unexpected side effects of using AI in financial
services and housing. We have also looked at the implications
of artificial intelligence's voracious appetite for personal
data and the implications for privacy, at technological
approaches to maximally preserve privacy while retaining AI's
effectiveness, and the importance of secure digital identity.
In this hearing, we are going to take a closer look at the
frameworks for developing, monitoring, and recognizing AI to
ensure that the technology we develop and deploy will be of
overall benefit to society.
In past hearings, we have examined instances of algorithmic
bias that have produced discriminatory effects in the lending
space. We have seen facial recognition technology that is far
less effective at identifying minorities correctly, despite the
fact that the developers of these tools did not include a
discriminatory line of code in their products. So, we clearly
cannot allow technology to treat humans differently based on
race and appearance, unless, of course, perhaps we are
explicitly correcting for past unjust biases, which brings up a
set of issues that my father struggled with as a civil rights
lawyer back in the 1950s, and continues with us today. We have
to understand whether we should hold AI to standards that are
higher than we would expect of an ordinary human-based
decision-making process.
As we start defining frameworks for developing and
performance-testing AI, it seems possible that we are starting
to place requirements on AI that are more strict than we would
ever place on human decision-makers. For example, most of our
witnesses today have advocated for defining minimum diversity
standards for the training datasets for AI, but we have never
considered requiring that a human bank officer would have a
minimum number of friends of different races or protected
classes, even though it might arguably result in more fair
decision-making. And we may already be seeing the positive
results of holding AI to higher standards than humans with the
recent reports that fintech apps were apparently more effective
than human-based banks in issuing Paycheck Protection Program
(PPP) loans to minority customers.
As policymakers, we also have to understand to what extent
we should concentrate on so-called black-box testing that only
focuses on the inputs and outputs from opaque neural networks
and other decision-making algorithms, or whether we should
expect ourselves and the public to receive and to understand a
detailed explanation of what goes on under the hood. So, there
is a lot to be examined here. It is my hope that in this
dialogue, we will discover which frameworks exist and which
should be created or fleshed out to ensure that AI is working
effectively and safely for everyone.
And the Chair will now recognize the ranking member of the
task force, Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for your
leadership on ethics in AI and for convening today's hearing,
and I also thank our witnesses for being here. It is vital that
Congress continues to consider how we can best promote
innovative advancement in the private sector while also
ensuring that AI is both transparent and ethical. Today's
hearing provides an opportunity to hear directly from industry
experts and stakeholders on the importance of this topic.
A few months ago, the task force held a similar hearing
examining how human-centered AI can address systemic racism.
One of our witnesses at that hearing, Professor Rayid Ghani of
Carnegie Mellon University, testified that algorithms
themselves are neither inherently biased or unbiased, but work
by analyzing past data and making generalizations about future
outcomes. I believe that these discussions on bias and
algorithms are important to have. We must acknowledge and
recognize these technologies at times are not perfect due to
the inherent nature of a technology created by humans. It is
vital, though, that we do not take steps backwards by
overregulating this industry, which may have a chilling effect
on the deployment of these technologies.
If there are problems with AI and algorithms, we should not
abandon our push to innovate and move forward. It is through
further innovation that we are likely going to be able to fix
these issues and to improve the technology. As Chairman Foster
recognized, we have seen the benefits in the disbursement of
PPP loans. I think that is an important thing for us to keep in
mind as we continue forward.
We should also continue to work with the experts in
industry in order to move forward in a bipartisan way that both
celebrates technical advancements and ensures that there is
transparency and fairness through the use of artificial
intelligence. There have been multiple efforts in the
government and the private sector to address this issue, and we
have seen tremendous advances not only in AI technology, but in
efforts to address bias in algorithms internally. There is
recognition of a business incentive to have transparent
algorithms that are fair and ethical.
Beyond the obvious concerns of ethics and transparency, I
am also looking forward to learning more today from our
witnesses about ways that we can strengthen data transparency
for families, and consider reforms that would protect our
children from being targeted by harmful algorithms. As the
financial internet and the traditional internet merge--and we
have seen recently-reported social media companies, like
TikTok, employing algorithms that promote inappropriate content
to young users--I think it is extremely troubling and extremely
timely that we start to discuss these things. An AI-powered
world where parents have no control over what content or
products are being fed to their kids, no transparency around
the algorithms that are funneling the content, and no control
over the underlying data itself is not an ideal outcome.
In summary, AI has great promise to innovate industries
like the financial services sector, but there are still
opportunities to improve. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today how Congress should be thinking about this
balance, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
The Chair will now recognize the Chair of the full
Financial Services Committee, the gentlewoman from California,
Chairwoman Waters, for 1 minute.
[No response.]
Chairman Foster. It is my understanding that she is not
able to make it right now, so we will move on.
Today, we welcome the testimony of our distinguished
witnesses: Ms. Meredith Broussard, an associate professor at
the Arthur L. Carter Journalism Institute of New York
University; Ms. Miriam Vogel, the president and CEO of EqualAI;
Ms. Meg King, the director of the Science and Technology
Innovation Program at the Wilson Center; Mr. Jeffery Yong,
principal advisor at the Financial Stability Institute of the
Bank for International Settlements; and Mr. Aaron Cooper, the
vice president for global policy at BSA--The Software Alliance.
Witnesses are reminded that their oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. You should be able to see a timer on your
screen which indicates how much time you have left. I would ask
you to be mindful of the timer, and quickly wrap up your
testimony once the time has expired, so that we can be
respectful of both the witnesses' and the members' time.
And without objection, your written statements will be made
a part of the record.
Ms. Broussard, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MEREDITH BROUSSARD, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR, ARTHUR L.
CARTER JOURNALISM INSTITUTE OF NEW YORK UNIVERSITY

Ms. Broussard. Thank you. Chairman Foster, members of the
task force, thank you for hosting this important hearing and
for giving me the opportunity to testify. My name is Meredith
Broussard. I am a professor at NYU, the research director at
the NYU Alliance for Public Interest Technology, and author of
the book, ``Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers
Misunderstand the World.'' In my written testimony, I explore a
practical vision for recognizing AI, and in my short time, I'll
talk about AI generally as well as discrimination algorithmic
auditing and regulatory sandboxes.
The first thing I want to say is that AI is not what we see
in Hollywood. There is no robot apocalypse coming. There is no
singularity. We do not need to prepare for artificial general
intelligence because these things are imaginary. What is real
is that AI is math, very complicated and beautiful math.
Machine learning, the most popular kind of AI, is a poorly-
chosen term because it suggests that there is a brain or
sentience inside the computer. There is not. When we do machine
learning, we take a large set of historical data and instruct
the computer to create a model based on patterns and values in
that dataset. The model can then be used to predict or make
decisions based on past data. The more data you put in, the
more precise your predictions will become. However, all
historical datasets have bias. For example, if you feed in data
on who has gotten a mortgage in the past in the United States
and ask the computer to make similar decisions in the future,
you will get an AI that offers mortgages to more White people
than people of color.
AI needs to be regulated because it has all of the flaws of
any human process, plus some. My own regulatory vision begins
with frameworks, high-level governance models that guide a
company's use of AI and data. A company can make sure its
frameworks are implemented by performing regular algorithmic
audits, ideally using a regulatory sandbox. The process could
be monitored by regulators using tools we already have, namely
compliance processes inside existing regulatory agencies.
Agencies and companies might decide which AIs need to be
regulated and monitored by looking at the user and the context.
Automated license plate readers used at toll booths might be a
reasonable use of AI. Automated license plate readers used by
police as dragnet surveillance might be an unreasonable use of
AI.
An open secret in the AI world is everyone knows that these
systems discriminate. Any conversation about a robot apocalypse
is a deliberate distraction from the harms that AI systems are
causing today. Right now, AI is preventing people from getting
mortgages. A recent investigation by The Markup found that
nationally, loan applicants of color were 40 to 80 percent more
likely to be turned down by mortgage approval algorithms as
compared to their White counterparts.
When the International Baccalaureate used AI to assign
student grades during the pandemic, high-achieving, low-income
students received terrible grades, which prevented them from
getting college credits that would allow them to graduate early
and incur less student loan debt.
AI is used to generate secret predictive consumer scores,
like health risk scores or identity and fraud scores. It is
likely that Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC)
people are systematically disadvantaged by most of these
scoring systems. The EU's proposed AI regulation calls for
categorizing AI into high and low risk, which I think is a good
strategy. A low-risk use might be using facial recognition to
unlock your phone. A high-risk use might be the police using
facial recognition on real-time surveillance video feeds.
Facial recognition has been shown to consistently misidentify
people with darker skin; people of color are at a high risk of
being harmed by facial recognition when it is used in policing.
In the U.S., we can register and audit high-risk AI to ensure
that AI is not harming citizens.
The process for uncovering algorithmic bias is called
algorithmic auditing. ORCAA, a company I consult with, performs
bespoke algorithmic audits in context, asking how an algorithm
might fail and for whom. Audits can show how an algorithm might
be racist, or sexist, or ableist, or might discriminate
illegally. Once we identify a problem, it can be addressed, or
the algorithm can be discarded. There is also software like
Parity, or Aequitas, or AI Fairness 360, that can evaluate
algorithms for 1 of 21 known kinds of mathematical fairness.
I'm enthusiastic about the potential of a regulatory
sandbox, a protected environment where companies can test their
algorithms for bias. If and when the bias is discovered, they
can then address the issue in their code and rerun the test
until they're in compliance with acceptable thresholds. I'm
currently working with ORCAA to develop a regulatory sandbox
prototype. In our version, regulators would also have a limited
view inside the sandbox to see if the company is auditing their
algorithms for bias and fixing the problems that they find
without the companies revealing any trade secrets.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today on this
important topic, and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Broussard can be found on
page 26 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Broussard, and I have to
say I am fascinated with the thought of figuring out for which
of the 21 definitions of fairness you will be advocating.
Ms. Vogel, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MIRIAM VOGEL, PRESIDENT AND CEO, EQUALAI

Ms. Vogel. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Gonzalez, and
distinguished members of the task force, thank you for
conducting this important hearing and for the opportunity to
provide this testimony. My name is Miriam Vogel. I'm president
and CEO of EqualAI, a nonprofit founded to reduce unconscious
bias in AI systems. At EqualAI, we are AI net positive. We
believe AI is and will be a powerful tool to advance our lives,
economy, and opportunities to thrive, but only if we're
vigilant to ensure that the AI we use does not perpetuate and
mass produce historical and new forms of bias and
discrimination.
We're at a critical juncture. AI is increasingly becoming
an important part of our daily lives, but decades of progress
made and lives lost to promote equal opportunity can be
unwritten in a few lines of code. And the perpetrators of this
disparity may not even realize the harm they're causing. For
instance, we can see our country's long history of housing
discrimination now replicated at scale in mortgage approval
algorithms that determine creditworthiness using proxies for
race and class.
At EqualAI, we try to help avoid such harms by supporting
three main stakeholders: companies; policymakers; and lawyers.
Often, our work involves helping organizations understand they
are effectively AI companies because they are now using AI in
pivotal functions. As such, they need an AI governance plan,
particularly given that with AI, as you know, key assessments
occur behind the proverbial black box where inputs and
operations are generally unknown to the end user.
As discussed in your past hearings, implicit bias
infiltrates AI in a variety of ways. Our operating thesis is
that bias can embed in each of the human touch points
throughout the AI lifecycle, from the ideation phase deciding
what the problem is you even want to solve with AI, to the
design, data collection, development, testing, and monitoring
phases. But we are optimistic and we think each touch point is
also an opportunity to identify and eliminate harmful biases.
As such, risk management should occur at each stage of the AI
lifecycle.
There are several helpful frameworks to identify and reduce
harms in the AI systems, including GAO's, GSA's, and the
important efforts under way at NIST. The EqualAI framework
offers five pillars to consider when establishing responsible
governance, including, first, invest in the pipeline. Our basis
tenet is that AI needs to be created by and for a broader
cross-section of our population. There are several
organizations promoting diversity in tech effectively right
now--AINU, AI4All, and several others--and we need to support
these efforts.
Second, hire and promote people with your values. To create
and sustain a diverse workplace and produce better AI, AI
programs used in H.R. functions should be checked routinely to
ensure they're in sync with the values of your organization and
our country.
Third, evaluate your data. The more we know about datasets,
the safer we are as a society. We encourage identifying gaps in
data so that they can be rectified and, at a minimum, clarified
for end users.
Fourth, test your AI. AI should be checked for bias on a
routine basis. As you know, AI constantly iterates and learns
new patterns as it is fed new data. On our website,
EqualAI.org, we offer a checklist to help get you started, and
we offer additional steps to take in our written testimony. We
highly recommend as well the use of routine audits.
And fifth, redefine the team. An often-overlooked
opportunity to reduce bias in AI is by creating testing teams
that include those underrepresented in the AI creation and the
underlying datasets.
There are numerous ways that Congress can play a key role
in ensuring more effective, inclusive AI. Several are listed in
our testimony. A few include, one, Congress can reinforce the
applicability of laws prohibiting discrimination to AI-
supported determinations. Two, Congress can lead by example,
create a framework for AI procurement, acquisition, and
development and ask vendors if they do the same.
Three, incentivize investment in the future of work. Like
all transformative technologies, AI will eliminate jobs, but it
will also open up opportunities. To lead in the AI revolution,
safeguard our economy, and support greater prosperity among
more communities, we should re-skill our workforce by
understanding what jobs are likely to emerge, and offering
incentives for upscaling and loan forgiveness for those
committing to a term in public service.
Finally, we enthusiastically support the bill of rights put
forward by the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy last week to level-set expectations and inform the
public about their rights.
In conclusion, we believe we're at a critical juncture to
ensure that AI is built by and for a broader cross-section of
our population. It's not only the right thing to do; a strong
U.S. economy and our leadership depend on it. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Vogel can be found on page
79 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Vogel, and I echo your
enthusiasm for the White House's effort to come up with an AI
bill of rights, though I don't believe I have seen even a draft
of it at this point.
Ms. King, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MEG KING, DIRECTOR, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
INNOVATION PROGRAM, THE WILSON CENTER

Ms. King. Thank you, Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Gonzalez, and members of the AI Task Force for inviting me to
testify today. My name is Meg King. I'm the director of the
Science and Technology Innovation Program at the Wilson Center,
a nonpartisan think tank created by Congress nearly 60 years
ago. My program studies the policy opportunities and challenges
of emerging technologies, and investigates methods to foster
more open science and to build serious games. We also offer
hands-on training programs, called the Technology Labs, to
Legislative and Executive Branch staff on a variety of issues,
including artificial intelligence. Next month, we will offer a
series of individual trainings on AI for Members as well.
As with any technological evolution, the benefits of AI
come with associated costs and risks. Focusing only on the
benefits misses the nuances of the potentials and pitfalls of
this advance. To help the task force understand the risks to
any industry and, in particular, the financial services
industry, I will focus my remarks on the nature of AI
generally, to understand the environment in which creation is
occurring.
Today, there aren't significant incentives for the private
sector to include ethics directly in the development process.
At the current pace of advancement, companies cannot afford to
develop slowly, or a competitor might be able to bring a
similar product to market faster. Largely due to consumer trust
concerns, international organizations, regions, and private
companies have all begun to issue ethical frameworks for AI.
Most are very vague principles, as you mentioned, Chairman
Foster, with little guidance as to application.
Two that this committee should pay close attention to are
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), and the European Commission (EC). In addition to their
principles on AI, the OECD is developing process and technical
guidelines ranging from pinpointing new research to making
available software advances which will become part of a
publicly-available interactive tool for developers and
policymakers alike. As Ms. Broussard noted, European regulators
announced a risk-based plan this year to establish transparency
requirements, including biometric identification and chatbots.
Chatbots, in particular, are expected to have a significant
impact on the financial services industry as many companies see
value in customer service process improvement and the prospect
of gaining more insight into customer needs in order to sell
more financial products.
As regulators ask developers more questions about the
ethics of their AI systems, they have the potential to slow the
process, which could cost businesses money. However, if ethical
concerns are identified too late in the development process,
companies could face considerable financial loss if not
addressed properly. No ethical AI framework should be static,
as AI systems will continue to evolve, as will our interaction
with them. Key components, however, should be consistent, and
that, specifically for the financial sector, should include
explainability, data inputs, testing, and system life cycle.
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) is the method to ask
questions about the outcomes of AI systems and how they achieve
them. It helps developers and policymakers identify problems
and failures, possible sources of bias, and helps users access
explanations. There are a number of techniques available to
carry out XAI, as well as open source tools, which make these
techniques more accessible.
In the financial sector, XAI will become critical as
predictive models increasingly perform calculations during live
transactions, for example, to evaluate risk or the opportunity
of offering a financial product or specific transaction to a
customer. Establishing a clear process for XAI will be critical
to address flaws identified in these real-time systems and
should be an area of focus for the committee.
Additionally, producing policies on how these systems will
be used and in what context will be helpful. Without context,
data pulled from a mix of public/private records can produce
inaccurate results and discriminate in access to financial
products. One of the near-term questions this committee should
ask about systems you will encounter in your oversight is how
the COVID-19 pandemic experience is factored into these
systems. One promising possibility to address the data input
problem might be to synthesize artificial financial data to
correct for inaccurate or biased historical data. Just today, a
major tech company announced acquisition of a synthetic data
startup. Watch this space.
While quality assurance is part of most development
processes, there are currently no enforceable standards for
testing AI systems, and, therefore, testing is uneven at best.
Additionally, users are far removed from AI system developers.
Carefully assessing the growing field of Machine Learning
Operations Tools (MLOps) and machine learning operations and
identifying ways the committee can participate in that process
will be useful.
AI breaks, often in unpredictable ways, at unpredictable
times. Participants in the Wilson Center's AI Lab have seen AI
function spectacularly using a deep learning language model to
produce the first-ever AI-drafted legislation, as well as fail
when a particular image loaded into a publicly-available
generative adversarial network produced a distorted picture of
a monster rather than a human. Lab learners also study why
accuracy levels matter, as they use a toy supply chain
optimization model to predict whether and why a package will
arrive on time and how to improve the prediction by changing
the variables used, such as product weight and length of
purchase.
Beyond mistakes, some AI systems carry out tasks in a way
humans never would. Many examples exist of scenarios producing
results developers didn't intend, like a vacuum cleaner
injecting collected dust so it can collect even more, and a
racing boat in a digital game looping in place to collect
points instead of winning the race. Anyone who has played the
game, ``20 Questions'' understands this problem. Unless you ask
exactly the right question, you won't get the right answer.
As more and more AI systems are built and distributed
widely with varying levels of user expertise, this problem will
continue. Establishing a framework of ethics for the
development, distribution, and deployment of AI systems will
help spot potential problems and provide more trust in them.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. King can be found on page 74
of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. King.
Mr. Yong, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF JEFFERY YONG, PRINCIPAL ADVISOR, FINANCIAL
STABILITY INSTITUTE, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS

Mr. Yong. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Foster,
Ranking Member Gonzalez, and distinguished members of the task
force. My name is Jeffery Yong, and I'm the principal advisor
at the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for
International Settlements, or the BIS. I offer my remarks today
entirely in my personal capacity based on a publication that I
co-authored with my colleague, Jermy Prenio, entitled, ``FSI
Insights No. 35: Humans keeping AI in check--emerging
regulatory expectations in the financial sector.'' And the
views expressed in that paper are our own and do not
necessarily represent those of the BIS, its members, or the
Basel ommittees. I'm appearing before the task force
voluntarily. I would like to note that my statements here today
are similarly my personal views, and they do not represent the
official views of the BIS, its members, or the Basel
Committees.
By way of background, the Financial Stability Institute
(FSI) is a unit within the BIS with a mandate to support
implementation of global regulatory standards and sound
supervisory practices by central banks and financial sectors,
supervisory and regulatory authorities worldwide. One of the
ways the FSI carries out this mandate is through its policy
implementation work which involves publishing FSI Insights
papers. The papers aim to contribute to international
discussions on a range of contemporary, regulatory, and
supervisory policy issues and implementation challenges faced
by financial sector authorities.
In preparing FSI Insight No. 35, my co-author and I found
that regulatory expectations on the use of AI in financial
services were at a nascent stage. Accordingly, we drafted a
paper with four key objectives: to identify emerging common
financial regulatory themes around AI governance; to assess how
similar or different these common regulatory themes are viewed
in the context of AI vis-a-vis that of traditional financial
models; to explore how existing international financial
regulatory standards may be applied in the context of AI
governance; and to examine challenges in implementing the
common regulatory themes.
To this end, we can select a section of policy documents on
AI governance issued by financial authorities or groups formed
by them as well as other cross-industry AI governance guidance
that applies to the financial sector. In total, we examined 19
policy documents issued by 16 regional and national authorities
and 2 international organizations. Most of these documents are
either discussion papers or high-level principles, which
underscores the fact that financial regulatory thinking in this
area is at a very early stage.
We identified five common themes that recur in policy
documents that we examined: reliability; accountability;
transparency; fairness; and ethics.
On the theme of reliability, emerging supervisory
expectations for AI and traditional models appear to be
similar. What seems to be different is that the reliability of
AI models is viewed from the perspective of avoiding harm to
data subjects or consumers, for example, through
discrimination.
On the theme of accountability, it is acknowledged that
both traditional and AI models require human intervention. In
the case of AI, however, this requirement is motivated by the
need to make sure that decisions based on AI models do not
result in unfair or unethical outcomes. Moreover, external
accountability is emphasized in the case of an AI model, so
that data subjects are aware of AI-driven decisions and have
channels for recourse and moving on transparency.
Supervisory expectations related to explainability and
auditability are similar for AI and traditional models.
However, expectations or external disclosure are unique to AI
models. This refers to expectations that firms using AI models
should make data subjects aware of AI-driven decisions that
impact them, including how their data is being used.
On the theme of fairness, there's a distinct and strong
emphasis in emerging supervisory expectations on this aspect in
the case of AI models. Fairness is commonly described in the
documents as avoiding discriminatory outcomes.
Similarly, on ethics, as a distinct and strong emphasis on
this aspect of AI models, ethics expectations are broader than
fairness, and relate to ascertaining that consumers will not be
exploited or harmed.
Now, given the similarities of the themes between AI and
traditional models, existing financial literacy standards that
govern the use of traditional models may be applied in the
context of AI. However, there may be scope to do more in
defining financial regulatory expectations related to fairness
and ethics. The use of AI in the financial sector presents
certain challenges, and the key challenge relates to the level
of complexity and lack of explainability. Given these
challenges, one way to approach this is to consider a tailored
and coordinated regulatory policy approach, meaning
differentiating potential and conduct treatment depending on
the risk that the AI models pose.
With that, I conclude. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yong can be found on page 88
of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Mr. Yong.
Mr. Cooper, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF AARON COOPER, VICE PRESIDENT, GLOBAL POLICY, BSA--
THE SOFTWARE ALLIANCE

Mr. Cooper. Thank you very much. Good afternoon, Chairman
Foster, Ranking Member Gonzalez, and members of the AI Task
Force. My name is Aaron Cooper. I'm vice president of global
policy for BSA-The Software Alliance. BSA is the leading
advocate for the global enterprise software industry. Our
members are at the forefront of developing cutting-edge, data-
driven services that have a significant impact on U.S. job
creation. I commend the task force for convening today's
important hearing, and I thank you for the opportunity to
testify.
Enterprise software services, including AI, are
accelerating digital transformation in every sector of the
economy, and BSA members are on the leading edge, providing
businesses with the trusted tools they need to leverage the
benefits of AI. In fact, last year, software supported more
than 12.5 million jobs outside the tech sector. AI is not just
about robots, self-driving vehicles, or social media. It's used
by businesses of all sizes to improve their competitiveness.
It's the power and industrial design that improves
manufacturing performance and reduces environmental impact.
It's the tool that streamlines transportation and logistics
operations, and that detects cyberattacks and improves H.R.
operations. In the financial services industry, AI is being
used to reduce the risk of fraudulent transactions and deliver
a better customer relations experience.
While the adoption of AI can unquestionably be a force for
good, it can also create real risks if not developed and
deployed responsibly. We commend the task force for its work to
explore domestic and international AI frameworks because they
play a critical role in ensuring the responsible use of AI.
As you explore these issues, we offer our perspective on a
risk management approach to bias which has been a particular
focus for BSA, and that we hope will also inform the broader
conversation. For BSA members, earning trust and confidence in
AI and other software services they develop is crucial, so
confronting the risk of bias is a priority. We, therefore, set
out to develop concrete steps companies can take to guard
against this. The resulting framework is included in full in my
written testimony. It is built on three key elements: impact
assessments; risk mitigation practices; and organizational
accountability modeled on NIST frameworks, which includes more
than 50 actionable diagnostic statements for performing impact
assessments that identify risks of bias and corresponding best
practices for mitigating those risks.
Among the unique features of the BSA framework is that it
recognizes that these steps need to be followed at all stages
of the AI life cycle: design; development; and deploymentt.
Also, different businesses will have different roles throughout
the life cycle, so risk management responsibilities will need
to be tailored to a company's role. Who's developing the
algorithm? Who's collecting the data, training the model, and
ultimately deploying the system? What does that all mean in
practice?
A few examples. First, when designing an AI system,
companies should clearly define the intended use and what the
system is optimized to predict, identify who may be impacted,
and, if the risk of bias is present, document efforts to
mitigate that risk. They should examine data that will be used
to train the model to ensure that it's representative and not
tainted by historical biases.
Second, at the development stage, they should document
choices made in selecting features for the model and document
how the model was tested.
Third, at the deployment phase, they should document the
process for monitoring the data and model and maintain a
feedback mechanism to enable consumers to report concerns.
And to be clear, at every phase, it is important for
companies to have a team that brings diverse perspectives and
background, which can help anticipate the needs and concerns of
people who may be affected by AI in order to identify potential
sources of bias. Bias is only one of the important ethical
considerations for responsible AI, but addressing it is
critical. And the risk management approach we recommend in this
context can be tailored to address other ethical
considerations.
In conclusion, digital transformation across industry
sectors is creating jobs and improving our lives, but industry,
civil society, and academia must work together with Congress
and other policymakers on guidelines and laws which will ensure
that companies act responsibly in how they develop and deploy
AI. We appreciate the task force's strong focus on these issues
and hope that our framework on confronting bias will contribute
meaningfully to this discussion. Thank you for the opportunity
to testify, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooper can be found on page
33 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Mr. Cooper.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
My first general question is to Ms. King or Mr. Cooper,
whomever wants to field it. How much should we expect of AI,
and, in particular, should we be asking more of AI than we do
of humans? For AI-driven cars, should the standard be that you
should outperform humans on average or in all circumstances?
With similar things regarding fairness as well, in general, is
it reasonable? Are there real dangers in using human-based
decision-making as the standard of fairness and safety for what
is acceptable in AI?
Mr. Cooper. I am happy to jump in. I will give one example
and a way of thinking about this, that things which are illegal
in the physical world should be illegal in the digital world
when we use AI or any other system. In the realm of
discrimination, for instance, a practice that would be
discriminatory if a person did it, should still be
discriminatory and illegal if an AI system does it.
And I think what we are finding in other areas is that AI
is increasingly being used, both in everyday features of what
companies are doing as they go through a digital transformation
but will also increasingly be used in more high-risk areas. And
in those situations, we need to make sure that there is a
proper impact assessment so we know, whether it is related to
bias or safety or another issue, that companies are thinking
through what those implications are going to be and taking
steps to mitigate the risks.
Ms. Vogel. I am happy to answer if you would like, as well.
I think the answer is, honestly, we don't know. Certain systems
are designed very narrowly right now, and that is because AI
outperforms humans in those systems. But in others, with
context, with heuristics, the shortcuts that we use as humans
don't perform well. And as one of the Wilson Center machine-
learning researchers who has written a paper about it reminds
us regularly, autonomous agents optimize the room, floor, and
function that we give them. So, until we can improve AI to a
level where we feel comfortable that moves beyond that narrow
capability, I don't think we have an answer yet about how to
think about the consequences, but also the opportunities. They
are just so varied across so many sectors at this point.
Chairman Foster. Are there any other comments on the
deployment decision that has to be made here? You need some
sort of absolute standard that this is good enough for this
application, and it is something we are going to have to pace
because that is probably, at best, the level at which Congress
will be specific about how these decisions should be set up.
Another thing that I know we all struggle with is this
question of black-box testing versus expecting that the public
should have a detailed understanding of what goes on inside. If
you look at the trouble that we have had trying to convince
people to get vaccinated, it is not clear that it helps to tell
them the details of how the immune system in the human works.
And, that may make it better. It may make it worse. We had this
situation very recently where we apparently fired a football
coach, not, to my knowledge, for mistreating athletes, but for
what went on in his private decision-making.
Should we accept or reject algorithms based only on their
inputs and outputs, or should we actually demand to look inside
at all of the intermediate levels of the neural network and see
if there are objectionable racist nodes in them? What is your
thinking on that, the black box versus detail, and also how to
convey that to the public? Anyone? Should I just pick someone
at random?
Ms. King. I am happy to jump in.
Chairman Foster. Okay.
Ms. King. I think it is a great question, and I think that
the challenge also includes that even if you show the general
public all of the nodes, it wouldn't necessarily make sense. In
this case, you wouldn't know which are prioritized, so there is
a balance to strike. There are intellectual property issues,
privacy issues, and so forth. So, just opening the box, first
of all, would be somewhat technically challenging as well as
legally. Compliance testing, as you say, can be a helpful way
to demonstrate compliance, safety, and legality. And to the
extent that more data becomes available, we don't need to
expect everyone in the general public to understand it. We have
seen so many cases already where the limited publicly-available
data has been used for important findings, like with the
UnitedHealth Care Optum case, where scientists, researchers
were able to go backwards, look at the algorithms, and identify
biases in the algorithms.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And when you figure all this
stuff out, let us know.
The Chair will now recognize the ranking member of the task
force, Representative Gonzalez of Ohio, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster, and thank
you to our witnesses. Ms. Vogel, I am going to try to pick up
where Chairman Foster just left off on compliance testing. Is
it fair to say, based on the response you gave, that the right
way to think about this is more to look at the outputs of AI as
opposed to opening up the hood and trying to understand each
individual node and network? Is that the right way to think
about it?
Ms. Vogel. My view is that it should be a balance. I think
that, absolutely, the outputs are indicative. They are helpful
to look at now because so much of the AI is already deployed,
and so we are not at the design stages for so much of the AI in
common use, and for that understanding, what the outputs are is
important and helpful. I think there are elements of what is
under the hood that would be helpful and important to
understand, particularly when you are talking about AI used in
a pivotal sensitive function. So, I don't think it is one or
the other. I do think it is a balance, but no matter what I
think, the outputs are very important to be testing and
watching.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. No, I appreciate that. I think, as I
mentioned in my opening statement, it is encouraging that we
are seeing some AI algorithms produce better results,
significantly better results in some instances, from a bias
standpoint. And obviously, the hope is to understand what it is
that they are doing right and doing more of that or making that
more transparent, and then helping foster a more collaborative
innovation environment.
Ms. King, I want to shift to you, and I want to ask about
transparency in AI algorithms. Also, as I mentioned in my
opening statement, the use of algorithms in social media has
had a detrimental effect on young users, which, as a parent, I
find extremely problematic. Do you think that more can be done
to ensure parents have additional transparency about their
child's data being collected by these apps or their own, and
how can we strike the right balance and the right line between
encouraging innovation, managing problematic algorithms, and
providing data sovereignty to users?
Ms. King. Thank you, sir. As a parent as well, that is the
one thing that terrifies me, is my children getting access to
these capabilities. And unfortunately, I wish there was one
significant answer that could fix it, but it is going to be a
constant ever-moving group of things that we have to do. And
explainability is significant in that problem because, as
Miriam just said, we have to understand what the outputs are,
but we have to understand enough about how we are getting there
to be able to make informed decisions about whether there is
too much data that is being collected or whether there isn't,
and there are many ways to do this. One of the most popular is
this local and interpretable model agnostic explanation. This
was created by the University of Washington to try to see what
happens inside, so model agnostic. It should be across models.
That is one of many ways to do that.
Another piece to this is, as you just mentioned, that AI
can be positive and there are some impressive advances
happening right now in synthetic data that can both hopefully
correct for some of those historical data biases, but also give
just a better picture of the people who are going to be
impacted by the system being created. Now, of course, you have
to understand what that synthetic data looks like, so you
probably should have a wide group of interdisciplinary experts
assessing that to make sure you are not missing something. But
I think it is a combination of constantly reviewing the
outcomes, constantly trying to take at least a sample of
explainability across some of the most important, as Europeans
are suggesting, high-risk models, and then also assessing kind
of what are the new technical capabilities we are developing
now that can help address this problem.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. Shifting to Mr. Cooper for
a second with my final minute, I want to ask you about BSA's AI
risk management framework included in your testimony. One
aspect that seems to be of importance is that a one-size-fits-
all framework will not work for small companies and startups. I
completely agree. Could you elaborate on why flexibility in any
framework is important for fostering innovation?
Mr. Cooper. Sure. Thank you very much. I think it is
important to have flexibility in a variety of ways of achieving
a desired outcome for a number of reasons, including that not
all systems are going to be used for the same purposes. The
algorithm and the data that is used to determine what shows our
kids watch or what videos our kids watch online is one form of
algorithm and one use of AI. But there is also database
management, and customer relations management tools, and
farmers who use AI in order to improve crop yield, and one set
of regulations across-the-board isn't going to be able to be
flexible enough to address the range of different use cases for
AI.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Yes, thank you. And I also think it
is almost always the case that the higher the regulatory
burden, the more you entrench incumbents, and the less
innovation you have at the startup level as the regulatory
burden is just too high to even contemplate a startup. So with
that, I thank the witnesses, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Ms.
Pressley of Massachusetts for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Chairman Foster, for convening
this important hearing, and to our witnesses for joining us
here today. Certainly, systemic racial discrimination is
widespread in the financial services industry. The damage of
redlining, banking deserts, and employment discrimination has
never been fully redressed or repaired in America, and all of
the data supports those facts. Today, mortgage lenders deny
Black applicants at a rate 80 percent higher than White
applicants, and payday lenders continue to target low-income
people of color, charging 500-percent interest even in the
midst of a pandemic. Many believe artificial intelligence
presents an opportunity to make the allocation of credit and
risk fairer and more inclusive. However, AI technology and
machine learning can easily go in the other direction,
exacerbating existing bias, and reinforcing bias credit
allocation, and making discrimination in lending even harder to
prove.
Cases of racial bias in AI are well-documented and have
impacted everything from mortgage loans and tenant screening to
student loans. The deciding factor between whether the
technology has a positive or damaging impact could be its
developers.
Ms. Broussard, who is writing the algorithms that are being
used to make important financial decisions, like
creditworthiness? Do the teams writing these algorithms
generally reflect the diversity of people in America?
Ms. Broussard. Generally, these teams do not represent the
diversity of people in America. Silicon Valley and its
developers tend to be very pale, male, and Yale. Compared to
overall private industry, the EEOC found that the high-tech
sector employed a larger share of Whites, Asian Americans, and
men, and a smaller share of African Americans, Hispanics, and
women.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. In fact, in February 2020, the
Financial Services Committee released a report on the diversity
of America's largest banks, which found that banks were largely
undiversified at all levels and departments. Those data points
you offered there support that.
Ms. Broussard, one more question, will this lack of
diversity affect AI used by financial institutions? What is the
impact?
Ms. Broussard. Absolutely, yes, there is an impact. The
problem is that people tend to embed their unconscious biases
in the technology that they create. When we have a small and
homogeneous group of people creating AI, that AI then gets the
collective blind spots of the community of people who are
creating the algorithms. So, the more diversity you have in the
room when you are creating algorithms, the better the algorithm
is going to be for the wide variety of people who live in
America.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Ms. Broussard. And just to further
unpack the impact of that on people's lives, there are many
different facets that AI companies developing these
technologies really need to consider, from, as we are speaking
to here, who is developing the algorithms to the AI's impact on
job loss. A recent report from the World Economic Forum
predicted that by 2025, the next wave of automation amplified
by the pandemic will disrupt 85 million jobs globally.
Ms. Vogel, what role should independent auditors play in
helping to assess the human cost and the ethical implications
of AI technologies so that both developers and the public can
fully understand the ethical impacts these technologies have
for actual consumers?
Ms. Vogel. Thank you for that question. It is a really
important point. We do have this growing body of experts--in
fact, we have one on this very panel--who do this important
work of checking in, of taking the temperature and
understanding where these gaps are. I think it is really
important that we build our reliance and our infrastructure to
support more algorithmic auditing because these are the people
who will tell us if the AI doing what we expect it to. Are we
discriminating? Are we creating opportunity? For whom will this
fail, and how do we create more opportunity through our
algorithms?
Ms. Pressley. Thank you. I agree. Frequent and independent
audits are critical. AI-supported recommendations in the
financial services industry directly impact people's lives and
economic opportunities, and yet the algorithms used are trained
on data that is rife with imbalance and discrimination. So as
we do the work deliberately to enact long-overdue economic
justice, we can't allow the AI industry to create new problems
and to compound these already persistent and deeply-embedded
inequities. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Loudermilk from Georgia for 5
minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. One important
thing to keep in mind as we discuss AI is the types of bias we
need to eliminate and the types of bias that we actually want
to keep. Sometimes, the main purpose of an algorithm is to be
biased. For example, in loan underwriting, algorithms are
generally used to distinguish between who can pay back a loan
and who is not able to pay back a loan. With that in mind, we
must work toward eliminating the types of bias that have no
place in our financial system, such as the bias based on race
or gender or any other factor like that.
One important way of doing that is when an algorithm is
being built, there should be a thorough record-keeping of
everything that is added to the algorithm. That way, if bias is
suspected, companies and regulators can see everything that
went into the algorithm and see where the bias may be coming
from. I think this would help make it where algorithms are not
a black box and where the outputs cannot be explained, but you
would have a record where you could see where the problems may
be.
Mr. Cooper, your organization's framework for AI best
practices recommends maintaining records of the data that is
used to train AI models. I agree with that. Expanding on that,
do you believe that maintaining thorough records of all of the
inputs used to build an algorithm can be useful for identifying
the source of any unwanted bias?
Mr. Cooper. Thank you very much, Congressman. Yes, I think
it goes even beyond what the data is. I think that there is a
whole set of considerations that companies need to go through
to figure out whether there is a high risk that the AI system,
as it is intended to be deployed or as it is being deployed,
may have consequential impacts on people. And the decision-
making about what those risks are and what the right mitigation
practices are, how the data was tested, what historical biases
may or may not be present in them, keeping a record of that as
part of a risk management framework, can be both useful in
order to make sure that companies are not putting systems out
into the world or using systems that are going to lead to
discriminatory results. But it could also be useful, as you
say, after the fact, if there is a problem, to go back and
audit and find out why it happened and make sure it doesn't
happen again.
Chairman Foster. Representative Loudermilk, I believe you
are muted.
Mr. Loudermilk. I don't know why it is cutting off like
that. Can you hear me now?
Chairman Foster. Yes, we can.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
Chairman Foster. And feel free to exceed your time by 40
seconds.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. Mr. Yong, in your testimony, you
discuss the importance of accountability and transparency in
AI. Can maintaining records when algorithms are being built
help achieve those goals?
Mr. Yong. Yes. Accountability is very important, especially
when it comes to AI, and without record-keeping, there is no
transparency. In our testimony, we mentioned that transparency
is a prerequisite to enabling financial institutions to meet
the other general AI governance principles. And if the AI model
is not transparent, then it is very difficult to assess whether
it is reliable, whether it is sound, and whether there is bias
involved. So definitely, record-keeping is a prerequisite to
meeting this accountability and general principles.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you for that. Ms. King, you have
written that policymakers must govern AI in a way that is
flexible enough to adapt when technology inevitably changes,
wand we know that it continually changes in today's
environment. I agree with that, and I believe that is needed to
have an environment that fosters innovation. With that in mind,
how can policymakers ensure that AI governance remains
flexible, but robust, at the same time?
Ms. King. Thank you, sir, for that question, and I think it
is all about having a set of goals that are measurable and
achievable. One of them is, how can you explain these systems,
and, again, the complexity here is really because these systems
cross so many sectors. Yours obviously is financial services,
so you have some very specific use cases to identify, which is
helpful, but you need to be able to explain those specific use
cases. You need to ask a lot of questions, and those questions
will change, too, but the big ones are why was it developed.
What are the [inaudible]? How does it possibly fail because it
is the unexpected failure that is really a lot of the problem
here.
And then again, how can we correct those errors and report
them? So if you can kind of have those four ways of addressing
this challenge and work with companies, and you work with both
governments who are buying this and the companies who are
producing this to have sort of the four methods of regularly
checking that you are getting, you are producing what you want,
you are getting what you want out of it, and that it is not
discriminatory, then I think that is a flexible way to move
forward.
And I think the sandbox concept that Ms. Broussard has
suggested is also very helpful, because while records are great
and it is easy for us to say, let's keep records here, if you
have ever taken a look at the code behind some of these systems
and how often it changes as you shift weights, it gets pretty
complicated pretty quickly. So, the more you can have these
kinds of places where companies and organizations can feel safe
testing is going to be critical going forward well.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. And, Mr. Chairman, I yield back
the balance of my time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you,.
The Chair now recognizes Representative Casten for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you so much. I think Mr. Loudermilk
really hit it on the head with the transparency question, and I
want to follow on that, but I want to specifically get to the
auditability issue, and I think you alluded to this, Ms. King.
It is one thing to be able to see the code. It is something
else completely to be able to understand the code. And I say
this as someone who, before I came to Congress, ran a utility.
And my biggest risk was predicting revenue--did it vary with
the weather, did it vary with economic conditions--and I built
a genetic algorithm that figured all that stuff out. I have no
idea how it worked, but it was amazingly effective and it made
our investors much happier because we could predict our
revenue.
That is trivial. It is not at all implausible for me to
imagine that we get to a world where an investment fund has
figured out from looking at global data that there is about to
be a massive human rights abuse committed, and it is shorting
the affected businesses and properties, right? That would be
deeply unethical, and if we understood it, it would be a
problem, but it is totally possible that we could never
actually understand that and saying that is what it is doing.
So my question is, and I think all of you can answer this,
but I am going to start with Ms. King, just because I see you
nodding so vociferously, what is the best regulatory practice
for ensuring that these algorithms remain auditable, and
ensuring that they apply to everyone in the system, because
presumably, as soon as some subset of people agree to have
auditable algorithms, people who violate that might have an
investing edge, whether that is a bad actor in our country or a
foreign actor who wishes us harm. What is that standard, both
domestically and internationally? How would you recommend we
think about that?
Ms. King. Thank you, sir. I will take a quick stab at it,
and I am going to use a hypothetical because I think it is
always helpful to have it. Yours is very complicated, and I am
not going to try and explain your very impressive example. At
the Wilson Center, in one of our trainings, we use a supply
chain prediction model. Will it or won't it arrive? Will the
USPS deliver a package on time? And you have a series of
variables. You have product wait. You have the month that it
was ordered. You have things that you probably, as a consumer,
wouldn't think matter, but about 10 different variables. And as
you play with the model and you change the variables, you
change the weights--how much weight do we give to a particular
variable or not--you understand more why the prediction you get
comes out, and then you can kind of take that and you can go
back through the system and check it.
I would say you need a couple of standards. One is not
going to work, unfortunately, but a couple of standards that
have that sort of ability to use a couple of methods, probably
a model agnostic method, if it is possible, to go back and just
understand, at least at a strategic level. You may not be able,
as you know very well, to go and explain the whole thing, but a
confidence level and then explainability that you could
achieve. So, you are looking for some sort of confidence trust
level and some sort of agnostic model verification, and you are
also looking to make sure as you are going through that
process, that if you are going to have regulators as part of
this conversation, you have a number of regulators across
sectors. As your example points out, you can't just have
financial services regulators. You are going to have to have
others from other parts of the government at the table because
of these unexpected outcomes.
Mr. Casten. If I could, though, that approach you described
works where there is a finite number of known inputs. If you
are using sort of a neural network model that, for all
practical purposes, has an infinite number of inputs, I don't
know how you audit that at some level of complexity. To follow
on from that, and I am sure this varies market to market, is
there any good analysis? Is there a percentage of algorithmic
trading or algorithmic investing, wherever it sits, that we
really don't want to have more than X percent because now the
algorithms are responding to algorithms? Is there a robust
mathematical way to think about that? And maybe it is different
for housing credit decisions than it is for equities
investments or something else. But is there some robust way to
think about that so that we don't sort of unwittingly introduce
too much volatility into the system? And if any of the other
witnesses want to chime in on this, you would be welcomed for
your thoughts as well.
Ms. Vogel. I can speak to auditing algorithms. What we want
to do is, we don't want to think about auditing all algorithms
to the same standard. We want to think about auditing
algorithms in context because the context matters a lot. So, we
do need to keep track of inputs. We do need explainability. We
do need to enforce real-world laws inside algorithms. We do you
need to be aware of bias in, bias out. And so to your point
about thresholds, the acceptable thresholds would be determined
based on the context.
Mr. Casten. I see I am out of time, but I would welcome
further thoughts offline from any of the witnesses, and I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Adams from North Carolina for
5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Chairman Foster. And thank you,
Ranking Member Gonzalez and Chairwoman Waters, for this hearing
today. And to our witnesses, thank you for your testimony.
Professor Broussard, in your testimony, you noted that all
historical data sets have bias, and that AI needs to be
regulated as soon as possible because it has all of the flaws
of any human process plus more. You also cite in your testimony
the potential impact of bias in AI to students and consumers of
lower socioeconomic status, such as when the International
Baccalaureate used AI to assign grades to students, to their
detriment. So, building off of what my colleague, Ms. Pressley,
discussed, would you tell us more about what happened in these
scenarios?
Ms. Broussard. Sure. Thank you for that question. The
International Baccalaureate (IB) example is a situation where,
because of the pandemic, the International Baccalaureate exams
were canceled, and the IB decided to use an algorithm to assign
imaginary grades to real students, which had disastrous
consequences, because the inputs to the algorithm were things
like a school's performance in the past. We know that the
economic divide is particularly profound when it comes to
America's schools, and so the students at the poor schools were
predicted to do poorly, and the students at the rich schools
were predicted to do well. We have a racial divide there. Who
are the students at poor schools? They are mostly Black and
Brown students. Who are the students at rich schools? Well,
they are mostly White students. So, the algorithm made very
predictable decisions that disadvantaged Black and Brown and
poor students. This is what happens most of the time with
algorithmic decisions.
Ms. Adams. Would you explain what algorithmic auditing is,
and how we can encourage public and private entities to adapt
it as a best practice?
Ms. Broussard. Thank you. Yes. Algorithmic auditing, as I
mentioned in my testimony, is something that I do with a
company called O'Neil Risk Consulting and Algorithmic Auditing,
Inc. (ORCAA). What we do is we look at an algorithm and we ask,
who could this algorithm negatively affect, and we look at the
inputs to the algorithm. We do look at the code. We act as an
information fiduciary, so we keep everything extremely private.
We look at the outputs and we do mathematical and statistical
analysis as necessary in order to figure out what is going on
in the algorithm. Once you actually figure out where the
algorithm is going wrong, you can fix it, but in a lot of
industries now, people are pretending that there is nothing
wrong. For example, Ms. Vogel mentioned before the Optum case.
There is also the case of the Apple card, where a man was
offered a credit limit that was about 10 times higher than his
wife, even though they shared all of their finances.
Companies are pretending that they don't collect
information like race in order to make decisions. But, on the
other hand, if you are using a factor, like a ZIP Code, that is
an input to your algorithm, then, actually we have enough
residential segregation in the United States that if you are
using a ZIP Code, you are actually using race as a proxy. So,
there are--
Ms. Adams. Thank you.
Ms. Broussard. Thank you.
Ms. Adams. I want to move on, if I can, quickly.
Ms. Broussard. Sure.
Ms. Adams. Ms. Vogel, I was happy to see that part of your
recommendations related to diversifying the AI field, including
supporting Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs). Specifically, what shoud Congress be doing to ensure
that HBCU and Minority Serving Institution (MSI) students are
able to participate in the AI revolution that is currently
underway?
Ms. Vogel. Thank you for that question. We strongly believe
that we need AI to be built by and for a broader cross-section
of the population, both so that more can benefit from the AI,
so that more can benefit from the economic support that comes
from it, but also so that our AI is better. So, we need to make
sure that we support HBCUs and MSIs to ensure that their
students are part of this current AI revolution that is
undeway. We know that HBCUs produce nearly 20 percent of all
Black graduates, 25 percent of Black graduates who earned
degrees in the disciplines of STEM technology, science,
engineering, and math, and we need to make sure that we have
all hands on deck. We can't afford to not bring all of these
students into the AI revolution. Industry is depending on their
participation.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, ma'am. I think I am out of time. Mr.
Chairman, I am going to yield back, but thank you very much for
your response.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Auchincloss of Massachusetts
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Auchincloss. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
talk about two specific applications of algorithms that have
been and are front and center these days, and really invite the
panel to weigh in on one or both of them. The first is the use
of algorithms in hiring. A number of organizations, some from
the center-left, some from the left, and some from the center-
right, have all converged that there are somewhere between 25
to 30 million ``hidden workers'' in the United States, people
who could be employed, who, under the right conditions, want to
be employed. And yet, we are not tapping into their
productivity, and they are not getting to realize their fullest
aspirations.
That is obviously a multifaceted problem, but one element
of it is algorithms that some of the biggest companies are
using, something like 75 to 80 percent of Fortune 100s, for
example, in how they sort resumes that get put forward. They
are screening out resumes that have discontinuity in
employment. They are screening out resumes of formerly-
incarcerated individuals. They are screening out resumes that
don't have a college degree, even for jobs that don't require a
college degree. I welcome input from the panel on this first
application, kind of the state of play right now in these
resume-screening algorithms, and what can be done to improve
them, and whether they have any role at all going forward?
Ms. Broussard. I can offer that my colleague, Hilke
Schellmann, has been writing about these topics, and has done
some really excellent work in the MIT Technology Review, that
is an in-depth review on what is going on with hiring
algorithms.
Mr. Cooper. Yes. This is one of the reasons why we need a
risk management framework for when there is going to be an AI
system that has a highly-consequential impact on somebody's
lifec, so making sure that there is a thought process that is
auditable about what the factors are that are considered in
determining what resume is going to go where is a good example
of something where we need to make sure that there is a
thought-through and documented impact assessment, and then
steps taken to mitigate risk.
Mr. Auchincloss. And I would just add also that this should
be a triple-line win for everybody. Companies don't want to be
screening out high-quality workers for esoteric reasons. They
are struggling for employees, as we speak. And as a society, we
want people to be working and contributing, and people
themselves want meaningful work. So, I would hope that this can
be an area of actual bipartisan work going forward on how we
encourage the private sector to be more thoughtful about their
use of these hiring algorithms and the other elements of this
challenge of hidden workers.
The second area that I want to dig into and invite the
panel to speak on is about what many of us have been reading
about these last 2 weeks, which is Facebook's algorithm. The
whistleblower addressing the Senate exposited that while she
did not think Section 230 should be revised for user-generated
content, she did think that Facebook's algorithm itself should
be subject to liability laws. And I would welcome input from
any of the panelists here about how that might be applicable in
terms of Facebook, in particular, but really any social media's
algorithm, whether that should be subject to regulation itself?
Mr. Cooper. I am happy to jump in again. We don't represent
Facebook, but I would say that I think it is important to make
sure that where you have particular high risk in the way an
algorithm is working--in this case, feeding certain videos or
certain social media feeds to certain people, particularly
where it has to do with children--is a high risk, and we need
to make sure that the decision-making process is appropriate.
And there is a combination of a regulatory aspect of that and
also just good practices internally to make sure that there is
organizational accountability so that when decisions are made,
that there is somebody at a senior level who signs off on those
decisions, and that there is documentation of why certain
choices were made.
Mr. Auchincloss. Yes. I can see why it would be challenging
to try to unpick liability for an algorithm that was put into
place, how you can draw causality directly, and yet part of me
thinks that we have to answer that question. We have to wrestle
with that problem because, otherwise, we are going to be in a
place where I think organizations will be distancing themselves
from accountability instead of embracing it by being able to
point towards these black box algorithms and say that they are
just part of part of their toolkit, and you can never pay cause
and effect. I think we need to reject that explanation and hold
companies liable for the algorithms that they choose to use.
I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and I would like to thank our
witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for these witnesses, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:16 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

October 13, 2021

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
