- KEEPING UP WITH THE CODES: USING AI FOR EFFECTIVE REGTECH

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

KEEPING UP WITH THE CODES:

USING AI FOR EFFECTIVE REGTECH

=======================================================================

HYBRID HEARING

BEFORE THE

TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 13, 2022

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 117-85

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-880 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JUAN VARGAS, California              LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            TED BUDD, North Carolina
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
RITCHIE TORRES, New York             JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           LANCE GOODEN, Texas
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         VAN TAYLOR, Texas
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   PETE SESSIONS, Texas
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio, Ranking
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                    Member
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           TED BUDD, North Carolina
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts      VAN TAYLOR, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 13, 2022.................................................     1
Appendix:
May 13, 2022.................................................    21

WITNESSES
Friday, May 13, 2022

Greenfield, Kevin, Deputy Comptroller for Operational Risk
Policy, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC)........     4
Hall, Melanie, Commissioner, Division of Banking and Financial
Institutions, State of Montana; and Chair, Board of Directors,
Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS)....................     5
Lay, Kelly J., Director, Office of Examination and Insurance,
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)....................     7
Rusu, Jessica, Chief Data, Information and Intelligence Officer,
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), United Kingdom..............     9

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Greenfield, Kevin............................................    22
Hall, Melanie................................................    38
Lay, Kelly J.................................................    46
Rusu, Jessica................................................    52

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Foster, Hon. Bill:
Written statement of the Alliance for Innovative Regulation..    60
Written statement of the Data Foundation.....................    66
Written statement of the National Association of Federally-
Insured Credit Unions......................................   184
Garcia, Hon. Sylvia:
Written responses to questions for the record from Kevin
Greenfield.................................................   187
Written responses to questions for the record from Kelly Lay.   189
Gonzalez, Hon. Anthony:
Written statement of Security Scorecard......................   190
Maloney, Hon. Carolyn:
Written statement of Security Scorecard......................   190

KEEPING UP WITH THE CODES: USING

AI FOR EFFECTIVE REGTECH

----------

Friday, May 13, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Task Force on Artificial Intelligence,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The task force met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m., in room
2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Foster [chairman
of the task force] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Foster, Sherman, Adams,
Auchincloss; Gonzalez of Ohio, and Loudermilk.
Chairman Foster. The Task Force on Artificial Intelligence
will now come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the task force at any time. Also, without objection,
members of the full Financial Services Committee who not
members of this task force are authorized to participate in
today's hearing.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Keeping Up with the Codes:
Using AI for Effective RegTech.''
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us today for what should
be a very interesting hearing of the task force. Today, we are
looking to explore how different financial regulators have been
leveraging AI technology to improve their regulatory and
supervisory efforts. The use of artificial intelligence (AI)
and machine learning (ML) by financial institutions, known as
RegTech, as well as the use of AI and ML by financial
regulators, known as SupTech, are two areas that are rapidly
gaining regulatory focus.
To give our audience some idea of what we are talking
about, imagine that a regulator comes up with a simple, rules-
based method for automatically generating, say, suspicious
activity reports (SARs). Such a system will soon be flooded
with false positives, that is, activities that appear
suspicious but are in fact not. So, an experienced human
regulator will then be assigned to sort through these to
determine which are spurious and which are truly suspicious
activities.
And this will rapidly generate what is called a tag, a
dataset that can be used by machine-learning algorithms to
approximately replicate the human's complex judgment at scale
and at low cost, which all sounds great until you encounter all
of the classic problems with AI and machine learning. That is,
if the human inspector was racist, the machine-learning
algorithm will be racist. And sophisticated bad actors will
have the ability to pollute the dataset with thousands of non-
suspicious activities so as to trick the ML algorithm to give a
pass to a small number of serious violations.
This is a complex space, and taken together in the
financial services space, RegTech and SupTech may help
financial institutions and government regulators to monitor
transactions, evaluate risk, detect noncompliance, identify
illicit finance, and implement regulatory changes at a rate
never seen before. The AI community anticipates that the use of
RegTech and SupTech will grow significantly in the coming
years, with a global RegTech market projected to reach over $55
billion by 2025. This rapid growth exemplifies why it is so
important that we get these technologies right, that we need to
make sure that we leverage these powerful tools in the right
way.
Just as we work to ensure that private industries utilize
AI and ML in a responsible manner, we need to be sure that our
government regulators and entities embrace such technology to
improve oversight and strengthen supervision of the financial
services industry. Financial institutions' risk management and
compliance operations rely heavily on synthesizing large
datasets and detecting both trends and uncharacteristic
activity. A large portion of this calculus depends on the
ability of these firms and regulators to successfully predict
whether wrongdoing or other risks may occur in the future.
With this great predictive ability, AI must remain
accountable to broad regulatory schemes. Those employing AI in
their business processes or regulatory efforts cannot avoid
responsibility when unintended or unwanted results occur. As
with any AI, the use and implementation must be carefully
monitored and evaluated in the end by a natural person in some
capacity. Similarly, regulators and inspectors must be able to
look under the hood of business operations utilizing AI,
especially in sensitive and impactful industries such as the
financial services space. These algorithms and programs must be
accountable, explainable, and adjustable.
So, I am glad we are gathered here to discuss such an
important topic and to better ascertain how we can promote
responsible innovation and adoption amongst both financial
services participants and regulators.
And with that, I would like to recognize the ranking member
of the task force, my friend from Ohio, Mr. Gonzalez, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster, and thank
you, as always, for your leadership on this task force. It's
always a pleasure to work together, and I share your interest
and excitement for the possibilities of increased use of
emerging technologies in our regulatory system.
Technology has transformed the way that Americans interact
with financial institutions, for the better. Today, Americans
can access banking services, buy and sell stock, and get
approved for a mortgage faster and cheaper than ever before
without ever having to step foot into a local bank or credit
union. In our work on this committee, we should be doing more
to promote the adoption of new technologies to further optimize
operations and open finance to more Americans. The expanded use
of AI and machine learning will help financial institutions use
data more efficiently and reach more Americans.
That brings us to today's hearing. In one of my first
hearings as a member of this committee, I advocated for our
financial regulators to explore the applications of emerging
technologies like AI and machine learning. As financial
institutions have made great strides in innovation, so, too,
are financial regulators.
To me, the benefits are twofold. First, it will help
decrease regulatory costs on financial institutions,
particularly our smallest financial institutions which are
often the bedrock of local communities. A 2015 Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis study found that compliance costs are
disproportionately high for small banks, at an estimated cost
of 22 percent of net income. Globally, the cost of compliance
for banks is estimated to be at least $100 billion. This
prevents institutions from being able to invest those dollars
into further innovations, but, most importantly, makes
financial products more expensive for everyday customers. Our
goal should be to reduce these regulatory costs and give
institutions, especially smaller financial institutions, the
flexibility to deploy their capital more efficiently.
It is important to note that decreasing regulatory cost
does not necessarily mean decreased regulation. This leads me
to my second point. Increased use and deployment of RegTech and
SupTech will lead to more effective and efficient regulations.
As the financial institutions rapidly increase their use of AI
and machine learning, we run the risk of traditional financial
regulatory systems being vulnerable to failure. In my view, the
use of RegTech can play a critical role in enhancing consumer
protection, containing systemic risk, reducing financial
crimes, and creating greater regulatory feedback between
financial institutions and Federal agencies.
In today's hearing, I am excited to hear from our witnesses
on the current utilization of AI and machine learning by
private industry and Federal agencies, and the barriers facing
regulators, including whether agencies have sufficient
technical staff resources and sufficient congressional
authority. We must also confront the potential difficulties of
the greater use of RegTech, including bias, algorithm
challenges and implementation, and the protection of Americans'
personally identifiable information.
Again, I want to thank Chairman Foster for convening
today's hearing. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses,
and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And today, we welcome the
testimony of our distinguished witnesses: Kevin Greenfield, the
Deputy Comptroller for Operational Risk Policy at the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency; Melanie Hall, the Commissioner
of the Montana Division of Banking and Financial Institutions,
as well as the Chair of the Board of Directors of the
Conference of State Bank Supervisors; Kelly Lay, the Director
of the Office of Examination and Insurance at the National
Credit Union Administration; and Jessica Rusu, the Chief Data,
Information, and Intelligence Officer of the UK Financial
Conduct Authority.
Witnesses are reminded that their oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. You should be able to see a timer on your
screen that will indicate how much time you have left, and a
chime will go off at the end of your time. I would ask that you
be mindful of the timer, and quickly wrap up your testimony if
you hear the chime, so that we can be respectful of both the
witnesses' and the task force members' time.
And without objection, your entire written statements will
be made a part of the record.
Mr. Greenfield, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN GREENFIELD, DEPUTY COMPTROLLER FOR
OPERATIONAL RISK POLICY, OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE
CURRENCY (OCC)

Mr. Greenfield. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Gonzalez,
and members of the task force, thank you for the opportunity to
appear today and discuss artificial intelligence tools used by
national banks, Federal savings associations, and Federal
branches and agencies of foreign banks supervised by the Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC). I appreciate this
invitation to discuss the opportunities, benefits, and
challenges that artificial intelligence or, more commonly, AI,
presents for banks, and our approach to supervising those
activities.
I serve as the OCC's Deputy Comptroller for Operational
Risk Policy, and I am responsible for overseeing the
development of policy and examination procedures addressing
bank operational risk, which includes understanding and
monitoring the risks of AI. I also represent the OCC in
international forums, such as the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision's Financial Technology Group, which coordinates the
sharing of regulatory practices on tech issues, including those
related to the use of AI.
Technological changes and rapidly-evolving consumer
preferences are reshaping the financial services industry,
creating new opportunities to provide consumers, businesses,
and communities with more access to financial products and
services. The OCC promotes responsible innovation in the
banking industry to expand access to credit and capital,
improve operations, and support full and fair participation in
the American banking system. Over the years, we have adapted
our supervisory approach to address the increase in banks' use
of technological innovations, such as AI.
Today, banks can use AI tools to strengthen their safety
and soundness, enhance consumer protections, and increase fair
access to products and services. AI can be used to enhance the
customer experience, such as assisting with online account
openings and product selection. AI can also be used to support
more efficient credit underwriting and other banking
operations. Used in appropriate ways, these approaches have the
potential to promote greater access to banking services by
underserved communities. Use of advanced analytical tools is
not new, and banks have been employing mathematical models to
support operations for some time. However, banks are now
introducing AI tools to support even more complex operations
and increased automation.
While we have seen many large banks develop these tools
internally, AI tools and services are becoming more widely
available as third-party firms are increasingly offering AI
products and services to banks of all sizes. While AI tools can
present benefits, we must also be mindful of the risks that
banks' use of AI is not properly managed and controlled.
Potential adverse outcomes are caused by poorly-designed
models, faulty data, inadequate testing, or limited human
oversight. Banks need effective risk management and controls
for model validation and explainability data management,
privacy, and security, regardless of whether a bank develops AI
tools internally or purchases through a third party.
The OCC follows a risk-based supervision model focused on
safe, sound, and fair banking practices, as well as focused on
assessing compliance with laws and regulations. OCC examiners
have significant experience in supervising banks' use of
sophisticated mathematical models and tools. This includes
evaluating fair lending concerns and other consumer protection
issues, such as unfair or deceptive acts or practices. The OCC
expects banks to monitor for and identify outcomes that could
create unwarranted risks or adversely impact the fair treatment
of customers.
If we identify any concerns, risks, or deficiencies during
our examinations, the OCC has a range of tools available and
will take supervisory or enforcement action as appropriate. But
just as banks are increasingly using sophisticated technologies
and tools to enhance bank capabilities, the OCC is similarly
engaged in assessing how innovative technologies can strengthen
our supervisory processes. The OCC employs a number of
analytical and technology tools to support banks' supervision,
and work is currently underway to materially upgrade our core
supervision systems to further enhance this ability to monitor
risks in the banking system. Moreover, the OCC is considering
the use of AI tools as part of this effort.
I want to thank the task force for its leadership on this
important issue and for inviting the OCC to testify today. I
look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Deputy Comptroller Greenfield
can be found on page 22 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Mr. Greenfield.
Ms. Hall, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MELANIE HALL, COMMISSIONER, DIVISION OF BANKING
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS, STATE OF MONTANA; AND CHAIR, BOARD
OF DIRECTORS, CONFERENCE OF STATE BANK SUPERVISORS (CSBS)

Ms. Hall. Good morning, Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Gonzalez, and members of the task force. Thank you for holding
this hearing. My name is Melanie Hall, and I am the
Commissioner of Montana's Division of Banking and Financial
Institutions, and the Chair of the Conference of State Bank
Supervisors' Board of Directors. It is my pleasure to testify
today on behalf of CSBS on how the State system uses technology
today and how we see it shaping the future through networked
supervision, a federated regulatory approach to further evolve
and streamline the State system.
First, I would like to address how States are using
technology platforms as well as data analytics to enhance
States' supervision today. CSBS operates a regulatory licensing
platform called the Nationwide Multistate Licensing System, or
NMLS, on behalf of State regulators. NMLS became part of the
SAFE Act in 2008, but got its start in the early days of the
mortgage crisis as State regulators recognized the need to stop
bad actors from leaving one State just to move to another.
Today, nearly 640,000 companies and individuals use NMLS
annually to manage their business licensing and registration.
These companies and individuals span the mortgage, consumer
finance, debt, and money services business (MSB) industries,
with the mortgage industry accounting for more than 80 percent
of NMLS use.
The NMLS is also used to register mortgage loan originators
who work at banks and credit unions. This RegTech has helped
State regulators become more efficient and risk-focused. NMLS
data and information is used to identify trends in licensing
and supervisory activities. In particular, the data has given
State regulators a deeper perspective into the mortgage
industry and helped to identify applications and companies that
may require more scrutiny. NMLS data further helps State
regulators analyze nationwide trends and identify risks through
quarterly reports on both the mortgage and MSB industries. CSBS
is also in the early stages of developing a call report for
consumer finance.
Building on the success of NMLS, in 2020, the States
launched a new technology platform called the State Examination
System (SES). SES is the first nationwide system to bring
regulators and companies into the same technology space for
examinations. State agencies can conduct exams and
investigations, process consumer complaints, and do other
supervision work through this secured platform, and share that
information with industry and other States. SES provides
uniformity and efficiency, reducing the regulatory burden for
multistate companies.
In addition to these two important technology platforms,
CSBS has a dedicated data analytics team that works with State
regulators to find new ways to anticipate and mitigate risk.
Some of the areas that State regulators are exploring include
using a technology tool to understand emerging trends from
examiners in the field, using predictive modeling as an early
detection tool for bank risk, and piloting a predictive
analytics program, and understanding how AI could be used to
review loan files for consumer compliance and more.
Networked supervision will evolve the State system to one
where communication occurs in real time. Knowledge and
expertise flows across the States, and regulation becomes
streamlined. Last year, the CSBS board identified networked
supervision priorities to advance this wide-ranging initiative.
The priorities laid the foundation for future collaboration,
and further work started under Vision 2020 to streamline the
licensing and supervision of money services businesses.
Networked supervision requires timely and robust data and
information sharing between State and Federal agencies. In
addition to developing platforms that support this objective,
CSBS is identifying and modernizing the necessary legal
underpinnings to enable greater data sharing. The State system
has information-sharing agreements with numerous Federal
agencies, and we are pursuing and would appreciate your support
of more of these arrangements.
States are working toward a future where technology
platforms and data analytics allow 54 State financial agencies
to operate as one seamless supervisory network. This networked
approach will transform financial regulation, giving State
regulators an even greater ability to identify and understand
local risks before they threaten consumers in the financial
system at a national level. As noted in greater detail in my
written testimony, the States are committed to implementing
technology solutions and collaborating in new ways to improve
oversight and enhance consumer protections while reducing
regulatory burden.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Commissioner Hall can be found
on page 38 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Hall.
Ms. Lay, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF KELLY J. LAY, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF EXAMINATION AND
INSURANCE, NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION (NCUA)

Ms. Lay. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Gonzalez, and
members of the Task Force on Artificial Intelligence, thank you
for conducting this hearing on the effective use of AI and
RegTech, and for the opportunity to testify before you today.
My name is Kelly Lay, and I am the Director of the Office of
Examination and Insurance at the National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA). I started my career with NCUA as an
examiner in the field and have held various positions
throughout the agency. Most recently, I was the NCUA's Director
of the Office of Business Innovation, where I led the
development and implementation of the agency's new examination
platform, the Modern Examination and Risk Identification Tool,
also known as MERIT.
In my testimony today, I will first focus on the agency's
examination modernization efforts. Second, I will highlight
research NCUA has conducted in the realm of AI and RegTech and
the NCUA's challenges to incorporate AI and RegTech
technologies in the credit union industry. Third, I will
discuss last year's request for information on the
institutional use of AI. And I will conclude with a legislative
request for the NCUA to receive third-party vendor authority.
In 2015, the NCUA formed the Enterprise Solution
Modernization Program to help NCUA staff regulate and supervise
credit unions more efficiently. The program aims to modernize
the NCUA's technology solutions to create an integrated
examination and data environment and facilitate a safe and
sound credit union system. As an initial step, the NCUA
prioritized replacement of the legacy examination application,
also known as AIRES, which was over 25-years-old.
After several pilot phases, NCUA rolled out MERIT,
including enhanced integrated analytics utilizing a business
intelligence tool, and our new secure central user interface,
called NCUA Connect, to the NCUA, State supervisory
authorities, and credit unions in the second half of 2021.
Currently, the NCUA has focused on helping users through this
significant transition while deploying system enhancements. In
2017, the NCUA board also approved virtual examination
exploration and research funding. Currently, the virtual
examination project is in the research and discovery phase.
The agency's goal is to transition, within the next 5 to 10
years, the examination and supervision program into a
predominantly virtual one for credit unions that are compatible
with this approach. The NCUA is in the testing phase of
deploying a machine-learning model to perform data validation
more efficiently, with quarterly call reports and profile
submissions. Deployment of this new technique is expected to
occur in the next 4 quarters and should result in more reliable
and consistent call report filing across the industry.
The NCUA recognizes the importance and benefits of
technological changes and has incorporated organizational
change management strategies into our initiatives. However,
there are challenges. In addition to dedicated resources for
development and testing, expanding the NCUA's use of RegTech
and AI would require the agency to train examiners and credit
unions, as applicable, and revise our examination policies and
procedures. In addition, while the NCUA supports and encourages
innovation and the growth of the industry, we also must protect
the interests of credit union members in terms of privacy and
security and not compromise the industry's safety and
soundness.
Furthermore, most federally-insured credit unions have less
than $100 million in assets. These small credit unions fulfill
a vital role in their communities but are usually short-staffed
and lack the expertise and resources necessary to keep abreast
of changing technology. Generally, the smaller institutions
have neither the economies of scale nor the expertise necessary
for sophisticated analytics.
Last year, the NCUA joined the OCC, the FDIC, the Federal
Reserve, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) in
a request for information on the institutional use of AI and
related challenges. We collectively received responses from
financial institutions, vendors, industry trade groups,
academic communities, and consumer advocacy organizations. In
total, we only received 32 comments, and of those, only 4 were
from the credit union industry.
Finally, any examination of technology in NCUA is
incomplete without discussing the significant challenges the
agency has confronted since the 2002 expiration of its third-
party vendor authority. While there are many advantages for
credit unions to use these service providers, the continued
transfer of operations to credit union service organizations
and other third-party vendors diminishes the ability of the
NCUA to accurately assess all of the risks present in the
credit union system and to determine if current credit union
service organization or third-party vendor risk mitigation
strategies are adequate.
I would like to thank Chairman Foster for introducing the
Strengthening Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector Act to
give the NCUA third-party vendor examination authority. I urge
the members of this task force to review this legislation and
consider adding their support to close this growing regulatory
blind spot that the NCUA continues to confront.
This concludes my statement. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Director Lay can be found on
page 46 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And Ms. Rusu, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF JESSICA RUSU, CHIEF DATA, INFORMATION AND
INTELLIGENCE OFFICER, FINANCIAL CONDUCT AUTHORITY (FCA), UNITED
KINGDOM

Ms. Rusu. Good morning, Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Gonzalez, and members of the task force. Thank you for the
invitation to appear virtually today. I am currently serving as
the Chief Data, Information and Intelligence Officer at the
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA). For the committee's
background, the FCA is the conduct regulator for approximately
51,000 financial services firms in the U.K. The FCA is
responsible for ensuring that relevant markets function well,
as well as operational objectives to protect consumers and
promote effective competition.
In my role at the FCA, I am focused on building digital
supervision technologies and leveraging data science and
intelligence capabilities. As stated in our 2022 business plan,
we believe that an increasingly data-driven industry should
have a regulator. Therefore, the use of AI both by industry as
RegTech, and for the purposes of regulatory supervision, or
SupTech, is an important area of focus for us. The data
technology and innovation division that I lead engages with
firms' subject matter experts and fellow regulators to drive
positive transformation in how we regulate.
The FCA's innovation services include TechSprints, digital
and regulatory sandbox activities, innovation pathways, as well
as our scalebox and early oversight for new firms. Our
TechSprints are events where we convene industry experts to
develop proofs-of-concept to address specific challenges, such
as AML and financial crime. The regulatory sandbox allows
businesses to test new propositions in the live market with
real customers and regulatory oversight, whereas the digital
sandbox enables proofs-of-concept to be developed using complex
synthetic datasets. Recent digital sandbox participants have
focused on ESG data and fraud prevention.
Turning to the focus of today's hearing, we believe that
new technologies can bring positive benefits to consumers and
markets. As part of our work on AI, we want to facilitate
debate on the risks and ethical questions associated with its
use. The FCA is actively exploring how we can use AI techniques
as well for supervisory and enforcement purposes, including
leveraging advanced analytics techniques in our intelligence
work, which seeks to extract insights from FCA data to increase
the speed and accuracy of decision making, which we will
further embed with triaging and intervention models.
Externally, we have partnered with the Bank of England on
the development of the AI Public-Private Forum, established in
October of 2020, to share information and understand the
practical challenges of using AI in financial services, as well
as the barriers to deployment and potential risks. The FCA also
collaborated with the Alan Turing Institute on a year-long
project which explored the practical application of a high-
level framework for responsible AI.
Currently, we are working with the Bank of England to issue
a joint public discussion paper on AI, supported by new
research that will help us to deepen our understanding of how
AI is changing U.K. financial markets. In terms of the high-
level outcomes from the work thus far, we see that existing
model risk management frameworks reinforced that organizations
must take responsibility for algorithmic decision making,
regardless of the technology used. And in terms of risk
management, we see that AI forums are advocating that human-in-
the-loop processes exist. Data is a key building block of
responsible AI. We require firms to ensure they demonstrate
robust controls, consider data quality, including provenance
and recency of data utilized, as well as cyber and data
security when implementing new technologies. Governance and
accountability are, therefore, core to the way the FCA thinks
about AI.
The wider FCA and I would be happy to remain engaged with
the committee and with U.S. regulators to continue this
discussion. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rusu can be found on page 52
of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Rusu, and I want to thank
you also for your excellent written testimony, including many
interesting links to all of the great work, things like
TechSprints that you are doing, that you are involved in.
Unfortunately, it kept me awake way too late last night. Now,
to our Members, I would like to say that we anticipate a second
round of questions should be possible, so you can keep that in
mind.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
I would like to start by quickly responding to Ms. Lay's
important points regarding third-party vendors. In FSOC's
annual reports for 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, and
again in 2021, which happens to span two Democratic and one
Republican Administrations, the Council has highlighted the
fact that we have a regulatory blind spot with respect to the
oversight of third-party vendors of NCUA and FHFA's regulated
entities. Federal banking regulators are able to examine and
oversee banks' third-party vendors, which can help ensure those
third parties, especially technology firms that banks may
utilize, so that they do not oppose cybersecurity vulnerability
or other risks to the safety and soundness of the banking
system.
The Examination Parity Act gave NCUA and FHFA this very
authority from 1991 until it was sunsetted in December 2001.
And since then, both agencies, the GAO, and FSOC themselves,
have repeatedly and explicitly requested that this authority be
reinstated. And I have introduced the Strengthening
Cybersecurity for the Financial Sector Act of 2022 to address
these regulatory gaps at the NCUA.
Ms. Lay, the NCUA report concludes that the NCUA's lack of
authority over third-party vendors is a growing regulatory
blind spot and has the potential to trigger cascading
consequences throughout the credit union industry and the
financial services sector that may result in significant losses
to the NCUA. Can you elaborate a little bit on this issue?
Ms. Lay. Yes. Thank you for the question, Chairman Foster.
Currently, the NCUA does not have examination authority over
third-party vendors, and so we are unable to implement
corrective action on any third-party vendor if we find issues.
We do go into third-party vendors of credit union service
organizations voluntarily and can provide corrective or
recommendations for corrective action. However, we have had
instances where those third-party vendors of credit union
service organizations do not respond to that corrective action
that we put in place. We have a number of small credit unions.
Over two-thirds of our credit unions are less than $100 million
in assets, and they really would rely on our ability to provide
help to them with our due diligence of third-party vendors if
we could have this third-party vendor authority.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and I will probably get back to
this issue in the follow-up questions. Ms. Hall and Ms. Lay,
how do you handle the whole issue of explainability and--well,
actually all of our witnesses? During the financial crisis, I
talked to some gentlemen who had been running some of the banks
that tragically failed and asked them what it was like as the
regulators came in and closed their bank, and they at least
knew the formulas and the tasks that they were failing. But if
someone comes in to your bank or credit union and says, I'm
sorry, our neural network predicts that you are going to fail,
how do you explain this, and how do you handle that whole
problem with explainability at all levels?
Ms. Hall, do you want to take a swing at that?
Ms. Hall. Chairman Foster, thank you for the question. I
think that explainability in AI is something that can be
challenging, particularly for community financial institutions.
And ultimately, over time, we just have to continue to prove
out what has been established by the theories. For instance, in
Montana, we were one of a few States that did not have any bank
failures during the financial crisis, despite some of those AI
predictive technologies showing that we would have bank
failures.
And so, I think that we have to focus on the data inputs in
order to ensure that those inputs are actually reflective of
expected outcomes, and I think that requires constant change.
And I think that is where AI could really help financial
regulators if there is an effective feedback loop. I think
that, in a lot of ways, the regulatory agencies have struggled
with that feedback loop and plugging back in what the ultimate
outcome was in order to determine whether the models themselves
worked.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and my time has essentially
expired. So, I will recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster, and
thanks again to our panel for being here and for your
testimonies.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, I believe we need
to be doing more to encourage the use of AI for regulatory
purposes, both by the financial institutions themselves, but
also within our regulatory agencies.
Ms. Lay, I am going to start my questioning with you. In
your testimony, you discussed that the NCUA is investigating
the use of natural language processing, which transforms
unstructured data into structured data, increasing the uses and
applicability of data. What are the barriers facing the NCUA in
implementing this technology at present?
Ms. Lay. Thank you for the question. I believe that one of
the barriers we face is that AI is just very expensive and
those costs would fall to our credit unions as they pay for our
budget. Technology, AI, is very expensive. I think another
barrier is just the fact that many of our credit unions are
less than $100 million in assets, and so they also don't have
the sophistication sometimes and the level of staff to be able
to adopt these technologies. That would also be a barrier.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. What, if anything, are you all able
to do to help mitigate those barriers? Like, the cost would
make sense to me, for sure, but at the same time, if all of the
bigger players are adopting the use of some of these
technologies, we obviously don't want our credit unions to fall
behind on that front. What, if anything, are you all able to do
to help mitigate that cost issue?
Ms. Lay. One of the things I think that we could do is, if
the agency were granted a third-party vendor authority, that
would allow us to conduct examinations of any third-party
vendors that credit unions would be using to implement
artificial intelligence technologies. And I think that would
assist our credit unions in being able to have the ability to
see our reports of examination of those third-party vendors and
assist them in their due diligence process.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Got it. So, help them on the front
end in terms of the diligence side. That makes a lot of sense.
Ms. Rusu, I am going to switch to you. On this committee,
we often talk about the concerns of algorithmic bias and the
potential impact it could have on decision-making processes.
How do you all handle that in the U.K.? I am just curious,
because we talk about it a lot, and I would just be curious for
more of an international perspective on that issue
specifically.
Ms. Rusu. Sure. Thank you for the question, Ranking Member
Gonzalez. In the U.K., I would clarify that there is a
distinction between discrimination and bias. In the concept of
algorithmic bias, we think about whether or not groups could be
disproportionately impacted, primarily through bias that would
exist in the underlying data. And I think it is important, and
as you referenced in your earlier opening remarks, in terms of
general model risk management, you have to control both the
inputs that go into the model as well as the outputs. And that
is how we are thinking about bias and algorithms. We understand
the complexity and the challenges in understanding how bias and
algorithms can lead to unfair outcomes that might privilege one
group of users over another.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. And, Mr. Greenfield,
picking up on that line of questioning, how are regulators
working with private industry to prevent the use of biases in
their models?
Mr. Greenfield. Through the ongoing supervision process
with both financial institutions as well as our work with many
of the banks' service providers, we are very focused on banks
having effective risk management and governance in place for
the use of these models, which will include controls for the
model development, validation of the model, and testing of the
model, both initially and when in production. But what is also
very important is continued oversight of the model over time as
assumptions change and data quality can change over time. We
very much look at how that is being monitored, and those
outcomes are very, very closely monitored. We also engage in
those discussions with financial institutions as well as the
model developers and we put out guidance such as the model risk
management guidance that the banking agencies have been using
for some time now.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The gentlewoman from North
Carolina, Ms. Adams, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank you
to our witnesses, and to our ranking member as well.
First of all, the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) regulatory
failures and penalties over the last 10 years have been due to
a failure to detect and report suspicious activity, among other
violations. I hear regularly that financial institutions,
especially smaller entities, are both accountable for and at
the mercy of the RegTech service providers.
So, Mr. Greenfield, Ms. Lay, and Ms. Hall, in that order,
for Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering (BSA/AML)
compliance, if not in other areas, are your agencies' oversight
activities appropriately balanced? Mr. Greenfield, first.
Mr. Greenfield. Yes, I believe so. We are very focused on
how banks are setting up their risk management compliance
frameworks to manage the risk, and, as mentioned earlier, we
take a very risk-based approach. So, depending on the size and
complexity of the institution and the services it offers, that
level of oversight and that level of risk management
supervision would be commensurate with the activities of the
bank.
Ms. Adams. Go ahead. Finish.
Mr. Greenfield. Okay. We do engage in ongoing
communications. And we do encourage, especially smaller
community banks, to work together to be able to leverage
services more effectively, more efficiently, and more
economically, and also do focus on the service providers to
make sure that they are providing that level of service to
those banks.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Ms. Lay, what would you say about
that?
Ms. Lay. Yes, thank you for that question. BSA and AML, for
our smaller credit unions, is definitely burdensome and
something that we know that they absolutely need to follow. For
our smaller credit unions that only have one or maybe two staff
persons, they will need to bring in artificial intelligence to
help them with that compliance could certainly be a benefit. I
think the agency--
Ms. Adams. Okay. Thanks. How would you respond, Ms. Hall?
Ms. Hall. Thank you so much for the question. I will just
say, first of all, State regulators really appreciated Congress
enacting BSA reform that supports greater use of technologies.
State regulators supervise a large percentage of smaller banks
and smaller credit unions, and BSA/AML compliance certainly is
a tremendous cost to them, often without a solid feedback loop
to let them know how that information is being used. BSA/AML is
a perfect example of where AI could be really helpful, because
AI is really good at anomaly detection. However, what we really
need is a strong feedback loop with law enforcement in the
Federal agencies in order to improve that AI and make it more
accessible to smaller institutions in order to help with the
costs of BSA compliance.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Let me briefly ask each of you, should
RegTech firms themselves regulate or engage in financial
institution oversight in a different manner? Mr. Greenfield?
Mr. Greenfield. If I understand the question, should
RegTech firms be engaged with banks in a different manner or
oversight of--
Ms. Adams. Correct.
Mr. Greenfield. We believe RegTech firms should be in
communication with their client base, which would be the
financial institutions, in meeting their needs to ensure
compliance in an economical and efficient manner. We have
conversations with--
Ms. Adams. Okay. I just have a few more seconds left. So,
Ms. Lay and Ms. Hall, I want to at least get a response from
each of you as well.
Ms. Lay. We are in the early stages of looking at AI for
RegTech. We do believe that we would need to consult and speak
with many of our credit unions in the industry before--
Ms. Adams. Okay. Ms. Hall?
Ms. Hall. Representative Adams, State regulators would urge
passage of H.R. 2270, which would allow greater coordination
and information sharing between the Federal and State
regulators on third-party service provider exams. That bill is
working its way through Congress. And a lot of States have
their own laws that say they can regulate these third-party
service providers, but the Federal agencies are unsure as to
how much they can coordinate and share information with us. And
so, that bill would really go a long way to helping to ensure
that there is good coordination and information.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, ma'am. I am out of time, and, Mr.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank
everyone on the panel for being here. Some of my colleagues and
even other observers have raised concerns recently that
artificial intelligence and machine learning can exacerbate
bias. However, I believe that if used properly, artificial
intelligence and machine learning can actually be used to
reduce unfair bias. Some of the essential components for
obtaining unbiased results are through recordkeeping of what
goes into algorithms: robust testing and strong risk
management.
Ms. Hall, are there potential risks with using artificial
intelligence exclusive to AI? Are they inherent to any model
risk management framework?
Ms. Hall. Congressman, I believe that bias is always a part
of any kind of model and predictive modeling. I do think that
there is the capacity for machine learning hopefully to
eliminate that bias faster than we have been able to eliminate
it in humans themselves. If there are appropriate feedback
loops, if there is appropriate information and data gathering
there, I do believe that machine learning could help to
eliminate that bias readily as long as there are appropriate
feedback loops.
Mr. Loudermilk. So in reality, bias exists everywhere. It
is not just in the artificial intelligence, but with proper
testing, checking, and data analysis, you believe we can
eliminate, for the most part, unfair bias?
Ms. Hall. Congressman, I am not an AI or machine-learning
expert myself, but I certainly would believe that it is faster
than humans, as we have proven as humans to not be all that
fast in our bias elimination. I would think that machine
learning, with evidence showing the actual outcomes, could
potentially be much quicker in eliminating that bias. And I
don't think that there is a way to necessarily eliminate that
bias on the very front end, but hopefully, the learning process
of machines is faster than our own.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. And I would submit that there is
inherent bias in human opinion and decisions, and you can
eliminate that through the machine if you have the proper data.
Mr. Greenfield, can you describe how the existing bank
regulatory structure already accounts for model risks
associated with AI?
Mr. Greenfield. Yes. I was going to say, so we do. Yes, we
have extensive experience in history with model risk
management. We have supervisory guidance that was jointly put
out by the banking agencies that provide some expectations for
banks as it relates to risk management, governance, testing,
and validation, control, and oversight of these models. We have
examination programs that focus on this as well as we take an
integrated supervision approach that when assessing AI or model
risk management within financial institutions, we will bring in
Ph.D. economists, subject matter or topic experts, whether it
be on fair lending, credit underwriting, or whatever the
activity being conducted, as well as technology experts that
work together in order to identify potential risks or concerns
with model risk management and communicate that to the
financial institution with expectations for corrective action.
Mr. Loudermilk. When you do bring that to the attention of
the financial services, business, or organizations, are they
examined and supervised in a way that would require them to
address these risks before they go forward? In other words,
does the government oversee how they address those?
Mr. Greenfield. Yes, we have a number of supervisory tools
available to us, ranging from matters requiring attention and
reports of examination to enforcement actions. But when we
identify deficiencies, we will require corrective action and
follow-up, and follow-through to ensure it has been done
effectively.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. Ms. Lay, I have been
concerned about the government's resistance to adopt certain
technology. In fact, the FDIC CIO resignation a few months ago
was alarming because he addressed the resistance to change. If
financial regulatory agencies are technologically stagnant,
doesn't that make it difficult to keep up with the changing
nature of the companies they regulate?
Ms. Lay. We agree the ability for NCUA and our credit
unions to adapt to new financial technologies is very
important. The NCUA does not want to hamper innovation in our
agency or in our credit union industry. One of the things that
I have testified here today is that many of our credit unions
are small, less than $100 million in assets. And we will need
to rely on artificial intelligence or rely on third-party
vendors to get into the artificial intelligence space. So, for
the agency to have third-party vendor authority to help those
credit unions with our due diligence for those companies would
be very helpful for the agency. I will just add that we have
been going through a technology modernization at the NCUA for
the past 5 years, and our NCUA Board and executive leadership
have been very supportive of that modernization.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The gentleman from
Massachusetts, Mr. Auchincloss, who is also the Vice Chair of
the Full Committee, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Auchincloss. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for organizing
this important hearing.
My question is for Mr. Greenfield and for Ms. Rusu, but
other witnesses are welcome to jump in, too. In these last 10
days, we have seen that algorithmic stablecoins are not so
stable. And it is clear that we are going to need both updated
auditing and disclosure regulation from Congress for the
stablecoin industry, but also for regulators to be able to
track the redeemability of stablecoins, if these continue to be
an important part of the modern economy.
Mr. Greenfield, while it is not quite AI--obviously it is
deep tech--what tools does the OCC have at its disposal to be
monitoring the redeemability and liquidity of algorithmic
stablecoins?
And, Ms. Rusu, knowing that the United Kingdom has been
really at the forefront of much of this legislation in the
crypto space, what advice might you offer us here in the United
States on this front?
Mr. Greenfield. I will start off by just stating that I am
not aware of any banks directly dealing with algorithmic
stablecoins. However, as you note, it is very much a key topic,
and the OCC is very focused on the development and use of
stablecoins throughout the financial sector. We do have a
number of policy initiatives and research underway looking at
the use of crypto assets throughout the financial sector and
within the national banking system. Our Office of Innovation is
very focused on this, and we are currently engaged in what we
have referred to as crypto policy sprints with FDIC and Federal
Reserve colleagues.
Mr. Auchincloss. Mr. Greenfield, if the OCC were vested by
Congress with the authority and the mandate to supervise
stablecoins, both algorithmic and non-fiat-backed, is it within
the capabilities of the OCC to do that?
Mr. Greenfield. We have put out recommendations on a
framework for stablecoins as part of the Presidential Working
Group report that was published last year. It is something that
we are very focused on developing, and Acting Comptroller Hsu
has spoken extensively on stablecoins. So, it is something that
we are very focused on and looking at what a potential
regulatory framework would look like.
Mr. Auchincloss. And you think the OCC has an important
part to play in that?
Mr. Greenfield. Yes.
Mr. Auchincloss. Ms. Rusu?
Ms. Rusu. Yes. Thank you for the question. As you know, we
do not yet regulate assets except through the anti-money
laundering regulation, but we are following up on this area.
And this week, I held the first crypto policy sprint, and we
considered three problem statements around crypto asset
disclosures to investors to address the inadequacy of
information shared. We looked at centralized versus
decentralized regulation approaches and gaps in the existing
regulatory framework for custodians and the complexities of
ownership around crypto assets, and we expect to share the
findings from the policy sprint later this summer.
We have also started a project using a web scraper to
identify websites that are promoting crypto assets and using
text analysis to identify risk indicators on the sites. So,
just recognizing that it is a complex area for regulation and
the algorithms involved share all of the same complexities that
AI algorithms share as well and recognize--
Mr. Auchincloss. Ms. Rusu, is it the opinion of the
majority of U.K. financial regulators that algorithmic
stablecoins have a place at all in a stablecoin ecosystem, or
are you coalescing behind only fiat-backed stablecoins?
Ms. Rusu. I don't think we have reached a decision yet on
that point, but we are certainly looking at all of the
different categories of crypto assets.
Mr. Auchincloss. And, Mr. Greenfield, do you have an
opinion on that question?
Mr. Greenfield. To the point of our focus on stablecoins,
we have been very focused on understanding the transparency in
reserves, redeemability issues, as you have noted, as well as
looking at the importance of having liquid assets in reserve as
part of the stablecoin framework.
Mr. Auchincloss. Do you think that there is a role for
algorithmic alongside fiat-backed stablecoins, or is that a to-
be-determined question?
Mr. Greenfield. I believe that is to be determined. That is
something as we look at the development--
Mr. Auchincloss. I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. And now, we will begin our
second and final round of questions here.
Ms. Rusu, one of the most interesting links in your written
testimony was dealing with efforts towards what is called
federated learning. This addresses a problem that occurs really
at all levels of financial regulation, where regulators have
access to the detailed information on individual entities that
they regulate. They would like to share that information with
sibling regulators in other States or other countries, but
privacy concerns prevents anything more than very general
trends. And the federated learning, as I understand it, is an
attempt to use access to encrypted datasets and to train the
neural networks across regulatory boundaries or even national
boundaries, and there is a potential solution to this.
My question is, is this viewed as something that is really
ready for prime time? Are there examples of real-world
implementation of federated learning between different
regulators, or does this feel like something that is at the
talking stage?
Ms. Rusu. Thank you for the question, Chairman Foster. We
are participating with other regulatory bodies and looking at,
for example, the Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum (DRCF),
to share learning and approaches on this. We are also looking
at AML through the course of TechSprints, and we are focused on
building solutions and sharing common approaches.
Chairman Foster. Okay. Are there any examples that any of
our witnesses are aware of, where that is being looked at in
detail in the U.S.? Going once, going twice?
[No response.]
Chairman Foster. Okay. I think that is a very promising
area, which, if it works technically, is going to really solve
a lot of the political problems with data sharing across
national boundaries. There was also discussion, Ms. Rusu, in
some of the struggles with determining ultimate beneficial
ownership and how that works. The heart of that is the issue of
having a secured digital ID for market participants that works
across national boundaries. During all the discussions in your
TechSprints and so on, is there any discussion of what amounts
to a crypto driver's license or something that would allow
participants to anonymously identify themselves in a way that
the regulators could see, but market participants could not?
Ms. Rusu. I know that some of the TechSprints have looked
at privacy-enhancing techniques (PETs), as well as different
types of encryption, like homomorphic encryption, and I think
certainly there is a lot of work to be done in that area. I
think we have some more focused areas coming up in TechSprints
later this year to delve into some of that. And I would say
that I also saw some of those solutions, or issues that you
referenced in terms of ownership, were addressed this week in
the 2-day crypto sprint that we held. So, it is something that
we don't have an answer to, but we are certainly investigating.
Chairman Foster. Okay. Were there any other high-level
conclusions from that work?
Ms. Rusu. In terms of the crypto, I think we will be in a
position to share some of the findings later this summer.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. Because the whole issue with
crypto, and secure digital identity, and synonymous, but
legally traced, but yet legally traceable access to crypto
transactions is really, at least in the U.S., I think it is at
the heart of the discussion going on right now.
I will now recognize the ranking member of the task force,
Mr. Gonzalez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. Mr. Greenfield, let's
start with you. I have heard from advocates for greater use of
emerging technology in the regulatory system and also from the
private industry that it is sometimes difficult for regulators
to work with private industry on testing and acquiring new
technology for pilot programs. Is this something that you have
experienced in the OCC, and what ideas might you have to help
solve that?
Mr. Greenfield. Sure. This is something that we have looked
at extensively. Again, we support responsible innovation in the
banking industry, and part of having that innovation is
institutions' and industries' ability to develop and test new
products and services. We do have supervisory guidance that
helps set expectations for banks' engagement in new or modified
products and services. It talks about the importance of risk
management, governance, stakeholder review, as part of these
processes.
Our Office of Innovation is very engaged, not just with
financial institutions, but many of the FinTech and emerging
tech companies that are helping to develop these products and
services, and bringing them in for one-on-one discussions or as
part of office hours to discuss what it is like to operate
within a banking environment, expectations around management
control, and to really respond to their questions and allow
them to better develop the products and services that they are
going to be offering to the financial institutions that we
supervise.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. I think that makes a lot
of sense, and, hopefully, those interactions are done in a
productive way. I know for a lot of emerging tech companies,
there is a fear of coming to Washington and working with
regulators because what you will hear oftentimes is that some
of these conversations turned into a predicate for an
investigation, when they were really just looking to get some
simple answers. That wasn't an accusation, by the way. I was
just sharing observations about conversations I have had.
Mr. Greenfield. Yes. It is one of the reasons why we have
our Office of Innovation that is separate from our supervision
group. It is an open invitation not only to come in to D.C. and
speak with us, but there also will be office hours in many of
the tech cities around the country.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. That is great. I am staying with you,
Mr. Greenfield. One of the more interesting applications of AI
and machine learning, in my view, is the ability to crack down
on illicit finance. Can you discuss how banks are currently
using these technologies to better track financial crimes, and
what more our regulatory agencies can be doing to promote the
use of this technology?
Mr. Greenfield. Sure. I think one of the biggest areas of
RegTech development that we have seen are advances in the
products and services developed both by banks as well as being
offered by third-party service providers to allow for better
and more efficient identification and determination on
suspicious activity, and for ensuring adherence with bank
secrecy and anti-money laundering laws. Banks have often been
challenged with, again, going back to the fundamentals of
validation and testing, when it comes to ensuring not only that
the model is picking up, but that it is also not overreaching
and having a lot of false positives, and really being able to
adjust those models over time.
And it is something that banks continue to have challenges
with, but we are seeing a lot of advancement in this area. And
there is a lot of opportunity, because as many of the other
panelists here today have commented, anti-money laundering laws
are there for a reason, and they are very important. And it is
important for adherence, but they can be challenging and
burdensome, especially for smaller community banks. And use of
these technologies can help provide the opportunity that we
enforce these laws, and enforce them as they are intended, but
also reduce the burden.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you. That is all I have. I
yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and that will conclude our
second round of questions. I would like to thank the witnesses
for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for these witnesses, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
And this hearing is adjourned.

[Whereupon, at 10:05 a.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 13, 2022

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
