- BETTER TOGETHER: EXAMINING THE UNIFIED PROPOSED RULE TO MODERNIZE THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BETTER TOGETHER: EXAMINING THE

UNIFIED PROPOSED RULE TO MODERNIZE

THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT

=======================================================================

HYBRID HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSUMER PROTECTION
AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2022

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 117-93

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-469 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            ANN WAGNER, Missouri
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANDY BARR, Kentucky
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JUAN VARGAS, California              LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            TED BUDD, North Carolina
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
RITCHIE TORRES, New York             BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      LANCE GOODEN, Texas
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              VAN TAYLOR, Texas
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         PETE SESSIONS, Texas
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection and Financial Institutions

ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado, Chairman

GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri,
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                     Ranking Member
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York         FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
BRAD SHERMAN, California             BILL POSEY, Florida
AL GREEN, Texas                      ANDY BARR, Kentucky
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
JUAN VARGAS, California              BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   TED BUDD, North Carolina
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            RALPH NORMAN, South Carolina
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts,      WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
Vice Chair
RITCHIE TORRES, New York

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
July 13, 2022................................................     1
Appendix:
July 13, 2022................................................    39

WITNESSES
Wednesday, July 13, 2022

Agnani, Seema, Executive Director, National Coalition for Asian
Pacific American Community Development (National CAPACD).......     5
Crosby, Catherine, Board Chairperson, National Community
Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC)..................................     7
Genao-Estrella, Yoselin, Executive Director, Neighborhood Housing
Services of Queens CDC Inc.....................................     9
Getter, Darryl E., Specialist in Financial Economics,
Congressional Research Service (CRS)...........................    12
Leighty, Quentin D., Chief Financial Officer and President, First
National Bank of Las Animas, testifying on behalf of the
Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA)................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Agnani, Seema................................................    40
Crosby, Catherine............................................    46
Genao-Estrella, Yoselin......................................    62
Getter, Darryl E.............................................    71
Leighty, Quentin D...........................................    83

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Perlmutter, Hon. Ed:
Written statement of the American Bankers Association........    93
Written statement of the Mortgage Bankers Association........   104
McHenry, Hon. Patrick:
Written statement of the Bank Policy Institute...............   109

BETTER TOGETHER: EXAMINING THE

UNIFIED PROPOSED RULE TO MODERNIZE

THE COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT

----------

Wednesday, July 13, 2022

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection
and Financial Institutions,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Ed Perlmutter
[chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Perlmutter, Meeks, Scott,
Sherman, Green, Foster, Vargas, Lawson, Casten; Luetkemeyer,
Lucas, Posey, Barr, Williams of Texas, Loudermilk, Budd,
Norman, Rose, and Timmons.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Also present: Representative Garcia of Illinois.
Chairman Perlmutter. The Subcommittee on Consumer
Protection and Financial Institutions will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the subcommittee at any time. Also, without objection,
members of the full Financial Services Committee who are not
members of this subcommittee are authorized to participate in
today's hearing.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Better Together: Examining
the Unified Proposed Rule to Modernize the Community
Reinvestment Act.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
In the 1930s, the practice of redlining, intentionally
refusing to extend credit to borrowers in geographic areas
based on race or ethnicity, was the official policy of the
United States Government. People of color were largely excluded
from homeownership, small business loans, and other
opportunities.
In the 1960s and 1970s, Congress passed a series of laws
aimed at stopping discrimination in the housing and financial
system. Among these laws, the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA)
was enacted in 1977 and requires banks to meet the credit needs
of their communities, including low- and moderate-income
neighborhoods. The Federal banking regulators are tasked with
scoring banks on how well they are meeting CRA goals and
regulations around this law. But nearly a century later, we
still feel the ripples of past policies holding our country
back.
In research sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, the authors found that no progress has been made
in reducing income and wealth inequalities between Black and
White households over the past 70 years. And in testimony
before this committee in 2019, journalist Aaron Glantz shared
findings from his investigation into modern-day redlining, in
which he discovered that in 61 metro areas across the country,
people of color were more likely to be denied a conventional
mortgage than their White counterparts, even when they made the
same amount of money, tried to borrow the same amount of money,
and wanted to buy in the same neighborhood.
In May, the banking regulators issued a joint proposed rule
making to strengthen and modernize the CRA. The last time the
CRA was significantly updated was in 1995, and since then, the
financial system has changed a great deal. Banks are more
digital and have fewer branches, algorithms and automation play
a significant role in determining credit risk, and non-bank
lenders dominate the mortgage market.
The CRA rulemaking is an opportunity to ensure our
financial system works for all Americans and to finally put an
end to modern-day redlining. A strong CRA rule could be the
catalyst we need to close the racial wealth gap. Legislation
noticed with today's hearing includes, but is not limited to:
H.R. 2768, the American Housing and Economic Mobility Act, from
Congressman Emanuel Cleaver; a discussion draft entitled, ``the
American Community and Investment Reform Act,''; and a
discussion draft entitled, ``the Making Communities Stronger
through the Community Reinvestment Act.''
I look forward to today's discussion and to hearing from
each of our witnesses about how to best strengthen and
modernize the Community Reinvestment Act.
I would now like to recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, Mr. Luetkemeyer, for 5 minutes for his opening
statement.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Community Reinvestment Act was enacted in 1977 to
ensure that banks are meeting the credit needs of communities,
and to combat the practice of redlining, where individuals in
certain geographic areas were cut off from banking services.
However, after nearly 50 years, it is clear that the CRA as it
currently stands is in desperate need of reform. Consumer
groups, banks, multiple Administrations, and Members on both
sides of the aisle understand the need to modernize and update
the CRA in a meaningful way.
The banking landscape has changed since the last major
reform of the CRA almost 30 years ago. The rise of mobile
banking has upended the traditional CRA assessment area, and a
dramatic decrease in bank branches has resulted in banking
deserts. Furthermore, some groups claim the current CRA does
not do a good job of driving investment in underserved areas.
Other groups say the vague requirements of the CRA do not help
banks or consumers understand what qualifies for CRA credit,
leaving all involved parties in the dark.
It is clear a new CRA is needed that will provide
transparency and accountability for the banks. It appears the
Federal banking agencies attempted to solve some of these
issues in their recently-proposed rule on CRA. For example,
many of the new standards in the rule establish subjective
quantitative metrics to determine what activities earn CRA
credit and how much each is worth. It is a critical step in
modernizing the CRA so that banks, localities, and consumers
all better understand the program.
The proposed rule also expands the importance of banking
activities outside traditional mortgage lending. While mortgage
lending remains important, there is an additional emphasis on
small business, farm, and automobile lending, along with an
expanded range of community service and development activities.
I have said many times that it is called the Community
Reinvestment Act, not the, ``Housing Reinvestment Act,'' and
banks should be given credit--to appropriately try to solve
these issues. I remain very skeptical of this rule as a whole
and have serious concerns regarding its direction.
According to Federal banking agencies, the CRA was
established to require banks to meet the credit needs of
communities, including lower- and moderate-income
neighborhoods, consistent with safe and sound operations. For
nearly 50 years, the CRA has examined the deposit-taking branch
locations of banks and entering assessment areas. The proposed
rule radically changes that approach by creating retail lending
assessment areas, where assessment areas are not determined by
deposits, but ultimately any geographic area where 100 mortgage
loans or 250 small business loans were made.
This is a dramatic shift that would place assessment areas
of financial institutions well outside of their communities. As
I stated before, modernization of CRA is critical given the
rise of mobile and online banking, but establishing assessment
areas based on lending metrics is misguided at best. The core
idea behind the CRA is that banks must serve the credit unions
of the communities in which they are receiving deposits. The
proposed rule upends that core tenet.
In addition, while the proposed rule does provide
subjective quantitative metrics for certain CRA credit, the
amount of data that banks are forced to compile under the
proposed rule is truly immense. According to the estimates
within the proposed rule conducted by the FDIC, the total
estimated annual burden of this rule would be 225,000 hours.
That is a staggering number which will place a significant
burden on financial institutions and have an impact on access
to credit for the very communities the CRA is attempting to
help. This enormous burden ultimately means it will be more
difficult for financial institutions to receive outstanding or
satisfactory grades on their CRA exams.
As probably the only Member of Congress who has actually
filled out one of these forms, I can tell you this is an
extremely big burden for folks, and the present form is very
difficult to fill out the way it is. To add more of a burden is
just unconscionable.
This leads me to my final point. The CRA was intended to
ensure that financial institutions are serving the credit needs
of their communities. It was not intended as a way to hold
banks hostage and extort money from them whenever a merger
takes place. The final rule produced by the banking agencies
should reflect the original intent of the CRA and look to
provide access and drive investment into lower- and moderate-
income communities. If this rule does not accomplish this goal,
then it has significantly deviated from the original intent of
the CRA and should not go forward.
With the comment period closing on August 5th, I look
forward to examining the comments and concerns from industry
stakeholders, many of whom are still combing through the 679-
page rule. I am also disappointed that a request to extend the
90-day comment period was flatly denied by the Federal banking
agencies. A rule as important as CRA should not by done in a
fly-by-night manner, and should have thoughtful, comprehensive
input from industry stakeholders before and forward. I look
forward to examining the proposed rule.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the Chair of the full Financial
Services Committee, the gentlewoman from California, Chairwoman
Waters, for one minute.
Chairwoman Waters. Thank you, Chairman Perlmutter, for
holding this hearing on the regulatory proposal to update the
Community Reinvestment Act rules. Under my leadership,
committee Democrats shut down the Trump Administration's
efforts to undermine the law's original intent. So, I am very
pleased to see the agencies work together on a new proposal to
ensure that banks are meaningfully investing in all
communities, not just some of them.
Although the CRA was enacted to eliminate redlining,
disparities for people of color--today, for example, the Black/
White homeownership gap is at a 120-year high, and the
megabanks are reportedly denying Black homeowners the
opportunity to refinance their mortgages at significantly
higher rates than White borrowers.
I look forward to the hearing, and I am hoping that our
witnesses can help shed some light on what is going on.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentlelady yields back.
I now want to introduce our panel, and I am pleased to
welcome each of our witnesses, some of whom are here in person
and others are on the platform. So, thank you all.
Ms. Seema Agnani is the executive director of the National
Coalition for Asian Pacific American Community Development. Ms.
Agnani has more than 25 years' experience in community
development, capacity building, and immigrant rights, and was
previously a member of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau's Community Advisory Board.
Ms. Catherine Crosby is the board chairperson of the
National Community Reinvestment Coalition. Ms. Crosby is
currently the town manager for Apex, North Carolina, and has
played an important role in negotiating bank public benefit
agreements with community, regional, and national banks.
Mr. Quentin Leighty is the chief financial officer and
president of the First National Bank of Las Animas, Colorado,
and we are glad to have a Coloradan on this panel, thank you,
sir. He is testifying today on behalf of the Independent
Community Bankers of America. Mr. Leighty has been with the
First National Bank since 2005, and is an alumni advisory board
member at the Graduate School of Banking at Colorado.
Dr. Darryl E. Getter is a specialist in financial economics
at the Congressional Research Service. Dr. Getter has also
served as a visiting economist at the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau, and as a financial economist at the
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Mr. Meeks is walking in right now, and I know he would like
to introduce Mrs. Yoselin Genao-Estrella. So, I am going to
give him that opportunity before he catches his breath.
Mr. Meeks. Mr. Chairman, you are absolutely right. I ran
over here for this opportunity, because I am so pleased to
introduce Yoselin, who is the executive director of the
Neighborhood Housing Services of Queens, and provides excellent
and critical resources to constituents of Queens, back in my
district. They have been working very closely with our office.
They testified at local hearings that we have had, and the job
they do to make sure that those who are less fortunate than
others have housing is just absolutely tremendous.
And so, I wanted to run over here to introduce her and say
thank you for all the work that you do in the city, and
particularly, in the Borough of Queens.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Meeks.
And also, I would like to thank Ms. Genao-Estrella. She was
in a car accident yesterday, I think, and is so intrepid that
she still wanted to testify for us today. So, thank you very
much for being here.
And thank you to all of our witnesses.
For those of you on the platform, I would ask you on behalf
of the older members of this committee, like me, to please take
your time. Speak slowly. Speak as distinctly as you can so that
we can better understand your testimony.
Ms. Seema Agnani, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF SEEMA AGNANI, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
COALITION FOR ASIAN PACIFIC AMERICAN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
(NATIONAL CAPACD)

Ms. Agnani. Thank you. Chairwoman Waters, Chairman
Perlmutter, Ranking Member Luetkemeyer, and members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify on this
important joint rule on modernizing the CRA.
National CAPACD is a coalition of about 100 organizations
working across the country in low-income Asian American,
Pacific Islander, and Native Hawaiian communities. They employ
a diverse set of strategies from affordable housing to
community organizing and supporting small businesses in order
to advance equities and create vibrant healthy communities. As
has been said, I have been working in the community development
sector for--essentially since the inception of my career.
In fact, had read the CRA legislation on my flight to my
first job interview in New York City in the early 1990s. This
landmark legislation was established to address redlining,
discrimination, and disinvestment in communities of color. And
unfortunately, it has been well documented that income and
equality and the wealth gap have continued to widen, as has
been said. This is the result of lack of access to safe,
affordable financial services, access to credit, and of course,
investments in affordable housing and support for
microbusinesses.
Despite this, 98 percent of banks passed their CRA exams.
As has also been said, the Black homeownership rate is really
unacceptable. And the overall homeownership rates for families
of color in this country are 30 points lower than that of White
families. Abusive payday lenders as well as online lenders are
increasingly concentrated in communities of color and are
charging unspeakable interest rates, leading to further wealth
stripping of our communities.
Simultaneously, our communities are being pushed out of
neighborhoods that they have long occupied as a result of
gentrification and rising rents, as well as predatory
investments and lack of access to affordable credit. So, the
CRA really must be modernized to address the broad range of
financial entities that now exist, and should be evaluated on
the actual and direct benefit to low-income communities of
color, as well as to disincentivize the types of investments
that promote displacement of low- and moderate-income
communities of color.
Today, that is the biggest threat to housing: disability
displacement due to rising rents and evictions. And the COVID
pandemic has only exacerbated that situation. For the Asian
American, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander communities,
the majority of those who are living in poverty are
concentrated in the highest-cost housing markets, leading to
these communities being at disproportionate risk of
displacement at this time in history.
In addition to this, the limited English proficiency rates
that are extremely high among low-income Native Hawaiian and
Pacific Islander (NHPI) communities puts them at a particular
disadvantage in terms of navigating the mortgage process or
being able to understand what loan products are being offered
to them. This was clearly evidenced through the rollout of the
Payment Protection Program in the aftermath of the pandemic,
particularly the first round, where our communities were really
not able to access those resources that were made available
because of the lack of language access, as well as the lack of
relationships with mainstream financial institutions. Many of
them turned to payday lenders and other alternative lenders due
to lack of access.
We would like to see race and ethnicity centered at the
evaluation of CRA evaluations. The current proposed rule really
does not go far enough. In addition, we would like to see CRA
evaluation being based on ensuring that further displacement
does not occur as a result of these investments and loans. In
addition, it should further create affordable housing. We would
like to see incentivization of preservation of existing
affordable housing, naturally occurring affordable housing, and
in order to ensure we don't advance homelessness. And
unfortunately, the definition of affordability is still too
high. The majority of our communities are unable to access
those affordable units under the current CRA.
Finally, we would like to see language access incentivized
in the CRA. When financial institutions make the effort to
reach those with limited English proficiency, they should
qualify for CRA credits for things like recruiting employees
who speak the languages of the local communities.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Agnani can be found on page
40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you, Ms. Agnani.
And I didn't give the witnesses the speech that I was
supposed to give at the beginning of your testimony. You get 5
minutes. The screen will show when you are down to one minute.
And we try to keep it to 5 minutes and not go too far.
I would now recognize Ms. Crosby for her 5 minutes of
testimony.

STATEMENT OF CATHERINE CROSBY, BOARD CHAIRPERSON, NATIONAL
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT COALITION (NCRC)

Ms. Crosby. I am honored to testify before you today on the
proposed regulatory reform of the Community Reinvestment Act. I
am the board chairperson of the National Community Reinvestment
Coalition (NCRC). NCRC is a coalition of 600 community-based
organizations. Our members do CRA on a daily basis, and
increase lending, investment, and services for our country's
underserved communities. I am also the town manager for Apex,
North Carolina, home to approximately 73,000 residents, and
prior to that, I served in Dayton and Toledo, Ohio.
The notice of proposed rulemaking issued by the Federal
bank agencies represents the most significant changes to the
CRA and exams in 27 years. CRA will be more effective in
bolstering bank reinvestment activity in underserved
communities, and in ensuring underserved groups' ability to
move into high-opportunity communities the more rigorous CRA
exams and ratings are. The NCRC proposed some significant
improvements and tests, but the improvements are not across-
the-board on all aspects of the exam.
I am pleased with the discussion draft, Making Communities
Stronger through CRA, circulated by the committee today. The
bill would require banks to establish community advisory
committees, which would be consulted by providing input on
banks CRA strategies, plans for meeting the needs of people of
color, and on bank mergers and branch plans. In addition, the
bill would increase oversight, meeting important needs such as
those with small dollar mortgages.
Finally, NCRC is pleased we are able to influence the
bill's proposal for periodic inner-agency statistical studies
on racial disparities. We are pleased that the American
Community Investment Reform Act of 2022 would require CRA exams
for security companies and affect their community development
financing activities. We do not support the presumption that a
financial institution with an outstanding rating satisfies the
convenience and needs of communities as part of its merger
application. We outline our views about this in recent comments
to the FDIC.
We strongly support applying CRA to independent mortgage
companies, as the American Housing and Economic Mobility Act
would do. In a previous report, we described how the
application of CRA by the State of Massachusetts to mortgage
companies is a model for Federal law.
Persistent racial and ethnic disparities in lending should
compel the agencies to incorporate race and ethnicities into
the CRA exam. An NCRC national-level analysis shows continuing
disparities, and in loan denials by race among people of color
who received home loans, their equity accumulation was less.
NCRC has asserted in a paper that it is possible for changes to
CRA to comply with legal standards if CRA exams lending by race
and ethnicity in geographic areas experiencing ongoing
discrimination. By including race, CRA could address the racial
disparities and have a direct impact on quality-of-life and
health outcomes.
The COVID pandemic disproportionately affected communities
of color in terms of unemployment, rates of COVID, and
disclosure. In part, this is a legacy of 80 years of redlining.
NCRC studies have shown that communities of color which were
identified as risky on redlining maps produced by the Home
Owners' Loan Corporation remain economically depressed, and
experienced a higher incident of adverse health outcomes.
I represent communities that have been distressed for
decades due to redlining. The NCRC is helpful in that it
proposed that CRA exams would assess lending separately in low-
income and moderate-income tracks. This would help the
distressed in lower-income communities. I also urge the
agencies to go a step further and to examine lending in
underserved neighborhoods with the lowest levels of lending.
As documented by NCRC, these tracts are disproportionately
communities of color. I was formally the chief of staff in
Toledo, Ohio, which is located in Lucas County. CRA reform was
needed there because in that county, low- and moderate-income
(LMI) neighborhoods are receiving low levels of lending. NCRC
documented that from 2018 through 2020 in Lucas County, just
12.4 percent of home purchase loans were made in LMI
neighborhoods despite 32 percent of people living there. No
lender in Lucas County is doing an adequate job of serving the
Hispanic population.
Among the top 20 lenders, the percentage of loans for
Hispanic applicants varied from 1 percent to 3 percent, despite
being 7 percent of the County's population. In Wake County,
where the town of Apex is located, 20 percent of the population
is African American. Of the top 20 lenders in the County, only
2 make 20 percent or more of their loans to African Americans.
The rest make 8 percent or less of their loans to African
Americans. And none are providing loans to the Hispanic
community proportionate to their representation.
These disparities make a compelling case to examine lending
by race or CRA exams in areas experiencing ongoing
discrimination. We ask that the agencies reconsider their
decision not to do that.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Crosby can be found on page
46 of the appendix.]
Chairman Perlmutter. Right at 5 minutes. Thank you very
much.
I now recognize Ms. Genao-Estrella for 5 minutes for her
testimony.

STATEMENT OF YOSELIN GENAO-ESTRELLA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSING SERVICES OF QUEENS CDC INC.

Ms. Genao-Estrella. Good morning, Chairman Perlmutter,
distinguished guests, and our very own Congressman Meeks.
My name is Yoselin Genao-Estrella, and I am the executive
director of a tiny but mighty organization, Neighborhood
Housing Services (NHS) of Queens. Although imperfect, CRA has
been a lifeline for investment in underserved communities. The
notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) to modernize the CRA
represents a step in a positive development, and it is a step
in the right direction. However, with the current proposal, CRA
will remain far from effective and likely incapable of reaching
its goals.
Although there is no silver lining to fully address
centuries of racial disparity or redlining, a comprehensive
cross-sector approach is urgently needed. We appreciate all of
the regulators for getting together and putting forth this
collective NPR, as well as our legislators in Congress for
introducing legislation that could potentially complement the
overarching goals of a straining CRA.
However, we need a bold holistic approach instead of a
piecemeal approach. For CRA to actually address redlining, it
needs to consider this goal. It is threatening the role of
community input, to provide access to banking, emphasize
homeownership as a path to wealth creation, and explicitly
include race. We appreciate the regulators' emphasis on the
importance of community input. However, it is not just
important to allow community input in this process; regulators
must center the needs and voices of communities of color and
LMI people in the exam and ratings.
In addition, acknowledging the increase in digital banking
and regulating this practice cannot negate the importance of
maintaining and opening new bank branches in already-
underbanked LMI communities and communities of color. Access to
banking and affordable, accessible products is critical to
building wealth through savings and assessing credit, yet banks
continue to expand and grow their branches as branches close
and communities are constantly left out of the financial
system.
We see this phenomenon in our own backyard where financial
institutions create self-fulfilling prophesies by not providing
adequate products and services in LMI bank branches and then
justifying branch closures due to the lack of business
activity. Immigrant communities, for example, are often left
behind in the banking system because of language, culture, and
identification barrier.
Homeownership remains an important path to wealth creation
and developing intergenerational wealth for communities of
color. Yet, too often these communities are left out of the
homeownership opportunities, are targeted by predatory products
and are given limited opportunities to accumulate wealth due to
lower appraisal values.
We appreciate the proposed data-driven framework and
acknowledge that it could combat great inflation, but we are
concerned about the overall impact without significant changes.
We are deeply disappointed that the regulators failed to push
for regulations that will have CRA live up to the intended
purpose of addressing redlining. Despite acknowledging the
law's origins and how modern-day redlining persists, all of the
regulators' proposals regarding race within the examination
framework would do is to disclose already-public data, and
would have no public impact on final ratings.
As a nation, we are in the crossroads as we strive for
racial equality and economic mobility, especially as we recover
from COVID-19. With intentionality, CRA can be one of the
engines to end racial disparity and finally combat redlining.
The time is now.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here, and I am happy to
answer questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Genao-Estrella can be found
on page 62 of the appendix.]
Chairman Perlmutter. Ms. Genao-Estrella, thank you for your
testimony.
Now, I would like to recognize a Coloradan on the panel,
Mr. Leighty, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF QUENTIN D. LEIGHTY, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER AND
PRESIDENT, FIRST NATIONAL BANK OF LAS ANIMAS, TESTIFYING ON
BEHALF OF THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY BANKERS OF AMERICA (ICBA)

Mr. Leighty. Chairman Perlmutter, Ranking Member
Luetkemeyer, and members of the subcommittee, I am Quentin D.
Leighty, CFO and President of the First National Bank of Las
Animas in Las Animas, Colorado. I am testifing today on behalf
of the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA), where I
am the chairman of the policy development committee and a
member of the Federal delegate board. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
The inclusive community focus on lending and service
required by CRA is the essence of what community banks do. For
this reason, CRA has not required us to shift or tailor our
banking practices, but only to document what we are already
doing. The First National Bank has served the communities of
Southeast Colorado since 1901. Today, we are a $580 million
bank, and most of the communities we serve are low-, moderate-,
or middle-income, and some are designated as either distressed,
underserved, or both.
I am proud that my bank has consistently received CRA
ratings of outstanding. We are an intermediate small bank with
2 assessment areas and our last examination was in 2020. My
written testimony includes a detailed discussion of how we
achieved our outstanding score, by serving borrowers at
different income levels and businesses and farms of different
sizes, particularly within the distressed and underserved
communities.
Our exam also found excellent responsiveness to the
community development needs and recognized our donation of
funds, employee time, and expertise to critical community
development services. Our performance was typical of thousands
of community banks.
ICBA has developed the following recommendations for CRA
modernization. Current thresholds do not reflect the extensive
consolidation and growth that has occurred in the industry
since 1977. Updated thresholds would partially ease the CRA
regulatory burden for most community banks without impairing
agency CRA assessments.
The agency should create a list of CRA qualifying
activities. While the list should not be exhaustive, it would
provide banks with greater clarity. CRA regulations should
exempt minority- and women-owned financial institutions and
Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) from
documentation and full-scope examinations. This change would be
fully consistent with the spirit of CRA.
Finally, ICBA recommends that all institutions that serve
consumers be subject to CRA. In the absence of CRA, credit
unions are not held accountable for their service to LMI
communities. Moreover, the increasing trend of credit union
bank acquisitions is removing CRA-covered institutions from the
marketplace. We ask that this committee hold a hearing on
credit union and community bank acquisitions and CRA.
As you know, the OCC, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve
recently released proposed rules to modernize CRA. I will use
this opportunity to make some broad and preliminary
observations. On asset thresholds, the proposal would increase
the small bank threshold to $600 million, and the intermediate
small bank threshold to $2 billion, which is short of our
recommendation of $2.5 billion. Banks with assets of more than
$10 billion would be subject to additional requirements. This
would provide welcome regulatory relief for small banks,
including mine.
The opt-in approach. The proposal would allow small banks
to opt in to the new retail lending test or continue to be
evaluated under the current test. We strongly support the opt-
in approach. As any new test requires banks to overhaul their
compliance management systems and retrain their staff, this
disruptive change comes at the expense of community service. We
urge the agency to extend the opt-in approach to intermediate
small banks as well.
The out-of-area activities. The proposal would allow banks
to receive CRA credit for beneficial loans and investments made
outside their assessment area. ICBA strongly supports this.
The list of eligible activities. The proposal requires the
agency to maintain a non-exhaustive list of activities eligible
for CRA credit. As I had mentioned, ICBA strongly supports this
change, which would create more transparency and predictability
in CRA evaluations.
My written statement provides more detailed analysis of the
proposal. Thank you, again, for convening this hearing today
and for the opportunity to hear the community bank perspective.
I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Leighty can be found on page
83 of the appendix.]
Chairman Perlmutter. Mr. Leighty, thank you for your
testimony.
Dr. Getter, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
testimony, sir.

STATEMENT OF DARRYL E. GETTER, SPECIALIST IN FINANCIAL
ECONOMICS, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE (CRS)

Mr. Getter. Chairman Perlmutter, Ranking Member
Luetkemeyer, and members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
My name is Darryl Getter, and I am a specialist in
financial economics at CRS, focusing on financial regulation in
the mortgage, consumer, and small business credit markets. At
CRS, our role is to provide Congress with objective and
nonpartisan research and analysis. Therefore, any arguments
presented in my testimony are for the purposes of informing
Congress and not to advocate for a particular policy outcome.
My testimony begins with a brief background of the
Community Reinvestment Act. It then highlights some of the
aspects of the proposed CRA rule that was jointly announced on
May 5, 2022, by the OCC, the Federal Reserve Board, and the
FDIC.
Congress passed the CRA in response to concerns that
federally-insured banks were not making sufficient credit
available in local areas where they were chartered and
acquiring deposits. Specifically, the expansion of bank
operations across State borders led to concerns that local
deposits were being used to fund out-of-State and international
lending activities, as opposed to housing, agriculture, and
small business credit needs at more localized levels.
In addition, there was concern about redlining practices in
which a bank may refuse to provide financial services to all
residents in a local area, perhaps due to discrimination. For
this reason, the CRA requires Federal bank regulators to
evaluate the extent that banks effectively meet the credit
needs within their designated geographical areas, including
low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, in a manner that is
consistent with prudential safety and soundness regulations.
The bank regulators award CRA credits and issue performance
ratings, which are subsequently taken under consideration when
banks apply for various activities that would require
regulatory approval. In 1995, the CRA framework was updated to
clarify and standardize the examination process. For example,
the concept of an assessment area was introduced primarily with
a geographical definition. In other words, a bank's lending
activities would be evaluated within the geographical location
of its main office, branches, and deposit-taking ATMs, as well
as surrounding areas where it may have originated and/or
purchased a substantial portion of its loans.
The definition of community development was also revised to
include the promotion of community welfare, and the definitions
of a small business and a small farm were also revised. The CRA
examinations were also customized to account for differences in
bank sizes and business models. Under the current CRA
framework, geographical issues have recently emerged, this time
as banks have increasingly adopted technology to conduct
digital payments and other online transactions.
For the purposes of CRA compliance, a bank may be able to
provide electronic and digital financial products to low- and
moderate-income communities outside of its designated
geographic assessment area, but whether it receives CRA credit
may depend upon an examiner's interpretation of the
circumstances.
The joint proposed rule that would update the current CRA
framework includes the following provisions. The definition of
a CRA assessment area would be updated and expended to allow
for evaluating more activities that occur outside of a bank's
primary assessment area. Furthermore, the proposed rule
clarifies that all activities meeting the expanded community
development definition would be eligible for CRA consideration,
regardless of whether they occur in the designated assessment
area.
The proposed rule also expands the definition of community
development, which is aimed to encourage partnerships with
financial entities that promote greater access to financial
products and services to traditionally-underserved populations
and geographies.
The proposed rule also incorporates greater use of the data
and documentation of a bank's lending and investment activities
for measuring CRA effectiveness. Over time, these metrics may
allow regulators to better gauge average and above-average CRA
activity levels. Collectively, these updates are intended to
promote financial inclusion efforts, and they may also result
in the evaluation of more community development activities
initiated by banks that may not have been evaluated under the
current CRA framework.
Thank you for your time, and I am happy to answer any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Getter can be found on page
71 of the appendix.]
Chairman Perlmutter. Dr. Getter, thank you for your
testimony.
We expect to have votes called on the House Floor around
11:30, so will get as many questions in as we can. Hopefully,
we can get through everybody who wants to ask questions, but if
not, then we will have to recess and then come back to finish
things up.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for my questions.
Ms. Genao-Estrella, one of the new categories of
revitalization and stabilization activities in the proposed
rule is disaster preparedness and climate resiliency. What
types of needs do you see in your community for building more
resiliency, and how might directing CRA investment help in
those efforts?
Ms. Genao-Estrella. Thank you so much for the question,
especially since our communities in Queens have experienced
different type of disasters.
And as we look to continue being able to provide
resiliency, there are not a lot of resources available. Our
communities cannot continually depend on disaster relief
efforts from the government. We need short-term and long-term
solutions. And we are very pleased that the climate resiliency
is included, because it would provide to the very same
communities that often get the brunt of the disasters that
happen constantly due to climate change, but being able to
provide investments that are needed in our communities. It is
urgently needed. We also are very cautious about being able to
include community input in the--in making community plans
available and working in tandem with the government as well.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you. And obviously, we all know
that communities in New York, and outside of New York, got
clobbered by Hurricane Sandy.
Mr. Leighty, I have a question for you. What role do you
think banks in Colorado can play in investing in disaster
resiliency efforts? Not so much out around Las Animas, but you
have brush fires and wildfires out there, and obviously in the
foothills and in the mountains, we had them too.
Can you also comment on your bank's experience in disaster
recovery?
Mr. Leighty. Sure. Unfortunately, we have had a lot of
experience with fires in the area, and of course, we are close
to the Black Forest fires that occurred here not that long ago.
We got active in helping finance the rebuilding of those areas,
and we have been very active in helping fire departments, both
with renovation loans and new equipment, and just being
prepared for the growth that has occurred in our State as well.
And so, we are very active with the municipalities in making
sure fire departments have the equipment they need and the
financing available to get that. And that is the role that we
have played directly.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you.
Mr. Leighty. We also have a couple of volunteer
firefighters who work for us, who leave the job from time to
time to go help fight those fires.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you, and I thank them for their
service.
I have another question for you. Many bankers have asked
for more clarity around what counts as a qualifying activity
for CRA credit. Under the proposed rule, the agencies would
maintain a publically-available list of activities eligible for
CRA credit.
Would having such a list of qualifying activities be
helpful for community banks in making decisions regarding
strategies in reaching low- to moderate-income communities?
And I want this to be answered by Ms. Agnani and Ms. Crosby
as well.
Mr. Leighty. I believe it would be helpful. The more
clarity we can have, the more efficient we can be, and the more
we can spend time on community development and lending versus
wondering what is coming at us on the regulatory side. And so,
I think it would be very helpful and something we would
certainly use.
Chairman Perlmutter. Ms. Agnani?
Ms. Agnani. Thank you. Yes. I do believe it would be
helpful. Although, I think a comprehensive list--there will be
always be additional needs. However, explicitly stating things
like language access and ensuring that things like displacement
do not occur would definitely reinforce and help strengthen the
CRA.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you.
Ms. Crosby?
Ms. Crosby. I agree with both Mr. Leighty and Ms. Agnani. I
think that also creates greater opportunities for the
institutions to work with their community partners to identify
opportunities that would help strengthen communities.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you.
I have another question for you, Ms. Crosby. Your testimony
highlights the need for CRA exams to consider lending to both
neighborhoods and individual borrowers by income and race.
Can you please explain why this is important, and do it in
14 seconds?
Ms. Crosby. That is a little bit unfair, but I will try. I
think it is really important to be working in two very
different communities, one community where lending is not
happening at all, and there is significant divestment. That is
the importance of tracking by place, and then working in a more
affluent community where we want to as to the diversity of our
community it is really important to be able to track how people
are able to access financial services to be able to live in our
community, and that is where you track by individuals. So, the
importance of mobility as well as the importance of making
investments in communities that are underserved is why you need
to track by both.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you. And my time has more than
expired.
I will now recognize the ranking member of the
subcommittee, the gentleman from Missouri, Mr. Luetkemeyer, for
5 minutes for his questions.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Getter, as someone who has studied the CRA, have
assessment areas ever been based on lending activity instead of
physical branches or deposits prior to this proposed rule?
Mr. Getter. As far as I know, the assessment area has been
based on lending activity. Although, deposits are very
important.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Right. To me, you are looking at what the
name of this Act is, it is the Community Reinvestment Act.
Mr. Getter. Yes.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. You want to take the dollars that are
being deposited into the bank and then reinvest those in the
community, and to make sure that money goes back into the
community. I think we have a problem here.
I am the ranking member of the House Small Business
Committee, and we set up a small business plan for the
restauranteurs of this country. The problem with it was that
they highlighted and prioritized women, minorities, and
veterans. And that was taken to court and declared to be
unconstitutional because it prioritized these three groups over
everybody else.
But by the same token, everybody needs to be aware that
when you start prioritizing things like this on race, I think
we are going down a rabbit hole here. I think we need to look
at this for low- and moderate-income folks, and I think the way
to do this is to say that all of the money that comes out of a
neighborhood needs to go back into it in some way, whether it
be in housing, small businesses, churches, or community
projects like community centers, and food pantries, things like
that. That money needs to go back in there, and there needs to
be a threshold on that to make sure it does. Otherwise, the
money gets taken out.
I think this is the argument most people are making this
morning, that money is coming out of the community and not
going back. I think if we make the argument that the money
needs to go back to the very community that it is being taken
from, I think we get to where we need to go, because I am
concerned that if we go down this hole of, it has to be only on
race, I think we are setting this whole Act up to be thrown out
of court as unconstitutional, based on what I have seen already
in the Small Business Committee.
Would you agree with that, sir?
Mr. Getter. Yes. And the statute even requires the
regulators to focus on geography. So, I don't know if the
regulators could even extend by race.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Mr. Leighty, you are in the banking
business. Would you agree with my assessment, there, that we
need to have a threshold, and make sure all of that money goes
back into the community, to make sure that we protect all of
the folks who have been depositing with the institution so they
can get their community--that is what this whole thing is all
about.
Do you agree?
Mr. Leighty. I would agree. That is how we reinvest. One of
the things that we look at is our loan and to deposit ratio,
and ours is very high, and historically has been, because we
are reinvesting those dollars back into the community.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. As a former examiner, I can tell you that
is something that we always looked at is whether the bank was
actually servicing its area by reinvesting in the community in
all sorts of ways, whether it be home mortgages, auto loans, or
small businesses, as well as community service things like
churches and food pantries and community centers. To me, that
is where this whole bill should be going.
The Housing Resource Center of the National Housing
Conference put out a paper, ``Could the future of CRA be in
doubt,'' and one comment in there was, ``Community development,
investment, and lending are essential to repairing communities.
Yet under the proposal, community development performance would
not affect most large banks' overall CRA rating because retail
test performance weighs heavier, 60 percent, than community
development performance, 40 percent.''
This is from the National Housing Conference, and Mr.
Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to have this
entered into the record.
Chairman Perlmutter. Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Getter, would you like to comment on that?
Mr. Getter. No, sir. I decline to comment at this time. I'm
sorry.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay.
Mr. Leighty, would you like to comment on that, that the
CRA rating is going to be weighed too far to the retail test
performance section rather than the community development
preference? Is that a better problem with this bill or this
proposed rule?
Mr. Leighty. I guess I am not sure I am ready to comment on
that. I apologize.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Okay. I see I have 18 seconds left, so
with that, I will yield back to the Chair, and we can hopefully
get everybody back before the vote.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Perlmutter. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from New York, Mr. Meeks, who is also the
Chair of the House Committee on Foreign Affairs, is now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And just briefly, in response to Mr. Luetkemeyer, the
reason why we have to have a CRA is because for over 200 years,
this country has focused on race. And the CRA was done as a
civil rights bill to correct the historic racism in the United
States of America. And I would say that particularly in
housing, it still exists today. The injustices and disparities
in housing, based upon the history of this country, are
prevalent and alive, and that is why we need CRA. And we know
from the time that CRA was initially enacted, things have
changed, because banking has changed. And as a result of that,
we have to make sure that we continue to correct the
disparities and the racism that this country was built on.
Ms. Crosby, we know that relying on data just around LMI
communities does not address these racial disparities, and and
studies show that we need to make sure that it is addressed.
How do you recommend enhancing CRA so that racial equity is at
the forefront of the work that we are doing so that we can get
rid of racism and redlining?
Ms. Crosby. I think that there are a number of examples of
how this could be done, but we propose an interagency
statistical study that would identify metropolitan areas and
rural counties experiencing ongoing dissemination. In those
areas, CRA exams would include metrics such as percent of loans
to African Americans or Hispanics or Asians, and the racial or
ethnic subgroups on CRA exams would be based on the results of
the statistical study.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you for that.
Let me go to Ms. Genao-Estrella, because you talked about,
again, in certain LMI communities and communities of color,
banking deserts starting to happen. And so, people don't have
access to it.
How do you suggest the CRA could address just that issue,
the closing of branches in low- to moderate-income communities
and communities of color? How would CRA address those issues?
Ms. Genao-Estrella. Thank you so much for the question.
It's very pertinent to the communities that we serve.
We see banking deserts in our community, and one thing that
CRA can do is to be able to regulate, and also that there will
be consequences for closing branches that are in LMI
communities and communities of color. And there will be
repercussions because we see when these branch closures, and
also this bank desert, when we see the repercussions on our
small businesses, we see the repercussions that happen and
there is a correlation between branches and also being able to
have economic opportunities and access to banking in those
communities that need it the most.
Mr. Meeks. Thank you for that.
And I want to also try to get to Mr. Leighty. I have been
supportive of innovation in the fintech space, because I
believe that they have the ability to provide significant
access to communities that have historically been shut out of
the financial system, but fintechs and nonbanks that may not
have charters, are not FDIC-insured. But they do provide core
financial tools to their consumers. However, the CRA only
applies to FDIC-insured banks. So, these nonbanks and fintechs,
which I, at times, applaud for making LMI a priority, are
outside the scope of the CRA.
What do you think the role of the CRA should be as it
relates to these nonbanks? And how do you think CRA regulation
of the nonbanks could be beneficial to curing racial
inequalities?
Mr. Leighty. We certainly support a level playing field and
also equality in that CRA space, because they are providing
great services. But we have seen many times when a shadow
industry comes in and gets into an environment that doesn't
have the same regulatory rules, it affects everybody. And so,
we would support CRA rules for them, for credit unions and
other financial services.
Mr. Meeks. My time has expired.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Lucas, who is also the
ranking member on the House Science, Space, & Technology
Committee, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
While the banking community has changed substantially in
the last decade, the Community Reinvestment Act has not been
meaningfully revised since 1995. And we are certainly in a
different world now than we were 27 years ago. And we can all
agree that CRA can be updated to better serve lower- and
moderate-income communities.
Dr. Getter, could you discuss how this proposed rule
attempts to provide clarity on whether CRA credit applies to
digital financial products and services that benefit an area
outside of a CRA assessment area?
Mr. Getter. Yes. And I have had a moment to also think
about the previous question, so I think I can do both of them
at the same time.
Mr. Lucas. Please.
Mr. Getter. For the most part, the CRA does provide--the
proposed rule does provide more clarity on the specific
community development activities. They came up with 11 new
categories that will let banks know that these loans will be
eligible for CRA consideration.
The issue is, that category would only count 30 percent
instead of 45 percent for the retail lending area. Now, with
the retail lending area, they did say you can--if you do a
substantial amount of lending in these areas outside of your
assessment area, you can create an assessment area and that
will be included.
What I would say might be something to think about or an
issue to think about is that because the statute says we want
you to cover lending in a geographic area, the regulators have
to give 45 or higher weight to loans in the retail assessment
area. Whereas in the community development area, they can
include all loans in all areas, but it is given less weight
because it is not directly in the assessment area.
So, the CRA incentivizes lending to LMI areas. It just
gives heavier weight to loans within those assessment areas and
areas in which they are doing a substantial amount of lending.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. It is my understanding that the CRA rule
will have a 1-year implementation period following the
publication of the final rule.
Mr. Leighty, could you give us your perspective on the
evaluation process and compliance changes that would be needed
by a bank once this rule goes into effect? Basically, is 1 year
a sufficient amount of time?
Mr. Leighty. We always like more time versus less. A lot of
us wear a lot of different hats. There are very few of us who
are siloed in community banking, so it does take time to get
our arms around legislation, especially legislation that has
nearly 700 pages to decipher.
So, the extra time would certainly be helpful. I would say
a year at a minimum. And it is going to cost us. We are going
to need consultants and lawyers and maybe even some software to
make sure that we implement those changes correctly. The more
time we have, the less expense on those ends we can have,
because we can digest that internally without needing to go to
a third party.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. This proposed rule offers a list of
examples of qualifying activities that are eligible for CRA
credit, which should help reduce uncertainty around which
activities will receive credit. It is important that this rule
provide clarity to banks before they commit to potential CRA
activities.
Dr. Getter, can you discuss how comprehensive this list is
and if this list includes a process for banks to seek approval
in advance regarding whether an activity is eligible for CRA
credit?
Mr. Getter. The list, from what I could tell, was very
comprehensive. Where there was uncertainty was, if a bank made
a loan outside of the area, if they would get credit for it.
And I do think that is one of the issues with CRA. It is not
just the digital of reaching out to people that has improved
with the technology, but also the way loans are funded has
changed over time. And the CRA sort of has a preference for
loans that are funded in portfolio.
So if a bank wanted to fund just a piece of a loan, or get
into a loan participation, let's say, with a CDFI that was not
in its assessment area, they may get some credit, but not the
same amount of credit that they would get if it was in the
assessment area.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. If the Chair will indulge me for one
second, do you see a process by which banks could get advanced
approval in the rule?
Mr. Getter. Yes, they can have a discussion with the
regulator. Normally, they make the loan and then go to the
regulator for approval, but I don't believe there is anything
that is stopping the bank from going to the regulator first and
getting some clarification.
Mr. Luetkemeyer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Perlmutter. I always indulge my friend from
Oklahoma.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, who is also the
Chair of our Housing, Community Development, and Insurance
Subcommittee, is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ladies and gentlemen, race is a serious issue. It has been
that way since the very foundation of this country. I would
mention those brilliant words by Thomas Jefferson, ``All men
are created equal, endowed with certain unalienable rights,
among those are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,''
and this man wrote that when he owned slaves. The reason I am
saying that is we have to stop being shy about dealing with
race.
Ms. Crosby, I want to direct this question to you. We have
a current framework within our rule, but it bases
discrimination only on credit. Now with the new rule, I
suppose, and you tell me, we are finally putting it in a
category of any racial activity, of any type of discrimination.
So, Ms. Crosby, it is my hope that you can shed a little
light on whether or not these new requirements that we have
will have the effect that is needed. Would it have little or no
effect on the impact of ratings of a bank and it would not
constitute a lending analysis for the purpose of evaluating
redlining risk factors?
First, I want you to tell me if this is true. Are you as a
person satisfied with the--not the current rule but this
proposed rule? Will it do the job of dealing with racial
discrimination head on?
Ms. Crosby. Thank you. I think at NCRC, we believe it could
be stronger. The agencies propose to use Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act (HMDA) data to produce exam type of prescribing
lending in rates but it is not incorporating those findings
into the banks' exam.
In addition to that, it is possible for changes to CRA to
meet current legal standards if CRA examined lending by race
and ethnicity in geographic areas experiencing ongoing
discrimination or exhibiting significant racial disparities in
lending.
We also propose including analysis of lending in
underserved neighborhoods with low levels of lending, which are
disproportionately communities of color. The agency should at a
minimum bolster fair lending reviews of company CRA exams for
banks that perform poorly in HMDA data analysis of lending by
race. In addition, the agencies propose to use Section 1071
small business and farm lending data by race and gender in CRA
exams when Section 1071 data becomes available.
I think there is an opportunity to strengthen the proposed
rules so that race can play a greater role in addressing the
needs of underserved communities.
Mr. Scott. Can you explain why it is important that the
rule does go further and includes information on a bank's
lending data in these underserved areas?
Ms. Crosby. In short, I will summarize it by saying that
when there were Federal policies that encouraged redlining by
race, that disproportionately impacted communities, and we are
seeing that today, even through our analysis of health outcomes
from COVID, when you correlate the data of communities that
were most significantly impacted by COVID with the data of
communities that were redlined, you see the direct correlation
of the impact of those policies that actually discriminated
against communities of color and are still persistent today.
So, there were intentional efforts to discriminate against
people of color by putting them in certain communities. There
needs to be intentional efforts to correct that.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Ms. Crosby.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Posey, is now recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Posey. Thank very much, Chairman Perlmutter.
Dr. Getter, what do you understand to be the objectives of
the Community Reinvestment Act?
Mr. Getter. I'm sorry. Would you please say that again?
Mr. Posey. What do you understand to be the objectives of
the Community Reinvestment Act?
Mr. Getter. Oh, okay. Thank you.
The objective is to make sure that banks are lending where
they accept deposits or where they were chartered, as stated in
the statute. That is what the banks are usually evaluated on,
how well they are reinvesting back into their communities.
Mr. Posey. Okay. This hearing finds much disappointment
with the Community Reinvestment Act in achieving those
objectives. What does your study of this Act suggest for the
sources of the disappointment?
Mr. Getter. The banks say that they were making loans but
it wasn't getting counted. So, they wanted to make sure that
they got credit for the CRA lending that they were doing.
Mr. Posey. Okay. The hearing memo speaks about modern-day
redlining, and this phrase appears widely in discussions of the
Community Reinvestment Act on the internet and in policy
circles.
Can you describe what the modern-day redlining is, and how
it differs from prior forms of redlining?
Mr. Getter. Previously, redlining may have meant not
getting a loan, whereas today, redlining could mean higher
prices. So, the HMDA is really trying to capture both. How much
credit is being denied, and is the credit being priced
correctly?
Mr. Posey. Very good. Thank you.
In your research paper, ``The Effectiveness of the
Community Reinvestment Act,'' you point out that compliance
with the CRA does not require adherence to lending quotas or
benchmarks, and that in the absence of benchmarks, evaluating
the effectiveness of the Community Reinvestment Act is
difficult.
Could you expand a little bit on that theme for me?
Mr. Getter. Right. The regulators are careful. They don't
want to say how much lending is enough. Ultimately, the
regulators are also the prudential regulators of the banks. So,
they don't want to say, you have to make this loan, or this
many loans, and then if the loans don't perform, turn around
and have to say, well, now, you have to hold all of this
capital.
So, the regulators do try to give banks flexibility. And,
again, they are just trying to make sure that the lending is
covered in the assessment area, which is what the statute
requires.
Mr. Posey. Very good.
Do you believe that given our country's emphasis on free
market economics and finance, it would be possible or even
desirable to remedy the problem by providing benchmarks for the
Community Reinvestment Act based on lending quotas and quotas
for other services?
Mr. Getter. I will say that CRA loans are profitable loans.
So, it is not like the regulation is forcing them to make a
loan that is not profitable. That is why the loan can be
eligible for CRA credit. The banks go out and lend and then
they get their exam and see how many of those loans are
eligible for CRA credit. And sometimes it is hard to separate
out that the bank made the loan because it was profitable or
did they make the loan because they were trying to comply with
CRA?
Again, the prudential regulators do not want banks to make
unprofitable loans. I would say that they do have a choice in
making loans, and it is just a matter of doing enough
documentation to show that this loan made a difference in the
LMI communities.
Mr. Posey. The composition of lending portfolios and other
bank services are subject to tradeoffs with other criteria like
risk-return, and capital requirements. How does the
implementation of the Community Reinvestment Act account for
these tradeoffs in rating banks under the Act?
Mr. Getter. Indirectly, because they have to cover their
assessment areas, and it may be an inadvertent consequence that
they get credit for holding whole loans rather than sharing
risks.
So in a world where you can securitize and you can do loan
participations and things like that, they tend to get less
credit, even if they are helping low- to moderate-income
communities outside of their assessment area, because the law
states, we want to know what you are doing inside your
assessment area.
Mr. Posey. Thank you.
My time has expired.
Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you, Mr. Posey.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Green, who is also the Chair
of our Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Green. Thank, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I kindly associate myself with the remarks of
Chairs Meeks and Scott.
And I contend, Mr. Chairman, that the current CRA
legitimizes invidious discrimination. As evidence, in his 2019
testimony before this committee, journalist Aaron Glantz shared
a finding from his investigation into modern-day redlining
which included the following:
``In 61 metro areas across the country, people of color
were more likely to be denied conventional mortgages than their
White counterparts, even when they made the same amount of
money, tried to borrow the same amount of money, and wanted to
buy in the same neighborhood.''
He goes on to say, ``Despite these disparities, 99 percent
of national banks received a satisfactory or outstanding grade
on their inspections under the Community Reinvestment Act.''
It legitimizes invidious discrimination. One of the things
that we must do would be to establish strong standards, with
meaningful sanctions. It is not enough to have standards if you
don't have sanctions that are meaningful.
When I was the president of the NAACP, we engaged with a
bank that wanted to merge. That was the point where you could
get the attention of a bank that was out of compliance. That is
not enough. We need stronger standards, and we need stronger
sanctions.
I am currently considering legislation to increase the Fed
Fund Rate on a bank that is out of compliance with the CRA
under stronger standards until that bank presents some sort of
action plan and begins to implement it such that we will know
they are moving towards compliance.
We have suffered long enough. The status quo intends to
protect the status quo. There is a desire to have a CRA that
would allow 99 percent of the national banks to receive a
satisfactory or outstanding grade when they have engaged in
invidious discrimination.
So, again, in his findings, people of color were likely to
be denied a conventional mortgage more so than their White
counterparts, even when they made the same amount of money,
tried to borrow the same amount of money, and wanted to buy in
the same neighborhood. That says it all. We have to make a
change.
Ms. Genao-Estrella, how do you respond to my comments?
Ms. Genao-Estrella. This goes to the heart of the
communities that we serve, in which I see it vividly. This is
not about 40 years ago. We see it in our communities, not only
constantly being denied but also there is a pattern. For
example, in New York City, 22 percent of the population is
Black, but fewer than 5 loans by CRA-regulated banks go to
Black borrowers.
We see patterns after patterns. And right now, we go to the
intention. By intention, it just needs to be an action and we
see also that--
Mr. Green. Permit me to intercede with 31 seconds left.
What do you think of my idea to increase the standards, of
course, but also to impose sanctions that are much stronger?
What are your thoughts on that?
Ms. Genao-Estrella. Yes. It is very important that there
are repercussions for banks, for bank institutions if there is
a pattern, and they are not providing the products and services
that the community needs, especially communities of color and
also LMI communities.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman yields back.
The gentleman from Kentucky, Mr. Barr, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Barr. Thank you, Chairman Perlmutter, and thanks to our
witnesses.
One of the pieces of feedback I receive frequently from my
constituents in the banking business is that it is difficult to
invest in low- to moderate-income communities when there is a
lack of clarity in the examination process for CRA.
Let me start with Dr. Getter. Do you believe that banks
will best serve and invest in communities when they have a
clear understanding of expectations from regulators, where it
is objective, as opposed to subjective, in the exams?
Mr. Getter. Sure. And also with credit histories from the
borrowers in those communities, so income alone is not the only
underwriting criteria. Credit history is important, and there
are also fair housing laws and equal credit opportunities.
Mr. Barr. Back to the point, it is the lack of clarity that
is a problem. And to Mr. Leighty's testimony--and I will just
quote directly from his written testimony--``Community banks
experience inconsistencies in the examination process. The
inconsistent manner in which loans receive CRA credit occurs
between examinations within an agency, as well as between
agencies. This makes it incredibly difficult for community
banks to plan and implement their CRA requirements
responsibly.''
Dr. Getter, do you believe that this interagency proposal
sufficiently addresses that concern?
Mr. Getter. It definitely addresses that concern. Now,
again, if a bank wanted to partner, let's say, with a CDFI,
they would not get as much credit as if they held that loan on
the books.
Mr. Barr. Let me get specific. And I will ask Mr. Leighty
to comment on this, too.
I think it is great that the interagency proposal adopts
former Comptroller Otting's proposal that an investment could
receive a binding decision or a proposed investment or proposed
loan could receive a binding decision about whether or not that
loan or investment would be eligible for CRA credit. I think
that provides the certainty that we need.
However, on this illustrative list of activities, which I
think is a good idea, a safe harbor, one of the problems that
one of my constituent banks has brought to my attention, a bank
that does a great job with CRA and invests in low- and
moderate-income communities quite a bit, is this issue on
revitalization.
And what my constituent said to me, and this is the
compliance officer, the CRA compliance officer of a bank who
was concerned that the revitalization among the 11 categories
that were listed in the proposal only counts if it is under a
government program.
And she said there are a lot of private groups or projects
that revitalize areas, especially in rural areas. Most of our
current community development activities in the revitalization
bucket would no longer count.
Do you believe, Dr. Getter and Mr. Leighty, that this is a
flaw in the proposal?
Mr. Getter. I would have to review that. I wouldn't call it
necessarily a flaw.
Mr. Barr. Mr. Leighty, what do you think?
Mr. Leighty. I would have to look at the details, but I
would say a lot of the CRA lending we do is direct without
government programs. We had a great example--
Mr. Barr. Right. That is the problem. I think the proposal
should revise that. There should be an opportunity for credit,
even when a government program is not involved.
Let me also ask Mr. Leighty a question about an alternative
to CRA. Rather than breathing new life into an antiquated
mechanism like CRA, why not supercharge Opportunity Zones and
incentivize capital formation in underserved areas through tax
relief?
Tax relief for community banks' retained earnings can
promote lending to the underserved in rural areas, and this tax
relief would strengthen community banks' capital and their
ability to lend and to create a more level playing field in the
financial ecosystem and increase capital in underserved areas
around the United States.
Mr. Leighty, would providing tax relief for community
banks' retain earnings increase access to capital in
communities that are traditionally underserved?
Mr. Leighty. Absolutely, it would. If we have more capital
to deploy, we want to efficiently deploy that. And so, that
would certainly help us have more to disburse, no question.
Mr. Barr. I am exploring legislation to do just that. I
think it is a suitable alternative or at least a supplement to
CRA, and I am going to be introducing legislation to that
effect.
Final feedback and this is--I don't have to time elicit a
comment. But one of my constituent bank compliance officers
said that the proposal's multiple new tests, subtests, and
factors would subject numerous discrete areas of bank
operations to evaluation, and the complexity and vast new data
collection reporting requirements would not facilitate the
issue of determining whether or not an activity would result in
CRA credit.
That is why there needs to be a longer implementation
period for this, and certainly a longer comment period. This is
a highly complex proposal and we need more time to--
Chairman Perlmutter. Your time is up, speaking of needing
more time. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Barr. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. And he yields back.
I will now yield to the gentleman from California, Mr.
Sherman, who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Investor
Protection, Entrepreneurship, and Capital Markets, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sherman. Thank you.
The last questioner put forward the idea that we should cut
taxes on banks or certain banks. And I would just say that at a
time when we have an enormous Federal budget deficit, for us to
do that, unless the gentleman has some pay-fors, would simply
expand that deficit further.
Mr. Leighty, the rules that we have now tend to be somewhat
vague, and it tends to matter what a particular examiner
decides to give you credit for, count against, et cetera.
Do the changes that are being proposed eliminate examiner
roulette, where what matters is which examiner you get? And do
they provide the clarity necessary so that you know what the
rules are and that the rules are published and not just
something kind of everybody knows but they are not in the
written rules?
Mr. Leighty. We think it would be very helpful. That list
would just release some of that uncertainty. And then, this
accountability, when we--if we had a channel to get in front of
our regulators and say, hey, we are looking at this project,
what is your perspective, would that qualify for CRA? And to
have a time period where they have to respond back would be
very helpful for us to march forward. In most cases, we are
going do those loans anyway, but it is helpful from the
efficiency standpoint to make sure we are documenting those
appropriately and have them as part of our report.
Mr. Sherman. So, you are saying that the rules are unclear
and you would like loan-by-loan advice from your regulatory
agencies, because you can't just look at the rules and
determine what is and is not going to qualify?
Mr. Leighty. I think there are just some that are in the
gray area, and those are ones that would come into effect. We
would want to have that dialogue and know the timeframe when we
will hear back. I wouldn't say that is the average loan, but I
would say there are circumstances where it would be good to
have that clarity on the front end, especially when we are
looking for participant banks to come into the deal as well, so
they could know that they would have a CRA component to that.
Mr. Sherman. Okay. And I would just say democracy works
better where rules are published, and the rules are clear,
rather than there are things in a gray area and an individual
bank getting an individual nod or ruling on an individual loan.
I have another question for you. The new types of qualified
activities specifically outlined in the framework are
activities that help communities prepare for natural disasters.
Given the increased frequency and severity of wildfires in the
West--and as the planet warms, those are only going get worse--
do you believe there will be an increased demand for loans
designed to improve resiliency? And do you see banks like yours
able to fill that need?
Mr. Leighty. I think we are well-positioned to help with
the fire mitigation, to help with some of the new equipment
that helps them more efficiently fight fires. A lot of our
communities are very small, and so we have volunteer fire
departments only in several of our communities. And we play a
really crucial role in making sure that they have the equipment
they need and the financing at a low price so that they can
afford to continue to grow, and that includes the Black Forest
area of the Colorado Springs market as well.
Mr. Sherman. I'm going to squeeze in one more question for
Ms. Genao-Estrella. We have seen the number of bank branches
decrease, some 13,000 closing between 2008 and 2020, and
another 4,000 during the pandemic era. So, we see an awful lot
of banking taking place by banks that either have no branches
or that service the vast majority of their customers online.
The branches are irrelevant to most of their customers.
Does the proposed rule do enough to make sure that these
increasingly-important online-mostly or online-only banks are
meeting their CRA responsibilities? And I am particularly
concerned that we say, well, you have a responsibility in the
areas in which you lend, but there may be online banks that
only lend in well-to-do areas.
How do these rules properly meet that objective?
Ms. Genao-Estrella. Thank you so much for the questions.
We see that in our communities as a problem, and we also
see it as being able to have--we really want to make sure that
financial institutions have a responsibility, and also that we
see it in different nonbank activities in the communities.
And we want to be able to have regulators that increase
access to banking and address the digital divide on all
banking, not just banks over $10 billion, and we want to be
able to--
Chairman Perlmutter. I--
Ms. Genao-Estrella. I'm sorry.
Chairman Perlmutter. I am going to cut you off, because the
gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Williams from Texas is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Thank you for that nice
introduction.
Chairman Perlmutter. He is also a small business owner.
Mr. Williams of Texas. You are bleeding into my time.
Chairman Perlmutter. And he has owned a car dealership for
a long time. He coaches the soft--the baseball team. I was
going to say the softball team.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Williams of Texas. I reclaim my time. Thank you.
I will have a short question. But I am sitting here and
thinking we should be talking about the things that I am
hearing from my people back home in Texas, including out-of-
control inflation, border issues, interest rates, crime, and
food. And today, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) numbers came in
at over a year increase of 9.1 percent. I am one of the few
today in this hearing who remembers 1981, when we had runaway
inflation heading toward these numbers.
This is not simply a transitory problem like the Fed
claimed, or the high-class problem that the White House wants
to deflect it to. This is having a real impact on all
Americans, even the ones we are talking about. Main Street
America is being affected, and this is eating away at wages for
workers, and profit margins for businesses. And this is going
to force the Federal Reserve to once again hike interest rates
to reverse this inflationary cycle.
These actions will make the cost of capital increase. And
that will leave small businesses, homeowners, home buyers, and
anyone who is looking to get a line of credit in worse
financial shape than they were.
So, I think we should be doing everything we can to help
people right now with the inflation crisis instead of
discussing a proposed rule, for example, that is still being
developed as we debate it here today, because it is still about
these issues I am talking about. It is about inflation. It is
about the border. It is about crime. It is about food. And we
need to fix that.
I just have a quick question for you, Mr. Getter. When we
talk about this rule--as the chairman said, I am a
businessperson; I employ people. And costs going up can
sometimes hurt service to your customers, can hurt margins, and
so forth.
So when we talk about this rule, do you think the way it is
currently drafted, it would impose a relatively large new cost
on banks that, again, could drive up rates to try to offset the
heavy costs? What do you think this is going to do to the banks
and their daily budgets with which they deal?
Mr. Getter. The data collection requirements will
definitely increase. Now, how that translates into rates, I am
not sure. It depends on the competition or when the borrowers
shop. But the data collection requirements definitely--
Mr. Williams of Texas. So, we are going to see a higher
cost to do this, which could come back and hurt the consumer.
In my time that is left, I would ask our private sector banker
from Colorado, Mr. Leighty, what he thinks.
Mr. Leighty. There is no question that more regulation
flows down and costs the consumer. And regulation is important.
We are all for it, and we know that this market needs to have
regulation. But it does get to a level where it is cost-
prohibitive, and it kind of contradicts trying to take care of
the communities that we serve.
Mr. Williams of Texas. In your industry--and in my
industry, too--you have had to hire, I am sure, many more
regulators and loan officers, haven't you?
Mr. Leighty. We have enhanced our audit side of things and
compliance side, for sure.
Mr. Williams of Texas. Well, anytime there is more cost and
regulation, it affects the consumer. And in my business, I have
even had to hire--my business is built on commissions, the car
business, as you have heard. And I have even had to hire
compliance officers, and I haven't found a compliance officer
yet who will work on commission.
So, anyway, Mr. Chairman, I have some time left that I will
yield back to you.
Chairman Perlmutter. I thank the gentleman for yielding
back.
The Chair will now recognize Mr. Casten from Illinois, who
is also the Vice Chair of our Subcommittee on Investor
Protection, Entrepreneurship, and Capital Markets, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am generally very supportive of the CRA, but it has
always struck me that it has some sort of inherent structural
flaws.
Ms. Crosby, I would like to start with you, and just see if
you can confirm my judgment and then sort of get to some
possible fixes.
Let's say that I am a bank, and I have someone I can
provide a $300,000 mortgage to, who is in an LMI community.
They qualify for the CRA credits. Do I get any CRA credits if I
forgave $300,000 of debt to that same individual? I think you
are muted.
Chairman Perlmutter. Yes, you need to do whatever you did
before.
Ms. Crosby. I am on my phone and the internet, so I get
confused. I apologize about that.
You get CRA credit for activity that is in an LMI track, as
well as what is made to an LMI individual. If I understand your
question correctly, if there is a loan made in an LMI track,
the bank would get credit for that. In terms of loan
forgiveness, I will have NCRC staff follow up than.
Mr. Casten. Let me give you another example.
Same track, same individual, I give them a $100,000 student
loan. What if I gave that individual a $100,000 scholarship?
Would I get any CRA credit for that?
Ms. Crosby. I am going to defer to NCRC staff. But I
believe if that falls--if that is in an LMI area, the loan
would not or the grant would not get CRA credit. But I will
have NCRC staff--I have them with me and they will follow up
with a response to that.
Mr. Casten. We could go on to other examples. My
understanding to both of those is that the answer is no, and I
say that because I am fortunate enough that I do not live in an
LMI community. A lot of my neighbors, like me, were fortunate.
We made the best life choice we ever could have made: We were
born to wealthy parents. And so, I didn't come out of college
with a lot of student debt. A lot of my neighbors got help
getting their first home, and we have built equity.
And we use CRA to try to invest in LMI communities by
giving debt to people who in some cases are already
overindebted. And we don't give them--we are not giving banks
the incentive to get them out from under debt traps. We are
giving banks incentives to give them more debt. And I am not
saying we should mandate. I understand how banks make money.
But I am wondering, Ms. Crosby, if we were to change the
CRA so that banks had the option to give people more equity, do
you think that would be an effective way to meet the goals of
the CRA and make our LMI communities stronger, and more
fiscally independent? And how might we do that?
Ms. Agnani, I would love to get your take on this with the
2 minutes I have left as well.
But I will start with Ms. Crosby.
Ms. Crosby. I am going to actually have NCRC staff follow
up with a response on that.
Mr. Casten. Okay. Ms. Agnani, any thoughts from you?
Ms. Agnani. In terms of loans versus equity investments, I
think it depends on who the beneficiaries are of those equity
investments and whether the affordable housing and/or
investment in small businesses are really reaching low- and
moderate-income communities and communities of color. So, I
think it would depend on the type of investment and who would
ultimately benefit.
Mr. Casten. Okay. With the time left, does anybody else
have any thoughts on this?
And, again, I understand that banks make money by loaning
money. And I am not suggesting that we mandate charity, but it
does strike me that the communities that have a lot of wealth
in this country are not the ones that have accumulated a lot of
debt. They are the ones that have accumulated a lot of equity.
And if any of you have thoughts, either in the time here or
in follow-up, of how we might put sort of appropriate scoring
in the CRA to give banks another tool, I would welcome your
thoughts.
Ms. Agnani. If I may, Congressman, I think a lot of these
conversations we are having, really at the end of the day it is
about the quality of the investments and lending versus
quality--quantity--quality over quantity.
And this is really why we need better data and to use
datasets like HMDA that actually disaggregate and include
racial subgroups. Without that ability to really evaluate
investments in lending, we won't be able to solve for these
problems.
Mr. Casten. Thank you.
And I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman's time has expired.
Votes have been called, but I want to see how many more
Members we can get through.
Mr. Loudermilk from Georgia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I will try to be brief.
Under the proposed rule, for a bank to receive an
outstanding rating, its CRA performance would have to be at
least 125 percent of the median. Over the last 3 years of
banking activities, not one bank with more than $50 billion of
assets would have achieved an outstanding rating. And less than
2 percent of banking assets are in banks that would currently
be considered outstanding.
Mr. Getter, if it is almost impossible for banks to receive
an outstanding rating, would that incentivize them to do more
or less CRA activity?
Mr. Getter. It could incentivize them to do less or just
maintain the status quo.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you. That is what I think most
people would perceive, because if there is no reason for a bank
to invest more resources, if there is a chance of achieving a
higher rating, I agree with you. I think it could cause them to
do less.
One of the biggest problems that we have with the current
CRA regime is that regulators often do not deliver exam results
for years back to the banks. Unfortunately, it appears that
this rule would only make the problem worse because results
would be based on backward-looking, peer metric comparisons.
So, Mr. Getter, if banks do not find out how they did until
years later, doesn't that cause significant delays with getting
CRA investments where they are needed most?
Mr. Getter. I don't know if the results would cause delays.
I have heard complaints that the results are slow. But again,
if there is money to be made, I don't see the bank just walking
away from it, waiting for a past CRA exam. But you are right.
Banks have complained about not getting feedback quickly.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. I have one other area of concern. I
have heard about the proposed rule that some of the compliance
deadlines like the first quarter, that is, at least 60 days
after the final rule, are very short.
Mr. Leighty, is that a concern for you? And can you share
why that could be a challenge for community banks?
Mr. Leighty. It is a concern. We wear a lot of hats, and we
are serving our communities, too. We are investing a lot of
time out in the community. And anytime we have added
regulation, it is just helpful for us to have more time to get
our arms around what exactly it means without having to go hire
a bunch of service providers to get us there quickly.
With the 700-page change to CRA, there is just going to be
a lot of things that we need to make sure we are covering. So,
the more time we could have, the better, for sure.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman has yielded back. Thank
you for cutting your questioning a little short.
I now recognize Mr. Foster, who is also the Chair of our
Task Force on Artificial Intelligence, for 5 minutes. If you
can do the same, then we can get to Mr. Rose, and maybe to Mr.
Garcia.
Mr. Foster. I will speak rapidly if we can get the lawyers
to stop talking.
As part of my role as the Chair of this Committee's AI Task
Force, we have been looking at how AI technology can improve
all aspects of the financial services industry, including
achieving equity goals.
The Community Reinvestment Act was passed by Congress in
1977 with the explicit goal of responding to redlining and
discrimination against communities of color. And still, decades
later, in part because the law was written in a race-neutral
way, a 2018 report by the Center for Investigative Reporting
found that redlining effectively persists in 61 cities
throughout the country.
New technologies such as artificial intelligence and
machine learning have the ability to automate loan underwriting
and can make credit decisions and process thousands of
applications at an unprecedented rate. This will lower costs,
and does lower costs, but can also make credit more available
to LMI communities. But it comes with risks, and these risks
have been highlighted by our AI Task Force.
I guess to all of the witnesses here: How can banks utilize
artificial intelligence or are they also utilizing artificial
intelligence in a way so that it actually benefits low- and
medium- and moderate-income families and people of color in
developing and revitalizing their communities instead of just
exacerbating it? Is there good news here in relation to AI?
Anyone?
Mr. Getter. It is my understanding that banks are not using
the machine learning to make the actual credit decision,
because if the regulators ask them, how did you get to this
decision, and it is so much data and they don't understand it,
then they can't answer that question.
So just from my understanding, machine learning may be
valuable. They may take in the application or something like
that, but the actual credit decision is made so that the bank
can explain it.
Mr. Leighty. I can speak from the community bank
perspective. Our business model at the office is that it may be
lacking in efficiency but very strong in the relationship base.
And so, we sit down at the table and get to know each other,
and make sure that we understand the exact needs, and custom-
make products for our customers.
Artificial intelligence certainly has a place, and we are
heading in that direction, but that is something that we have
not spent a lot of time focusing on, given our business model.
Mr. Foster. Do you end up using it implicitly just in your
advertising and outreach? There are examples of people using
Facebook-driven stuff. And whether they plan to or not, they
end up using AI for good or ill. How do you handle that one?
Mr. Leighty. We do have some marketing efforts that use the
digital platforms, and I am sure there is a lot of AI going on
in that background. That has been less than 12 months for us.
So we are new to that space, but we are certainly heading in
that direction.
Ms. Crosby. And just to add to the comments, we have heard
of some AI-driven members using a type of college that someone
attended or an Ivy League school in their underwriting
decision. So the further the AI strays from variables used in
traditional underwriting, the riskier it becomes from a fair
lending perspective.
Agencies must subject AI to rigorous fair lending reviews
to ensure than no racial, ethnic, or gender disparities arise
that are not justified by business necessity, which is the
standard established by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
Ms. Agnani. If I can just add, unfortunately, I can follow
up with specific research. I believe women of color are
disproportionately negatively impacted by machine learning in
lending, and so we need to proceed with caution.
Mr. Foster. Yes, one of the tough things is when you end up
using an algorithm that makes it better for everyone, but some
are helped more than others. Is that an acceptable thing or
not? And that is one of the things we have been struggling with
on the AI issue for a long time.
Ms. Genao-Estrella. Yes, I will agree with my fellow
panelists and witnesses. Definitely, this is something for the
future, but we also need it right now. For the communities that
we serve, right now, it has a negative impact, because we need
to go back to the basics. And if we have a structural problem,
racial disparity, there is very little that is going to, that
artificial intelligence, especially when we are not sitting at
the table making those decisions and who will be there. It is
definitely going in the right direction, but we need to do
more. Thank you.
Chairman Foster. Okay. My time is up.
And I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. Thank you. The physicist's time is up.
Mr. Rose from Tennessee is now recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Chairman Perlmutter. Another lawyer to
talk now.
And, Ranking Member Luetkemeyer, thank you for holding this
hearing. And thank to you our witnesses for being here.
I would just like to make a comment at the outset that we
need to stop with these gimmicky titles to hearings that
foreshadow a specific bias to the subject to be examined.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Better Together: Examining the
Unified Proposed Rule to Modernize the Community Reinvestment
Act.''
Is it better together? It might be. But how can we approach
the hearing with an eye towards neutrality or objectivity if
the very title of the hearing already reflects a certain type
of bias and appears to be a jab at former Comptroller Otting?
The public has not even had time to weigh in on this issue.
Indeed, the comment period is still open. And individuals,
financial institutions, and other interested parties are still
combing through the rulemaking. They have also asked for an
extension of the comment period, which was ultimately denied, a
common trend among Biden's financial regulators.
Imagine being a financial institution right now, spending
hours on the Federal Register, trying to figure out how these
new rules and regulations will impact your business, and in
many cases, trying to do so within the confines of an
abbreviated comment period. Now as my time is limited, I will
dive right into questions.
Mr. Leighty, are you worried about the complexity and
length of this 679-page rulemaking? And are you confident that
community banks will be able to comply with it?
Mr. Leighty. Ultimately, we will be able to comply with it
because our business model hasn't changed because of it. We do
take care of our communities. In two of the communities we
operate in, we are the only bank in town. There wouldn't be a
bank without us. And so, that is our mission.
But, yes, a 700-page change will certainly take a lot of
time, effort, and a lot of resources to get up to speed with
and a lot of help from the Independent Community Bankers of
America (ICBA )and others.
Mr. Rose. Dr. Getter, Mr. Green just stated a few moments
ago that he is working on a proposal to raise the Federal Funds
Rate on banks that are in noncompliance with the CRA. You don't
have to comment on what impact this would have perhaps on
individual banks, but what impact do you think this would have
on the banking system?
Mr. Getter. It does increase the cost of funds, especially
if they are using deposits to fund their loans. Actually, it
may even increase the cost of--for the entire banking system,
it could increase the wholesale funding and the cost to get the
funds to make the loans. So, that would be an issue.
Mr. Rose. Thank you.
I think that would be a terrible idea, frankly, and not
helpful at all.
But Dr. Getter, I would like to discuss the retail lending
assessment area test and the inclusion of indirect lending in
that test. We usually think of indirect lending as auto dealer
lending, but this will also sweep in dealer-initiated lending
in the equipment and transportation financing sectors. Banks
have very little input on these loans, since they are generally
acquired through partnerships with dealers. And the banks have
almost no control over the geographic distribution or the
marketing of these loans to customers.
Equipment and transportation finance are unique in that
there are fewer dealerships that originate these types of
loans. Further, there is an even more unique customer base that
isn't comparable to the overall aggregate of small business
lenders or demographics.
The proposed changes could result in banks leaving markets,
creating less opportunities and healthy competition for loans
in low- and moderate-income census tracks or to low- and
moderate-income borrowers or businesses with revenues of $1
million or less.
Dr. Getter, if the goal of the CRA is to encourage lending
by banks to low- and moderate-income communities and
individuals, why is it logical to include categories of loans
where the bank has no say in the communities or individuals
they serve?
Mr. Getter. It is my understanding that they are supposed
to do oversight over their indirect lenders. They are supposed
to pay attention to that, according to what I have heard from
various regulators. And if banks decide they want out of it, my
guess is that the nonbanks might step in and take up some of
that business. So, I don't want to speculate; I am not 100
percent sure. All I can say is that having the automobile data
might shed some light on where some real discrimination may or
may not be.
Mr. Rose. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman's time has expired.
Now, I am trying to figure out who I am going to go to
next.
Mr. Garcia, you are not on the subcommittee, so you are
last. You are going close us out.
Mr. Timmons?
Mr. Timmons. Yes, sir.
Chairman Perlmutter. Mr. Timmons from South Carolina is
recognized for 5 minutes.
And then, I think we will have to take a break and go vote.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, my friend.
I appreciate you holding this hearing.
And thank you to each of the witnesses for joining us
today.
Dr. Getter, part of this new Community Reinvestment Act
overall is that banks will be evaluated in so-called retail
lending assessment areas, which is any location where the bank
makes 250 or more small business loans or 100 or more mortgage
or small farm loans.
Is it possible a bank might reconsider and even limit
lending in a particular area to avoid meeting what seems to me
to be extremely low thresholds in these retail lending
assessment areas?
Mr. Getter. It depends on if it is one of the banks that
were complaining that they were not getting enough of their
loans evaluated for CRS. So, I guess it really depends on the
uniqueness of the banks. Some banks are probably glad to have
it, and maybe there could be some banks that won't be glad. But
it would be captured under the community development test.
Mr. Timmons. This could be an unintended consequence. And
we need to make sure we are structuring this in a manner that
would avoid that, if possible.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Getter. I'm sorry. Would you just say that one more
time?
Mr. Timmons. This could be an unintended consequence, and
we need to make sure that we are doing everything to avoid that
outcome.
Would you agree with that?
Mr. Getter. I guess maybe the community development test
would pick up on what is not happening. The community
development test is supposed to pick up anything that is not
necessarily included in the retail lending test, is my
understanding, is improper. So, the regulators will catch it.
Mr. Timmons. Okay. Thank you.
Dr. Getter, can we talk about the data collection aspect of
this? Because I have started to chat with banks about the
proposed rulemaking. One common concern has been the new data
collection piece of this. The biggest banks do not really care
about this and the smallest banks are written out, but is that
potentially a huge burden for midsized banks?
Can you explain to us the new compliance burden that would
be leveled on banks for data collection?
Mr. Getter. The automobile loans, I believe for the banks
that are $10,000 and over--oh, that is more the digital
collection thing. They have to respond to that.
It is a blessing and a curse. It is a double-edged sword
because there are a lot of complaints that banks are not doing
enough lending. At some point, the data will be needed to
either confirm or deny how much lending is being done by the
banking system. It will be costly, but at least we can go off
of evidence at some point once we have the data.
Mr. Timmons. Could you talk about what kind of information
is required to be submitted, how often, and any guesstimate on
cost and time required for it?
Mr. Getter. The regulators are going to try to harmonize it
with HMDA and with Section 1071. And the CRA examinations, let
me just say, 3 to 5 years. My guess is they are just going to
have to collect data constantly and have it ready, because if
they are doing mortgages, they are definitely collecting HMDA
data every year. And then, we will wait and see what Section
1071 requires.
So, data collection is just a new way of life, I suppose,
in a world of technology and digital modernization.
Mr. Timmons. Sure. Which regulators would be in charge of
collecting the data and going through it?
Mr. Getter. Who is going in be charge?
Mr. Timmons. Which regulators?
Mr. Getter. For CRA, it will be the banking regulators. For
the HMDA and the Section 1071, it is the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB).
Mr. Timmons. One final question. Where would this data,
which would be pretty sensitive, be stored? Is there any
concern with cybersecurity investments, costs associated with
that? The compliance cost alone is going to be large because of
additional individuals and time that will be required. But do
you have any cybersecurity concerns, and is this going to
create another layer of sensitivity?
Mr. Getter. Yes, there are cybersecurity concerns. And I
believe that is the reason why the small banks will be able to
stay under the regular CRA tests, and that is part of the
reason why Section 1071 has taken so long, based on my
understanding. We need the data on kind of the smallest
institutions served by some of the smallest banks. But because
of the data collection requirements and the cybersecurity
risks, it has been taking some time.
Chairman Perlmutter. Okay. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. We are going to go to Mr. Garcia of
Illinois for 5 minutes.
We have no time on the clock for voting on the Floor; 286
Members have yet to vote.
If Mr. Norman wants to go, we are going to end up
reconvening for him.
But, Mr. Garcia, please go ahead.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you, Chairman Perlmutter, and
Ranking Member Luetkemeyer, for hosting this important
discussion on the Community Reinvestment Act. This is a very
timely hearing.
And of course, I want to thank our witnesses who have
shared their time and expertise on the Community Reinvestment
Act with us. I come from Chicago and the story of the CRA runs
deep through my City and our community. It was in the Austin
neighborhood near my community where a community organizer
named Gale Cincotta led the fight against discriminatory
lending practices, and earned the nickname, ``Mother of the
CRA.''
So it is fitting that last year, our governor signed
Illinois' CRA in the nation with its own protection against
redlining and discrimination in lending. That is important to
immigrant communities like those that I represent on the
northwest and southwest sides of Chicago in suburban Cook
County, because the CRA isn't working for us.
For every dollar lent into majority White neighborhoods,
only 13 cents goes to Hispanic neighborhoods like mine, and the
investments we do receive fuel gentrification and displacement
all too often. I am heartened that our Federal regulators are
taking up the task of modernizing the CRA because real change
in lending practices is a nationwide problem and needs a
nationwide solution.
Ms. Agnani, from Gail Cincotta's day until now, our
communities have been clear about our needs. In the face of
redlining, discrimination, underinvestment, and displacement,
it is clear that our existing financial system wasn't built for
us. We need protections.
Do you think it is important for the Federal regulators to
receive community input as they revise CRA, and what should
that process look like, and do agencies like the CFPB have
anything to teach us about how regulators can consult with our
communities?
Ms. Agnani. Thank you, Congressman. Yes. Absolutely.
I also originally come from the Chicago area, and have
worked in Queens, so both Cities that are in focus in this
hearing are really critical. Absolutely. Focusing in on the
displacement issues, our communities need investments in
lending which will ensure that residents can stay in the cities
that they live in and work in and have helped to build.
And so, CRA credits should be given only if existing
residents are able to stay in their cities, and the small
businesses are allowed to thrive. That needs to be part of the
evaluation of whether CRA investments are effective. Sorry. I
am not sure if I answered the specific question.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. That is fine. Thank you so much.
Ms. Crosby, since the CRA was last revised, new players
like non-bank mortgage lenders and fintecs have revolutionized
finance. And if our laws don't catch up with them, we risk
predatory behavior and possible financial collapse. One issue
that I am focused on is industrial loan company (ILC) charters,
which not only allow for underregulated parent companies to own
a bank, but raise questions about a bank's responsibilities to
its community.
What do you think Congress and regulators can do to make
sure that a revised CRA adequately covers these new industry--
Ms. Crosby. ILCs have CRA obligations like traditional
banks. NCRC is not supportive of ILCs since the ILC parent
companies can be nonfinancial companies. This introduces
potential conflicts of interest the ILC can be pressured to
make unsound loans to its parent or cut off credit to the
parent company's competitors. BMW bank is an example of an ILC
that has a CRA exam, but the CRA exam evaluates an inadequate
strategic plan despite being a lender offering billions of
automobile loans across the country.
BMW bank created a strategic plan in which it has
designated Salt Lake County to be its only assessment area,
because that is where they are headquartered. The strategic
plan does not create goals for automobile lending, but only for
community development financing and services. While the
community development is important, lending should also be
examined and should be examined across the country.
Mr. Garcia of Illinois. Thank you very much. I see my time
is up, so, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Perlmutter. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Norman may have questions for the panel, but I think I
am going to take the Chair's prerogative, and I would like to
thank our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for these witnesses, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
I want to thank you all for your time and for your
testimony today. We appreciate it. And again, I want to thank
our panelists.
And with that, this hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

July 13, 2022

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
