- EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: HOW HUMAN-CENTERED AI CAN ADDRESS SYSTEMIC RACISM AND RACIAL JUSTICE IN HOUSING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: HOW
HUMAN-CENTERED AI CAN ADDRESS
SYSTEMIC RACISM AND RACIAL JUSTICE
IN HOUSING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES

=======================================================================

VIRTUAL HEARING

BEFORE THE

TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 7, 2021

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 117-23

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
44-838 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2020

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              ANN WAGNER, Missouri
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ANDY BARR, Kentucky
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California              TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     TED BUDD, North Carolina
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
RITCHIE TORRES, New York             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              LANCE GOODEN, Texas
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania         WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   VAN TAYLOR, Texas
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
NIKEMA WILLIAMS, Georgia
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio, Ranking
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                    Member
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           TED BUDD, North Carolina
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
JAKE AUCHINCLOSS, Massachusetts      VAN TAYLOR, Texas

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
May 7, 2021..................................................     1
Appendix:
May 7, 2021..................................................    27

WITNESSES
Friday, May 7, 2021

Girouard, Dave, CEO and Co-Founder, Upstart......................    10
Hayes, Stephen F., Partner, Relman Colfax PLLC...................     4
Koide, Melissa, Founder and CEO, FinRegLab.......................     5
Rice, Lisa, President and CEO, National Fair Housing Alliance....     7
Saleh, Kareem, Founder and CEO, FairPlay.........................     8

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Garcia, Hon. Sylvia..........................................    28
Girouard, Dave...............................................    30
Hayes, Stephen F.............................................    34
Koide, Melissa...............................................    40
Rice, Lisa...................................................    55
Saleh, Kareem................................................    69

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Garcia, Hon. Sylvia:
Written responses to questions for the record from Lisa Rice.    72

EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: HOW
HUMAN-CENTERED AI CAN ADDRESS
SYSTEMIC RACISM AND RACIAL JUSTICE
IN HOUSING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES

----------

Friday, May 7, 2021

U.S. House of Representatives,
Task Force on Artificial Intelligence,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The task force met, pursuant to notice, at 12 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Bill Foster [chairman of the task force ]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Foster, Sherman, Casten,
Pressley, Adams, Garcia of Texas, Auchincloss; Gonzalez of
Ohio, Loudermilk, Budd, Hollingsworth, and Taylor.
Ex officio present: Representative Waters.
Chairman Foster. The Task Force on Artificial Intelligence
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair is authorized
to declare a recess of the task force at any time.
Also, without objection, members of the full Financial
Services Committee who are not members of this task force are
authorized to participate in today's hearing.
As a reminder, I ask all Members to keep themselves muted
when they are not being recognized by the Chair. The staff has
been instructed not to mute Members, except when a Member is
not being recognized by the Chair and there is inadvertent
background noise. Members are reminded that they may only
participate in one remote proceeding at a time. If you are
participating today, please keep your camera on, and if you
choose to attend a different remote proceeding, please turn
your camera off.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Equitable Algorithms: How
Human-Centered AI Can Address Systemic Racism and Racial
Justice in Housing and Financial Services.''
I now recognize myself for 4 minutes to give an opening
statement.
Thank you, everyone, for joining us today for what should
be a very interesting discussion. We have a great panel of
witnesses that I know will provide some stimulating and
thought-provoking points of view. Today, we are here to explore
how artificial intelligence (AI) can be used to increase racial
equity in housing and financial services. There has been
extensive discussion around this topic, mostly focusing on the
real problems that can occur when we use AI that can inherently
or unknowingly be biased. I think that a lot of these issues
can be more complicated and nuanced than how they are portrayed
in the media, but it is clear that the use of AI is hitting a
nerve with a lot of folks, and that concern is for a good
cause. No one should be denied the opportunity to own a home, a
pillar of the American Dream, because of a non-human,
automated, and, often, unlawfully discriminatory decision.
Regulators and policymakers have a big responsibility here,
too.
We must actively engage in these sorts of discussions to
determine what the best practices are and to enact laws that
reflect and encourage those practices, while also fostering
innovation and improvements. Ideally, we should get to a space
where AI is not only compliant with and meeting the standards
that we have set for fairness, but exceeding those standards.
It should be a tool that augments and automates fairness, not
something that we have to babysit to make sure that it is still
meeting our standards. The real promise of AI in this space is
that it may eventually produce greater fairness and equity in
ways that we may not have contemplated ourselves. So, we want
to make sure that the biases of the analog world are not
repeated in the AI and machine-learning world.
I am excited to have this conversation to see how we can
make AI the best version of itself, and how to design
algorithmic models that best capture the ideals of fairness and
transparency that are reflected in our fair lending laws. Thank
you all again for being part of this important discussion, and
the Chair will now recognize the ranking member of the task
force, Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio, for 5 minutes for an opening
statement.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster. First of
all, I want to say how pleased I am to work with you as I take
on the role of ranking member of this important task force. You
have always shown a great willingness to be a thoughtful,
bipartisan partner, and I look forward to continuing our work
together. I also want to thank Ranking Member McHenry, ranking
member of the full Financial Services Committee, for putting
his trust in me to lead on this task force. He has been a
tremendous mentor to me, and a thoughtful leader on policies
that promote and expand the use of innovative technologies.
Financial services is an industry that continues to be on
the cutting edge of technology, as is evident through the use
of AI and other emerging technologies. I believe that this
committee, and particularly this task force, should embrace
this innovation and continue to consider ways that Congress can
provide helpful clarity to industry without stifling
innovation. Technology can help to not only propel forward our
advancements in the financial services industry, but can also
foster further inclusion and opportunities to our unbanked and
underbanked communities.
Advanced credit decision models can use AI to improve the
confidence of lenders in extending credit, reducing defaults,
and finding data that is not readily available for traditional
assessments of creditworthiness.
Additionally, it is my belief that AI technologies can
provide Federal regulators with additional oversight tools to
reduce and prevent financial crimes. We should be encouraging
Federal agencies to be working more with the industry in a way
that fosters adoption and can assist on money laundering
efforts. On top of using AI to catch bad actors, Federal
entities can take steps to work with industry to further adopt
the use of artificial intelligence through the use of RegTech,
in order to help automate and streamline regulatory compliance.
Today's hearing is an important one. We are having an
important discussion about some of the challenges the industry
faces by employing this technology, specifically on bias in
algorithms. I believe these discussions are important to have.
We must acknowledge and recognize that these technologies, at
times, are not perfect due to the inherent nature of a
technology created by humans. It is vital, though, that we do
not take steps backwards by overregulating this industry, which
may have a chilling effect on the deployment of these
technologies. Instead, my hope is that we will continue to work
with the experts in industry in order to move forward in a
bipartisan way that both celebrates the technological
advancements and ensures that there is transparency and
fairness through the use of artificial intelligence.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
the importance of this technology in the financial services
sector and how Congress can act to encourage innovation and
promote fairness. And with that, I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair will now recognize
the Chair of the full Financial Services Committee, the
gentlewoman from California, Chairwoman Waters, for 1 minute.
Chairwoman Waters. Thank you so very much, Chairman Foster.
I am so delighted and excited about artificial intelligence,
and I am very pleased that you chose to provide the leadership
for this task force that will help us to understand how we can
get rid of bias in lending, and other efforts that should be
made throughout our society in dealing with, simply, fairness
and justice. I am very pleased, and I think that our committee
will provide the leadership in the Congress of the United
States for dealing with this issue.
As a matter of fact, we created a Subcommittee on Diversity
and Inclusion, and your Task Force on Artificial Intelligence
works very well with that subcommittee, because actually, you
are going down the same paths, looking at the same issues, and
dealing with what we can do to get rid of injustice and
unfairness. Thank you so very much, and, please, go forward,
and you are the one to do it. Thank you very much. I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Today, we
welcome the testimony of our distinguished witnesses: Stephen
Hayes, a partner at Relman Colfax PLLC; Melissa Koide, the
founder and CEO of FinRegLab; Lisa Rice, the president and CEO
of the National Fair Housing Alliance; Kareem Saleh, the
founder of FairPlay AI; and Dave Girouard, the founder and CEO
of Upstart.
Witnesses are reminded that their oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. You should be able to see a timer on your
screen that will indicate how much time you have left, and a
chime will go off at the end of your time. I would ask you to
be mindful of the timer and quickly wrap up your testimony if
you hear the chime so we can be respectful of both the
witnesses' and the task force members' time.
And without objection, your full written statements will be
made a part of the record.
Mr. Hayes, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN F. HAYES, PARTNER, RELMAN COLFAX PLLC

Mr. Hayes. Chairwoman Waters, Chairman Foster, Ranking
Member Gonzalez, and members of the task force, thank you for
giving me the opportunity to testify. My name is Stephen Hayes,
and I am a partner at Relman Colfax, a civil rights law firm.
We have a litigation practice focused on combating
discrimination in housing and lending. We also provide legal
counsel to entities, including counsel on testing algorithms
for discrimination risks. I previously worked at the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB).
Credit markets reflect our nation's history of
discrimination. There are stark gaps in credit access and
disparities in credit scoring and in populations with thin or
no credit histories. There is evidence that some alternative
data and AI-based machine-learning models (ML models) can help
lenders make credit decisions for these groups, and so have the
potential to expand access. Whether that is true in practice
and whether any increases will improve or exacerbate
disparities is a context-specific question. Use of alternative
data and alternative models can also raise serious risks
related to explainability, validity, and, of course,
discrimination.
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair
Housing Act prohibit lending and housing discrimination. They
prohibit intentional discrimination, sometimes called disparate
treatment, as well as an unintentional type of discrimination
called disparate impact. Disparate impact focuses on fair
outcomes. Unlawful disparate impact occurs when: one, a policy
disproportionately harms members of a protected class; two,
either the policy does not advance an interest; or three, there
is a less discriminatory way to serve that interest. And what
that means in practice is that entities should not adopt
policies, like models, that unnecessarily cause disparities.
These frameworks, in particular, disparate impacts,
translate well to lending models, including to ML models. Some
banks have been testing models for discrimination for years,
and, of course, disparities remain in credit markets, and model
fairness alone is not going to solve that problem. But these
programs demonstrate that discrimination testing is possible,
and it can be effective.
As a general matter, the best programs align with legal
principles, so first disparate treatment. The programs ensure
that models don't include protected classes or proxies as
variables, and that the models are accurate across groups,
which is important, but it is insufficient to eliminate
discrimination. The programs include a disparate impact
assessment using the three-step framework that I mentioned
before.
The final step in that framework, minimizing the
disparities caused by models, is key to this process. In the
case of traditional models, this involves substituting
variables in the models with the goal of identifying variations
of models that maintain performance, but that have less
disparate impact, and newer methods exist now that can improve
upon that process for ML models.
Disparate impact testing can benefit businesses and
consumers. It can create more representative training samples
and increase access to credit over time. It can also counteract
the legacies of historic and of existing discrimination. These
tests are also paired with more holistic measures, like fair
lending training for modelers, ensuring that teams have diverse
backgrounds, reviewing policies within which models operate,
and monitoring areas of discussion.
Finally, banks are expected to comply with agency model
risk guidance, which is meant to help mitigate safety and
soundness risks. And these principles are not focused on
discrimination, but they can help facilitate discrimination
testing because they create an audit trail for models, and they
help establish monitoring systems for models.
In my experience, many companies understand that models can
perpetuate discrimination, and they don't want to use
discriminatory models. But at the same time, discrimination
testing is very uneven, and oftentimes nonexistent, which is
the result of legal and structural background characteristics
that incentivize testing in some areas, but not in others.
Policymakers can take steps to ensure more uniform and
effective testing. First, agencies like the CFPB can routinely
test models for discrimination, including assessing whether
less discriminatory models exist.
Second, agencies should announce the methodologies that
they use to test models, and they should encourage adoption of
discrimination-specific model risk principles.
And third, agencies should clarify that discrimination,
including unnecessary disparate impact, is illegal across
markets outside of traditional areas like credit and housing.
Thank you for considering my testimony today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hayes can be found on page
34 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you. Ms. Koide, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MELISSA KOIDE, FOUNDER AND CEO, FINREGLAB

Ms. Koide. Thank you so much, Chairman Foster. Good
afternoon. And thank you, Chairwoman Waters, Ranking Member
McHenry, Ranking Member Gonzalez, and the entire AI Task Force.
My name is Melissa Koide, and I am the founder and CEO of
FinRegLab. FinRegLab is a nonprofit research organization
evaluating the use of new technologies and data in financial
services to drive greater financial inclusion.
FinRegLab has focused on the use of alternative financial
data and machine learning algorithms in credit underwriting
because credit not only helps bridge short-term gaps, but it is
critical for enabling longer-term investments for families and
homes, education and small business.
The credit system, as we all realize, reflects and
influences the ability of families and small businesses to
participate in the broader economy, yet I think we also realize
that about 20 percent of adults in the U.S. lack a sufficient
credit history to be scored under the most widely-used models.
Another 30 percent have struggled to access affordable credit
because their scores were non-prime. Communities of color and
low-income populations are substantially more likely to be
affected. Nearly 30 percent of African Americans and Hispanics
cannot be scored under traditional means compared to 16 percent
of Whites and Asians.
Our work at FinRegLab directly intersects with the task
force's inquiry into ways to safely harness the power of AI and
data to increase opportunity, equity, and inclusiveness.
FinRegLab's first empirical research evaluated cash flow data
as a means to risk-assess underserved people in small
businesses for credit. We found cash flow data has substantial
potential to increase credit inclusion.
Our latest project, launched last month, focuses on machine
learning algorithms and their use in credit underwriting. We
are empirically evaluating the capability and performance of
diagnostic tools that seek to explain machine learning
underwriting models with respect to reliability, fairness, and
transparency.
Financial services providers have begun using machine
learning models in a variety of contexts because of the
potential to increase the prediction accuracy. There are many
ways AI and machine learning may be beneficial for consumers
and small businesses, but the technology could also be
transformational where information gaps and other obstacles
currently heighten the costs and risks of serving particular
populations. Yet, we all realize that the complexity of AI and
machine learning models can make it harder to understand and
manage, and they raise important concerns around exacerbating
historical disparities as well as flaws in the underlying data.
Publicly-available research is limited, but what there is
supports the general predictiveness benefits of machine
learning. Yet, it also suggests the effects of fairness and
inclusion may vary depending upon--and this is important--the
underlying data used. Some sources suggest it can increase
inclusion when used to analyze traditional credit bureau data,
while other studies find mixed or even negative effects when
additional supplemental data source is used. For this reason,
we believe more research is needed to better understand the
effect of machine learning alone and in conjunction with
promising types of financial data.
So, what is happening in the market today? Some banks and
non-banks are beginning to use machine learning algorithms
directly in their underwriting models in order to evaluate
applications for credit cards, and personal auto and small
business loans. They are doing so to improve the credit risk
accuracy, to leverage the speed and efficiency of the
technology, and to keep up with competitors. Yet, while
interest in machine learning is increasing, there are
fundamental questions about the ability to diagnose and manage
these model, and might both have general concerns about
reliability, transparency, fairness, and specific Federal
regulatory requirements that Steve just discussed.
FinRegLab is, therefore, partnering with researchers from
the Stanford Graduate School of Business to evaluate the
performance and the capabilities of explainability tools
designed to help lenders develop and manage machine learning
algorithms in credit underwriting. We will use the Federal
requirements concerning risk model governance, fair lending,
and adverse action disclosures as a starting point, but expect
that our research may be useful to address broader questions
about machine learning reliability and the use of diagnostic
tools for managing algorithmic decisions in a range of
contexts.
In addition to focusing on the machine learning
explainability, we intend to continue to study the role of
alternative financial data, both alone and in conjunction with
AI and machine learning, to foster greater financial inclusion.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Koide can be found on page
40 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Koide. Ms. Rice, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes to give an oral presentation of
your testimony.

STATEMENT OF LISA RICE, PRESIDENT AND CEO, NATIONAL FAIR
HOUSING ALLIANCE

Ms. Rice. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member Gonzalez, and
members of the task force, thank you so much for inviting me to
testify at today's hearing. The National Fair Housing Alliance
is the country's only national civil rights agency dedicated
solely to eliminating all forms of housing and lending
discrimination, and this includes eliminating bias- and
algorithmic-based systems used in housing and financial
services through our recently-launched Tech Equity Initiative.
How AI systems are designed, the data used to build them,
the subjective renderings applied by the scientist creating the
models, and other issues, can cause discrimination, create or
further entrench structural inequality, and deny people
critical opportunities. On the other hand, innovations in the
area of artificial intelligence have the potential to reduce
discriminatory outcomes and help millions of people. Much as
scientists used the coronavirus to develop lifesaving vaccines,
we can use AI to detect, diagnose, and cure harmful
technologies that are extremely detrimental to people in
communities.
We have biased AI systems because the data used to build
the models is deeply flawed. Technicians developing the systems
are not educated about how technology can render discriminatory
outcomes, and regulators are not equipped to sufficiently
handle the myriad manifestations of bias generated by the
technologies we use in financial services and housing. Let's
start with the data.
The building blocks for algorithmic tools are tainted data
that is embedded with bias generated from centuries of
discrimination. Not only are we building systems with biased
data, but oftentimes datasets are underinclusive and not
representative of underserved groups. As a result, for example,
traditional credit scoring systems, as you just heard Melissa
say, oftentimes cannot see the behavior of consumers that are
not represented in the data. This is why communities of color
are disproportionately credit invisible or inaccurately scored.
For example, in Detroit, Michigan, almost 40 percent of Black
adults are credit invisible. This pattern is common throughout
our nation.
So, how do these consumers access quality credit
opportunities, rent apartments, obtain affordable insurance, or
access other important opportunities necessary for people to
lead productive lives? Technology does not have to be biased.
There are mechanisms for producing fair systems, and I will
mention just a few. One method of de-biasing tech is to
integrate the review of racial and other forms of bias into
every phase of the algorithm's life cycle, including data
selection, development, deployment, and monitoring. The
European Union's newly-proposed regulation for AI offers one
way of addressing this issue. It creates a risk-based framework
that considers technologies, like credit scoring, as a high-
risk category because of the grave impact it has on people's
lives. The proposal holds high-risk models to a higher standard
and incorporates a review for discrimination risk in all
aspects of the algorithm life cycle.
To help de-bias tech, all AI stakeholders, including
regulators, scientists, engineers, and more, should be trained
on fair housing and fair lending issues. Trained professionals
are better able to identify red flags and design solutions for
de-biasing tech. In fact, recent innovations in building fair
tech have come from AI experts trained on issues of fairness.
Increasing diversity will also lead to better outcomes for
consumers. Research shows that diverse teams are more
innovative and productive. Moreover, in several instances, it
has been people of color working in the field who are able to
identify potentially discriminatory AI systems.
I will close by calling out the need for the creation of a
publicly-available dataset to be used for research and
educational purposes. Congress should encourage the release of
more loan-level data from the National Mortgage Survey and the
national mortgage databases so researchers, advocacy groups,
and the public can study bias in housing and finance markets
and, in particular, as it may relate to AI systems.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Rice can be found on page 55
of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Ms. Rice. Mr. Saleh, you are
now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KAREEM SALEH, FOUNDER AND CEO, FAIRPLAY

Mr. Saleh. Thank you, Chairwoman Waters, Chairman Foster,
Ranking Member Gonzalez, and members of the task force, for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Kareem Saleh, and I am
the founder and CEO of FairPlay, the world's first fairness-as-
a-service company. I have witnessed firsthand the extraordinary
potential of AI algorithms to increase access to credit and
opportunity, but I have also seen the risks these algorithms
pose to many Americans. If we are to fully harness the benefits
of AI, we must commit to building infrastructure that embeds
fairness in every step of the algorithm decisioning process.
Despite the passage of the fair lending laws almost 50
years ago, people of color and other historically-
underprivileged groups are still denied loans at an alarming
rate. The result is a persistent wealth gap and fewer
opportunities for minority families and communities to create a
prosperous future.
Why are we still so deeply unfair? The truth is that the
current methods of bias detection in lending are completely
unsuited to the AI era. Even though lending has become AI-
powered and automated, fair lending compliance is stuck in the
analog past.
So how can we bring fair lending compliance into the 21st
Century? We must give lenders the tools and guidance they need
to increase fairness without putting their businesses at risk.
Today, lenders are required to measure and remediate bias in
their credit decisioning systems. If, say, Black applicants are
approved at materially lower rates than White applicants,
lenders must evaluate whether this disparity is justified by a
business necessity or determine whether the lender's objectives
could be met by a less discriminatory alternative. It is at
this stage, the search for alternatives and the invocation of
business justifications, where our current fair lending system
has the greatest potential to evolve.
The way most lenders search for less discriminatory models
involves taking credit scores out of an algorithm, re-running
it, and evaluating the differences in outcomes for protected
groups. This method almost always results in a fairer model,
but also a less profitable one. This puts lenders in a catch-
22. They would like to be fair, but they would also like to
stay in business, plus there is no guidance on what constitutes
an appropriate tradeoff between profitability and fairness,
creating uncertainty for lenders about how to meet regulatory
requirements. Worse still, lenders fear that the very act of
trying to find a fairer, better means of underwriting or
pricing loans could be used against them as evidence they knew
their algorithms were biased to begin with.
Faced with this problem, most lenders opt for safety,
writing explanations for the use of unfair models instead of
searching for alternatives that may yield fairer results. The
upshot is that fair lending compliance has become an exercise
in justifying unfairness rather than an opportunity to increase
inclusion.
Today, a better, fairer option exists, using AI fairness
tools to de-bias algorithms without sacrificing profitability.
Several AI techniques allow lenders to take a variable, like
credit score, and disentangle its predictive power from its
disparity-driving effects. In many instances, these AI fairness
tools have increased approval rates for protected groups
anywhere from 10 to 30 percent without increasing risk.
Of course, industry will need support in order to fully
embrace the benefits of AI fairness. Here, Congress and
regulators can play an important role by ensuring that fairness
testing is being done by more lenders more often, applied to
their underwriting, pricing, marketing, and collections models,
and includes a robust search for less discriminatory
alternatives.
In addition, policymakers should ease the fear of liability
for lenders who commit to thoroughly searching for disparities
and less discriminatory alternatives, to reward rather than
punish those who proactively look for fairer systems.
Regulators can provide guidance on how lenders should view the
tradeoffs between profitability and fairness, and set
expectations for what lenders should do if disparities are
identified.
To bring fairness to AI decisions, we must build the
fairness infrastructure of the future, not justify the
discrimination of the past. Using AI de-biasing tools, we can
embed fairness into the algorithmic decisions to promote
opportunity for all Americans while allowing financial
institutions to reap the rewards of a safe and inclusive
approach. If we prioritize fairness, the machines we build will
follow.
Thank you. I am happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Saleh can be found on page
69 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Mr. Saleh. Mr. Girouard, you
are now recognized for 5 minutes to give us an oral
presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF DAVE GIROUARD, CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, UPSTART

Mr. Girouard. Chairwoman Waters, Chairman Foster, Ranking
Member Gonzalez, and members of the Task Force on Artificial
Intelligence, thank you for the opportunity to participate in
today's conversation. My name is Dave Girouard, and I am co-
founder and CEO of Upstart, a leading artificial intelligence
lending platform headquartered in San Mateo, California, and
Columbus, Ohio.
I founded Upstart more than 9 years ago in order to improve
access to affordable credit through application of modern
technology and data science. In the last 7 years, our bank and
credit union partners have originated more than $9 billion in
high-quality consumer loans using our technology, about half of
which were made to low- and moderate-income borrowers. Our AI-
based system combines billions of cells of training data with
machine learning algorithms to more accurately determine an
applicant's creditworthiness.
As a company entirely focused on improving access to
affordable credit for the American consumer, fairness and
inclusiveness are issues we care about deeply. The opportunity
for AI-based lending to improve access to credit for the
American consumer is dramatic, but equally dramatic is the
opportunity to reduce disparities and inequities that exist in
the traditional credit scoring system.
In the early days at Upstart, we conducted a retroactive
study of a large credit bureau, and we uncovered a jarring pair
of statistics: just 45 percent of Americans have access to bank
quality credit, yet 83 percent of Americans have never actually
defaulted on a loan. That is not what we would call fair
lending. The FICO score was introduced in 1989 and has since
become the default way banks judge a loan applicant, but, in
reality, FICO is extremely limited in its ability to predict
credit performance because it is narrow in scope and inherently
backward-looking. And as consumer protection groups, such as
the National Consumer Law Center, have highlighted, for the
past 2 decades, study after study has found that African-
American and Latino communities have lower credit scores as a
group than White borrowers.
At Upstart, we use modern technology and data science to
find more ways to prove that consumers are indeed creditworthy,
to bridge that 45 percent versus 83 percent gap. We believe
that consumers are more than their credit scores, and going
beyond the FICO score and including a wide variety of other
information, such as a consumer's employment history and
educational background, results in significantly more accurate
and inclusive credit modeling. While most people believe a more
accurate credit model means saying, ``no'' to more applicants,
the truth is just the opposite. Accurately identifying the
small fraction of borrowers who are unlikely to be able to
repay a loan is a better outcome for everyone. It leads to
significantly higher approval rates and lower interest rates
than a traditional model, especially for underserved
demographic groups, such as Black and Hispanic applicants.
Since our early days, skeptics have asked whether AI models
will hold up in a down economy. The tragedy of the COVID
pandemic, where unemployment rose from 4 percent to more than
14 percent in just a few weeks, required that we prove our
mettle, and, in fact, we did just that. Despite the elevated
level of unemployment, the pandemic had no material impact on
the performance of Upstart-powered loans held by our bank
holders. With the support of a more accurate credit model
powered by AI, our bank and credit union partners can have the
confidence to lend regardless of the state of the economy.
Imagine banks lending consistently and responsibly just when
credit is needed most. That is an outcome for which we can all
cheer.
The concern that AI in credit decisioning could replicate
or even amplify human bias is well-founded. We have understood
since our inception that strong consumer protection laws,
including the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, help ensure that
good intentions are actually matched by good outcomes. This is
especially true when it comes to algorithmic lending. For these
reasons and more, we proactively met with the appropriate
regulator, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, well
before launching our company. Quite simply, we decided to put
independent oversight into the equation. After significant
good-faith efforts, starting in 2015, between Upstart and the
CFPB to determine the proper way to measure bias in AI models,
we demonstrated that our AI-driven model doesn't result in an
unlawful disparate impact against protected classes of
consumers.
Because AI models change and improve over time, we
developed automated tests with the regulator's input to test
every single applicant on our platform for bias, and we provide
the results of these tests to the CFPB on a quarterly basis.
In September 2017, we received the first no-action letter
from the CFPB recognizing that Upstart's platform improves
access to affordable credit without introducing unlawful bias.
Thus far, we have been able to report to the CFPB that our AI-
based system significantly improved access to credit.
Specifically, the Upstart model approves 32 percent more
consumers and lowers interest rates by almost 3\1/2\ percentage
points compared to a traditional model. For near prime
consumers, our model approves 86 percent more consumers and
reduces their interest rates by more than 5 percentage points
compared to a traditional model.
Upstart's model also provides approval rates and lower
interest rates for every traditionally-underserved demographic.
For example, over the last 3 years, the Upstart model helped
banks that use Upstart approve 34 percent more Black borrowers
than a traditional model would have, with 4-percentage-point
lower interest rates. That is the type of consumer benefit we
should all get excited about.
I apologize that I am running long, so I will be happy to
just cut it here if that is what the committee would prefer.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Girouard can be found on
page 30 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Mr. Girouard, for your
testimony.
The Chair will now recognize himself for 5 minutes for some
questions.
One big prerequisite to racial and gender equity is
socioeconomic integration. Minorities and traditionally-
disenfranchised individuals should have the same access to
communities with quality schools, banks, grocery stores, and
other community staples, all of which stem from where they are
able to work and live. Additionally, socioeconomically-
integrated communities foster a greater sense of understanding
and tolerance across people from different walks of lives and
experiences. So to that end, I am interested in exploring how
AI, as well as optimally-designed subsidies, can help improve
socioeconomic integration.
There are many possibilities on how to proceed. For
example, one might decide to subsidize investments in
communities that have historically suffered from redlining, but
if those communities have subsequently gentrified, then blanket
subsidies in those areas might not be justified, so a broader
set of data would be needed.
Or perhaps we should just acknowledge that there are many
situations where there is an essential tradeoff between
fairness and profitability, so we should explicitly subsidize
lenders to adopt a more fair model while retaining the power of
AI to identify the most promising loans to subsidize. For
example, there is a program in Ottawa, Canada, that has been
using AI to identify areas undergoing gentrification or
disinvestment by analyzing home improvements that are visible
by Google Earth and satellite images. This sort of technology
might be showing where we are gaining or losing socioeconomic
integration and where subsidies might be appropriate.
My question is for, I guess, all of the witnesses here. If
our goals are not only to eliminate unfairness going forward,
but also to correct for past unfairness, what sort of changes
to the objective functions or explicit subsidies would we want
to optimize an AI program to measure and reward socioeconomic
integration and other things that we are interested in
promoting? You can take it in any order you want.
Ms. Rice. I can kick it off. One of the things that we have
been championing, Chairman Foster, is the building and
development of a really robust publicly-available dataset for
research purposes and to help fashion technology that is more
fair. What we are finding is that a lot of discrimination and
biases that we are seeing in AIs that we use are not just in
financial services and housing, but in every area--criminal
justice, education, employment, et cetera. One of the
challenges is that the datasets upon which the models are used
are extremely flawed and insufficient. They are
underrepresentative.
So, if we can build more robust datasets, we can even use
synthetic data so we don't have to use completely pure original
data that may raise privacy concerns. But if we had more robust
datasets, not only could we ensure that we are building better
models that are less discriminatory and that provide more
socioeconomic benefits for everyone in our society, but it
would also give us better tools for a better foundation for
diagnosing different forms of discrimination and building more
accurate tools for rooting out discrimination in algorithmic-
based systems.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. Does anyone else want to take
on the sort of optimal subsidy part of the question?
Mr. Saleh. Congressman, I will say that our experience
working in emerging markets is that if you can provide some
sort of credit enhancement for lenders to incentivize them to
lend into these subpopulations that are not well-represented in
the data, you can both give people a bridge to being scorable
in the future, and also incentivize the creation of a more
robust corpus of data that is truly representative of the
ability and willingness of some of these historically-
underprivileged communities to pay back loans. So, I endorse
very much the comments Lisa made, and I think that we should
look at credit enhancement programs for lenders to incentivize
exactly the kind of lending development you are talking about.
Ms. Rice. Yes. And Kareem's statement just reminded me that
Canada has a program that does that. They actually subsidize,
on the insurance base, consumers who get declined from the
voluntary market, and so there is a subsidy program to provide
insurance for those consumers. And it has actually helped build
a more robust dataset, and we can provide more information
about that later.
Chairman Foster. Yes, thank you. I think this is a very
important area to pursue, to really use AI to promote what we
want instead of just looking at it to prevent it from acting
badly.
I now recognize the ranking member of the task force, Mr.
Gonzalez of Ohio, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Thank you, Chairman Foster. Mr.
Girouard, I want to start with you. I find your testimony and
your entire business model, frankly, to be inspiring and
interesting in so many ways. But I am curious as to how
scalable the process was with the CFPB from the very beginning,
because I think one concern I have is that the CFPB, or any
other entity, might not be able to handle, say, 100 companies,
Mr. Girouard, sort of what you guys did.
So I guess my first question would be, from a structure
standpoint, how did you go about approaching the CFPB from the
beginning, because you sort of embedded compliance in the very
beginning, which makes perfect sense. But I am curious how that
all played out, how that evolved, and whether or not you think
whatever program you used could handle, let's say, 100 Upstarts
if we ever got to that point. So, I will just kind of turn it
over to you to comment on that.
Mr. Girouard. Sure. Thank you, Congressman. First of all, I
will say one thing, which is that the Equal Credit Opportunity
Act actually is quite useful. You might think of it like old
legislation from decades ago being irrelevant today or just not
keeping up with the times, but it actually does, to a large
extent. It works and it can be implemented. But, of course,
there is some ambiguity when you get into sort of algorithmic
lending and such.
So, we introduced ourselves to the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB) before we ever launched as a company
because we were naive. People told us, you shouldn't go talk to
the regulators, just sort of hide out, but we didn't believe
that was the right path, so we introduced ourselves, and told
them what we were hoping to achieve. And after years of good
work, we got what is termed a no-action letter, which basically
means trying to provide some clarity where there is ambiguity
in the regulation. That, of course, is not a scalable path for
anybody.
And we also necessarily took on a bit of risk in our early
days because we didn't know what the outcomes of our models
would be, but we were a startup, so we had the capacity to take
on that risk. The reality is, if there is going to be a path
forward where these tools are broadly used, and used in a
responsible manner where they do not introduce bias, they do
improve credit outcomes, it is going to require some form of
legislation or rulemaking to standardize how testing is done.
We have sort of done that one-off, but it is really not
scalable to the larger industry, which is, I think, what is
necessary.
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Yes, I couldn't agree more, and I
would love to follow up with you--I only have 3\1/2\ minutes
left--to get your ideas on what that might look like because I
think it is really important.
Ms. Koide, I want to move to you. We know that bank
regulators are increasingly open to new kinds of underwriting
as a driver for more inclusive lending and even for sounder
lending. The agencies put out a joint statement on this. The
CFPB provided the no-action letter with Upstart, as we all
know. What are the obstacles to industry adoption of these new
models? Is it mostly regulatory risk, or technological or
cultural, or something else, and what else could be done to
sort of clear the obstacles?
Ms. Koide. Yes, thank you for the question. We have been
quite focused in providing some of the empirical analysis on
alternative financial data cash flow information. And to
clarify here, it is transaction data that you can see in a bank
account and, importantly, even a prepaid card transaction
product which we have greater coverage, especially among
underserved communities and populations in terms of bank and
prepaid access as compared to credit records and histories. And
that research, I think, helped to inform the regulators'
awareness. They had been thinking about alternative data for a
while as well, but, nevertheless, providing that kind of
research and empirical insight, I think, helped to inform the
steps that the regulators took jointly to issue that statement.
There are, nevertheless, important questions around using
new types of data in underwriting, and more generally as well.
They extend from, how are we ensuring consumer permission
information is able to flow--we have Section 1033 under the
Dodd-Frank Act, for which we do not have rules written that
would articulate that process and the data that would be then
flowing under that authority--to how adverse action notices are
ultimately sufficiently responded to? If you are going to be
extending credit to somebody that is different from what they
expected to receive or under different terms than they
expected, you have to explain it. And I think articulating
those explanations to consumers are areas where the industry
has continued to think about, how do they provide those kinds
of explanations in a way that is comfortable for consumers and
responsive to [inaudible].
Mr. Gonzalez of Ohio. Great. Thank you so much, and I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and I will now recognize the
Chair of the Full Committee, Chairwoman Waters, for 5 minutes.
Chairwoman Waters. Thank you so very much. This will be
directed to Ms. Rice and Mr. Hayes. The Equal Credit
Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act prohibit
discrimination for protected classes in the extension of credit
in housing. Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve, the FDIC,
the OCC, the NCUA, and the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
sent out a request to financial institutions and other
stakeholders on how AI and ML are being used in the financial
services space, and how these activities conform with these
laws. Additionally, the Federal Trade Commission issued a
separate guidance that racial or gender bias in AI can prompt
law enforcement action.
Ms. Rice and Mr. Hayes, are these Federal agencies doing
enough to ensure that existing loans prevent bias and
discrimination or providing sufficient accountability for
disparate impacts that can result from the use of AI models?
What should they be doing? Ms. Rice?
Ms. Rice. Chairwoman Waters, thank you so much for the
question. The National Fair Housing Alliance is currently
working with all of those institutions and all of those Federal
agencies that you have just named on the issue of AI fairness.
And one of the challenges that we face is that the institutions
themselves don't necessarily have sufficient staff and
resources in order to effectively diagnose AI systems, detect
discrimination, and generate mechanisms and solutions for
overcoming bias.
As an example, financial services institutions have been
using credit scoring systems, automated underwriting systems,
risk-based pricing systems for decades, right? And we are now
finding out, in part by using AI tools, that these systems have
been generating bias for decades and decades, but for all of
these years, the financial regulators were really not able to
detect the deep level of bias ingrained in these systems. So,
we really have to support the Federal regulatory agencies, make
sure they are educated, make sure they are well-equipped so
that they can do an efficient job, not only working with
financial services institutions, but also to make their systems
more fair.
Chairwoman Waters. Let me interrupt you here for a minute,
Ms. Rice and Mr. Hayes. We would like this information brought
to us because when we talk about the longstanding biases, we
should be on top of fighting for resources and insisting that
the agencies have what they need to deal with it. And because
they are embedded now, it is because we have not done
everything we could do to make sure that they are equipped to
do what they needed to do to avoid and to get rid of these
biases. So, we want the information. We want you guys to bring
the information to us so that we can now legislate and we can
go after the funds that are needed. I thank you for continuing
to work on these issues, but I want you to bring that
information to us so we can do some legislation.
Mr. Hayes, do you have anything else to add to this?
Mr. Hayes. I completely agree with Lisa. I am hearing what
you are saying. I think that is a great idea. I say the
agencies have been in learning mode for a few years, and now it
is actually time to provide more guidance on how you should
test AI models. I think industry is ready for that. We are
ready for that. We would like to help inform that process, but
I do think now is the time for some more generally applicable
guidance and action in this space.
Chairwoman Waters. I think that Mr. Foster would welcome
additional information, as would other Members of Congress,
including me, the Chair of this Financial Services Committee,
because we cannot just wait, wait, wait, and tell the agencies
to do better. We have to force them to do better. And enforcing
them to do better means that we understand where the biases
are, and we actually legislate and we tell the agencies what
they have to do.
So, I am so pleased about this hearing today. And I am so
pleased about the leadership of Mr. Foster. But this is a
moment in history for us to deal with getting rid of
discrimination and biases in lending and housing and all of
this, and so help us. Help us out. Don't just go to them. Come
to us and tell us what we need to do. Is that okay?
Thank you very much. I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. And I just
wanted to say that if any of the Members or the witnesses are
interested in sort of hanging around informally after the close
of the hearing--it is something that we often do with in-person
hearings, and we are happy to try to duplicate that in the
online era here.
And the Chair will now recognize the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate
having another very intriguing hearing on a very important
matter here, especially as we adopt newer technologies in the
financial services sector.
Last year, the FDIC issued a request for information
regarding standard setting and voluntary certification for
technology providers. The idea was to have a voluntary
certification program to streamline the process for banks and
credit unions to partner with third-party FinTech and AI
providers. The proposal is intriguing to me because when I met
with both financial institutions and technology providers, one
of their biggest concerns with the current regulatory
requirements is that it takes an enormous amount of time and
due diligence every time they want to form a partnership. I
believe streamlining the onboarding process is an important
step toward encouraging these type of partnerships.
Mr. Girouard: what are your thoughts on this issue?
Mr. Girouard. Yes, this is a really important issue. We
tend to serve community banks, smaller banks which are often
struggling to compete with the larger banks that have a lot
more technical resources and people they put against the
diligence they are required to do to use any type of third-
party technology in their business. And if you are Wells Fargo,
or Chase, or PNC, you can spend all day and millions of dollars
evaluating technology solutions. But if you are a community
bank, that is not possible.
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Mr. Girouard. I think if you want to even the playing
field, if you want to keep the smaller banks alive, valid in
the communities they serve, you need to make it easier for them
to adopt technology. And that doesn't mean sort of foregoing
the evaluations or the prudence that you need to responsibly
adopt it. It just means allowing them to essentially put their
efforts together on some sort of standard that would allow
small banks across the country to keep up with all the
investment going on in the top handful of banks out there.
Mr. Loudermilk. So if we were able to streamline the
ability to form these partnerships, would that benefit
consumers by expanding the FinTech and AI products?
Mr. Girouard. Oh, for sure. Every month or so, we turn on
another community bank who suddenly offers attractively-priced
products with higher approval rates, lower interest rates, in
their communities, and it is happening regularly. But,
honestly, it is just the tip of the iceberg. The opportunity is
so much larger, and most banks, frankly, just don't have those
kinds of resources. This is a process that can take 6 months.
You can go through hundreds of hours of meetings and
discussions. You have your regulator come in that you talk to,
whether it is the FDIC, the OCC, et cetera. There is this
incredible process that most banks just don't have the time and
resources to take on, so it just gets sidelined.
Mr. Loudermilk. Another topic that I have brought up in
these hearings before is dealing with the issue of bias. We
need to recognize the difference between what types of bias we
want to have in AI versus those that need to be rooted out.
Obviously, you have to have a level of bias to discriminate
against those who can and cannot pay a loan back. Not all types
of biases are bad. If you think about it, the whole purpose of
using AI in loan underwriting is to be biased against those who
are unable to repay a loan, or at least identify those who have
the dataset that would say these folks are unlikely to pay a
loan, or even just to set an interest rate. At the same time,
algorithms obviously should not contain bias that is based on
factors that are irrelevant to the actual creditworthiness of
the borrower, like race, or gender, or any other factor.
Mr. Girouard, do you agree that we need to be careful not
to eliminate all bias in AI, but, rather, we should be working
to eliminate the types of bias that really don't belong there?
Mr. Girouard. Congressman, perhaps it is a bit of
semantics, but we believe that bias is always wrong. Accuracy
in a credit model is what we seek. And giving a loan to
somebody who is going to fail to pay it back is not doing any
good for them, so, of course, wanting to lend to people who
have the capacity to pay it back is always our goal. But we
don't view an accurate credit model or making offers of credit
as good as possible for people who are likely to pay it back in
any sense biased against everybody else. It is really just
accuracy in predicting and understanding who has the capacity
to repay.
Mr. Loudermilk. And maybe it is semantics, but what we are
looking at is for AI to look at data, just hard data,
regardless of any other demographic factor, just looking at the
creditability of the borrower. And I see that as a technical
term as a level of bias just to be able to determine, is this
person able to pay back the loan in the amount that they are
borrowing or are they not? Set all that other stuff aside. That
is really what we want AI to be able to do, not look at race,
or gender, or any of those factors. Just, are they of the
income level, do they have the credit history, do they have a
history of paying back loans, et cetera? That is really what we
are trying to get to, correct?
Mr. Girouard. It is true that we are trying to have an
accurate model that will lend to people who can pay it back,
and we constantly strive to make our model more accurate
because when we do that, it tends to approve more people at
lower rates, and it actually disproportionately improves more
underserved people--Black Americans, the Hispanic community--so
that is all good. But having said that, my thorough belief is
that you need a supervisory system, a separate system that
watches and makes sure that we are not introducing bias.
Mr. Loudermilk. I agree, and I appreciate your answer. And
I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlewoman from Massachusetts, Ms. Pressley, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pressley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this
task force hearing, and to each of our witnesses for their
testimony. Last year, I had the opportunity to ask the former
CFPB Director about a practice that remains a serious concern
to me: the use of information about people's education,
including where they went to college, when making decisions
about access to credit and the cost of credit. An investigation
by consumer advocates shows that the artificial intelligence
lending company, Upstart, was charging customers who went to
Historically Black Colleges and Universities more money for
student loans than customers who went to other schools, holding
all else equal. Now, I know Upstart has vigorously denied these
allegations, but I have here the first report prepared by Mr.
Hayes and his colleagues as a part of a settlement the company
reached with the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and the Student
Borrower Protection Center.
On page 23, it appears to say that Upstart made significant
changes to its business model after coming under fire for its
lending practices. I will certainly be watching closely see if
Mr. Hayes' firm can independently verify that these changes
actually address the disturbing effects of Upstart's approach
to lending. It is hard to imagine a practice that better
illustrates the deep and lasting legacy of systemic racism in
American higher education than educational redlining. That is
why I was so troubled to see that yet another FinTech lender
that uses AI, a company called Stride Funding, was engaged in
what sounds like the very same discriminatory practices as
Upstart. Mr. Hayes, should we be worried that these practices
are driving racial inequality and leading to disparate outcomes
for former students?
Mr. Hayes. Thank you, Representative. I will say as a
general matter, every time you use data in a model, part of the
reason for using that data is to replicate some patterns in
that data, and we also know that there are disparities in our
education system. As you pointed out, they are with respect to
race, national origin, and sex. Those could be replicated if
you use that data model that is risk. It is not inevitable.
There are lots of ways to use data to design models so that you
don't do that.
Our role in the Upstart and Student Borrower Protection
Center matters was as an independent monitor, so I don't have
views at this point about whether that has happened, whether
those reports are accurate or not. That is part of our charge
as an independent monitor. I think it is a risk. It is one that
should be guarded against, and I think any company that uses
this type of data should be very careful with it and test its
intuition.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. So, Mr. Hayes, how can Congress and
financial regulators ensure that complex algorithms and machine
learning [inaudible] have skewered the disparate and illegal
impact of these lending practices? What can we do?
Mr. Hayes. That is a great question. I will say as an
initial matter, there is a [inaudible] in AI and ML models, and
some of them are quite difficult to explain, or may be
impossible to explain. Others are not. Others are explainable.
And as an initial matter, if an institution cannot explain its
model, why it is reaching certain conclusions, it should be
very hesitant or maybe not use it at all for important
decisions. I think that is pretty key.
This goes also back to the point that Chairwoman Waters had
made. I think it is a great opportunity for the CFPB to come in
and start actively testing some of these models, to test some
of these intuitions, to test if these risks are real. That is a
role it can play. As an outside advocate, there is only so much
you can do with the model. It takes an agency with supervisory
authority to really help institutions understand how their
models work and make sure they are not going to violate the
law.
Ms. Pressley. Okay. Thank you. These patterns are certainly
very disturbing, and it seems that people have not learned from
Upstart's errors. The discrimination against students who have
gone to HBCUs and minority-serving institutions exacerbates the
disproportionate burden of student loans on Black Americans and
perpetuates economic discrimination. If the use of AI in
lending is to continue and expand in the financial services
sector, Congress and Federal regulators must be positioned to
provide proper oversight. And, as I mentioned, I will be
watching closely. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Taylor, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is great to be on
the task force, and I appreciate the opportunity for this
hearing. Ms. Pressley, I certainly hope you won't discriminate
against me for having gone to college and business school in
your district. Since Upstart has been named here, I would love
to give the CEO an opportunity to respond to that question set.
Mr. Girouard. Sure. Thank you. And, Congresswoman, I
certainly appreciate your concern, but I will say, first and
foremost, I have dedicated my career to improving access to
credit, and I stand proud with what we have accomplished and
how we have done it. The use of education data, without
question, improves access to credit for Black Americans, for
Hispanic Americans, for almost any demographic that you can
speak to. Our models aren't perfect, but they certainly are not
discriminatory.
We had a disagreement with the Student Borrower Protection
Center, and their conclusions, in our view, were inaccurate.
Having said that, we very willingly began to work with them and
to engage with them to figure out, are there ways we can make
even more improvements to our testing and to our methodology,
and we continue to do that, as well as with the NAACP Legal
Defense Fund. So, I think Upstart has demonstrated good faith
in trying to improve credit access for all and to do it in a
fair way that is working proactively with regulators, is here
working with lawmakers, and we will work with consumer
advocates if they want to. We have nothing to hide, and
frankly, we are proud of the effort we are making to improve
access to credit for Americans.
Mr. Taylor. Ms. Pressley, do you want to ask a follow up? I
would be happy to yield the floor to you to ask a follow up to
Mr. Girouard, or I can continue on with my questioning.
[No response.]
Mr. Taylor. Okay. So, Mr. Girouard, I really appreciate
what you are doing. I think you have an impressive model, and
it is amazing to see the application of AI in the way you have
done it. How do you source your loans? Are you doing those
directly or are you doing those through traditional banking
platforms?
Mr. Girouard. Borrowers come either to Upstart through our
brand and recognizing our marketing efforts to say, come here
and you can get a better loan than you can get elsewhere. They
can also come directly through our bank partners. There are
more than 15 banks on our platform which also can, using our
technology, offer loans to their own customers. So, they can
find us in many different ways.
Mr. Taylor. How big are your 15 banking partners? Are those
kind of regional banks? Are those G-SIBs? Are those community
banks?
Mr. Girouard. They vary from community banks to credit
unions, and credit unions are, on our platforms, growing quite
quickly.
Mr. Taylor. What is your average loan size?
Mr. Girouard. In the range of $10,000 to $12,000.
Mr. Taylor. Okay. I just want to put this card on the
table--I was on a bank board for 12 years, and I sat on the
loan committee, and so, I was part of approving every loan for
12 years. I can honestly say that never once was credit score
determinative of a loan. To be very honest, in the director
discussions, I would say that credit score didn't come up in
[inaudible] percent of our loan decisions. So, the statement
that you made about it being a primary means of making
decisions at least was antithetical to my own limited
experience. We were one of the 5,000 banks in the United
States, in terms of how we thought about credit. And I will say
that--
Mr. Girouard. I have yet to meet a bank that doesn't have a
minimum credit score requirement for a loan, typically 680 or
something of that nature. So if they are out there, I haven't
met them yet.
Mr. Taylor. Okay. I see where you are coming from. I think
I understand what you are saying. Thank you for that. That just
kind of clarifies where you are coming from in that particular
assessment. But again, I would just say that underwriting
credit is very important, and the other thing is you want to
have costs be lower. The final thing I would say is, if I add a
whole bunch of regulations on UI commerce, doesn't that make it
more expensive for you to do business and then, in turn, force
you to raise your rates?
Mr. Girouard. It depends what that regulation is. A lot of
times regulation can be clarity that actually helps adoption of
the technology--
Mr. Taylor. If I make it more expensive for you to operate,
doesn't that increase the cost of operating?
Mr. Girouard. Oh, by definition, it for sure does,
Congressman.
Mr. Taylor. Okay. Thank you. I just would encourage my
colleagues as we think about this, to make sure that we don't
increase the cost of operating, and then, in turn, lower access
to capital, which I think is our mutual objective. I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair will now recognize
the gentlewoman from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing, and Chairwoman Waters, we appreciate your support
as well. And to the witnesses, thank you for offering your
expertise and your insights.
I am grateful to Representative Pressley for diving into
educational redlining and its harmful impacts on HBCU students
and graduates. Over the past year, we have seen examples of how
using such data and algorithms by lenders could result in
borrowers facing thousands of dollars in additional charges if
they attended a minority-serving institution, like an
Historically Black College or University (HBCU). I am a proud
product of an HBCU, a 2-time graduate of North Carolina A&T,
and a 40-year professor at Bennett College, also an HBCU. And I
do know how invaluable these schools have been to my success,
and their outsized role in the economic and social mobility of
millions of Black people in this country. They play a critical
role in diversifying the workforce, particularly the tech
sector.
Ms. Rice, and Mr. Saleh, we know that AI bias is real. Can
you speak to the importance and value of increasing the
diversity among AI researchers, scientists, and developers to
improve quality of algorithm development and datasets, and how
can we ensure that HBCUs play a greater role in diversifying
the AI pipeline?
Ms. Rice. Congresswoman Adams, thank you so much for that
question. It is critically important. I mentioned earlier that
the National Fair Housing Alliance has launched the Tech Equity
Initiative. One of the major goals of the Tech Equity
Initiative is to increase diversity in the tech field, and one
of the ways of doing that, of course, as you just mentioned, is
partnering with Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC)-
serving financial institutions and HBCUs. I hinted in my
statement that the National Fair Housing Alliance has been
working on tech bias issues since our inception almost 40 years
ago. So, these issues--tech bias, AI algorithmic bias--are not
new. They are just gaining more media attention.
But we have found that as we work with financial services
institutions on the issue of tech bias, and we have been doing
this, again, for almost 40 years, the more these financial
services institutions--lenders, insurance companies, et
cetera--as they diversify their employee base, they yield
better policies that are more inclusive and fair, they also
themselves design better systems that are not only more
accurate, but have less discriminatory outcomes. And
oftentimes, it is because those people of color who are working
inside those institutions can see signs of discrimination. They
can pick up on variables that are being used in the algorithm
and, from their own personal experience, can detect and sort of
understand how those variables can generate a discriminatory
outcome.
I mentioned that a lot of the innovations that we are
seeing in the AI field, a lot of the tech bias that has been
documented has come from scientists like Joy Buolamwini, who is
one of the most noted data scientists in the world. How did she
detect that facial recognition systems were discriminatory?
Because she was working on a project and facial recognition
technology did not work for her Black face.
Ms. Adams. Right. Okay.
Ms. Rice. If she had not been Black, she wouldn't have
noticed that. So, I yield to my colleague, Mr. Saleh.
Ms. Adams. Mr. Saleh?
Mr. Saleh. I don't have much to add to Lisa's excellent
comments. Congresswoman, you are absolutely right. We must do
more to diversify the population of people who are building AI
systems, governing AI systems, and monitoring AI systems. The
technology industry has not been sufficiently good in that
regard.
Ms. Adams. We know that tenant-screening algorithms have
been increasingly employed by landlords, but there is evidence
that algorithms adversely affect Black and Latino renters. For
example, when a Navy veteran named Marco Fernandez returned
from deployment, and was trying to rent a house, the tenant-
screen algorithm [inaudible]. I am going to have to yield back,
Mr. Chairman. Thank you so very much, and thank you to our
guests for your responses.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Hollingsworth, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. I appreciate the Chair, and I certainly
appreciate the ranking member for having this great hearing
today, talking about these very important topics. I certainly
welcome and hope for more diversity in the technology field
writ large, and to find more opportunities for more people to
contribute their great talents to this country. I think that is
what has made us a leader around the world in technology, and I
hope it is what will continue to make us a leader of technology
around the world.
Mr. Girouard, I wanted to talk a little bit about this for
a second. I certainly know that you are a fan of making sure
that your workforces and other workforces are very diverse. But
I also want to recognize the desire that you have for ensuring
that your platform isn't biased in some way, that you make
money by making loans, and if you can find more creditworthy
individuals, no matter what walk of life they come from, no
matter what color their skin, no matter what background they
may have than other potential technologies, then you are better
off because of that. Wouldn't you agree that you are
incentivized to make sure that you find as many opportunities
to make creditworthy loans as possible?
Mr. Girouard. Yes, absolutely. The way my company grows is
the AI models get smarter at identifying who will and won't pay
a loan, and that might seem odd. You might think that could
make you shrink, not grow, but, in reality, millions and
millions of people who are actually creditworthy, in reality
are not recognized as such by a credit score.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Girouard. And that little oddness there means the
better our models get unbalanced, the more people get approved,
and the lower the interest rates are. So, it is a sort of win
for everybody as long as the technology keeps improving, and,
thus far, it has worked well for us.
Mr. Hollingsworth. And I definitely want to get back to,
how do we keep improving the technology, but I just want to hit
this point once again because I think, frequently, it goes
unsaid, that the wind is at your back. The goal is to increase
the number of loans and, frankly, to find opportunities to make
loans where others might not be able to make those loans or may
not find that same opportunity. So it is not as if we are
struggling to hold back a problem, but, instead, the problem
resolution and the market incentive here are working in the
same direction. And I think that is really important for us to
remember because in many other places, they work in opposite
directions.
Second, I want to come back to exactly what you said, which
is, how do we improve this technology over time? How do we
expand the breadth of this technology over time? And I wondered
whether there are stories or narratives or specific points as
to how we might do that, how we as policymakers might empower
you, your cohorts, your colleagues, your counterparts, and,
frankly, the next generation of ``you's'' to develop this
technology and be able to make it mainstream so that we can
empower more Americans, no matter the color of their skin, no
matter their background, to be able to get access to financial
capital.
Mr. Girouard. Yes. First, thank you for the question,
Congressman. I think, first of all, one of the most important
things that could happen, just to provide clarity, we are all
for testing, as you can see. We believe we are leading the
charge on how rigorous testing for bias can be and should be.
And as much as it is probably to our benefit that no one else
figured out how to do it and deploy this technology, it is to
the country's benefit that there is as much of this used
responsibly as possible.
The problem, of course, is that banks are regulated not by
one agency, but by at least four, if not more than that, and
you have State-level regulators as well. So, it is really
difficult for technology like this to get a hold when, even
within one regulator, there is not a consistent opinion. A
supervisor of this bank might say one thing, and a supervisor
of another bank says another thing, so the adoption ends up
being very slow.
There is one other important matter I want to raise, which
is that banks have to worry about consumer protection, et
cetera. But on the other side, they have the bank solvency, the
people who care about whether the bank is going to go out of
business, and these are sometimes at odds because they are
prevented from making loans to what the regulator would
perceive as risky borrowers. So, you have this sort of
governance of banks that is oftentimes in conflict with moving
toward a more equitable, more inclusive lending program. And
that is difficult--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Mr. Girouard, I think that is a great
point and something we really need to hit home. What you are
saying is, we care about the solvency of our financial markets,
the safety, but we also care about the efficiency, and making
sure we don't push one too far in favor of the other is a
really important dynamic going forward. And I think Van Taylor
hit on this, but regulation can both help efficiency, but it
can also hurt efficiency greatly, and making sure we monitor
that is very important. I yield back to the Chair.
Chairman Foster. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes the
gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Auchincloss, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Auchincloss. Thanks, Mr. Chairman, for organizing this
hearing, and to our witnesses for their terrific testimony and
Q&A. Massachusetts has been really on the cutting edge of
artificial intelligence and its use in computational biology,
in insurance, in the provision of legal services, in investing
in real estate, and also in thinking about the regulatory
dimensions.
The Massachusetts State House has formed a Facial
Recognition Commission, led by State Senator, Cindy Creem, in
my district, because of concerns over facial recognition
application. A study from MIT in 2018 found that while accuracy
rates for White men were north of 99 percent with facial
recognition technology, for Black women, it was significantly
less. And, Ms. Rice, this is why I was very happy to hear you
raise this issue.
I was wondering if I could really bring up two questions
with you. The first is concerns you may have on proposed
regulations for the introduction of facial recognition
technology into the setting of housing. We are seeing already
that smart home technology, like Latch, or smart keypads and
Nests are really becoming standard fare, and I don't think it
is very far behind to have cameras that are linked up for
recognition as well. Has this been an area that you have looked
at in regards to housing, and are there safeguards in place?
Ms. Rice. Yes, Congressman. Thank you for the question, and
one other area that we have particularly been focusing on is
the use of facial recognition technology in the area of
financial services. So, for example, more transactions have
been happening in the virtual space, and there is certainly the
opportunity to use facial recognition technology as a fraud
detection mechanism, for example. So, yes, this is an area of
deep and grave concern. It is one of the reasons why we have
been calling for the building and development of more
inclusive, robust datasets in many different areas. One of the
ways that Joy Buolamwini and other data scientists were able to
work with IBM, and Google, and Facebook, et cetera, to help
them improve or lessen the discrimination on their systems was
by building better training datasets.
Mr. Auchincloss. That was actually the second point I
wanted to raise. You have been ahead of me this whole hearing.
You had mentioned earlier in your comments the idea of
synthetic data as a way to buttress training sets. My
understanding for how the original facial recognition training
sets were composed is that the faces were really scraped off of
a lot of media sites and elsewhere, and they were pulling, it
seems like, disproportionately White faces. Has there been work
done, and maybe just describe more how those training sets have
been fixed because, as you say, really the raw data is the core
of undoing bias in the actual outcomes?
Ms. Rice. Yes, and I should have been more specific. I was
sort of myopically focused on financial and housing services in
terms of my reference to a synthetic dataset, publicly-
available dataset, for research and education only. I don't
think we should be building real systems and models using a lot
of synthetic data, so I am sorry I didn't get a chance to make
that distinction.
Mr. Auchincloss. Absolutely. Ms. Koide, maybe you could
weigh in here as well about any oversight that you think is
necessary for facial recognition technology.
Ms. Koide. Thank you for the question. We have been much
more focused on tabular data, data that is being contemplated
or used in credit underwriting. We have not been evaluating
visual recognition data, but it is a great question.
Mr. Auchincloss. Understood. Yes, it is an area that we
have been leaning into in Massachusetts and, I think,
increasingly nationally just because, in some ways, the
technology is both really good and really bad. Really good in
the sense that it has been incredibly effective and has created
some kind of compelling results in its accuracy, but very bad
in the sense that these kinds of biases have snuck through in a
way that, as Ms. Rice pointed out, were not identified for too
long. So, it has been an area of concern for me both at the
State and the Federal level, and I will yield back the balance
of my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you, and I would like to thank all
of our witnesses for their testimony today.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:24 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

May 7, 2021

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
