- DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2016

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2016

_______________________________________________________________________

HEARINGS

BEFORE A

SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
_______

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DEFENSE

RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey, Chairman

KAY GRANGER, Texas                 PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida            BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
KEN CALVERT, California            STEVE ISRAEL, New York
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                 TIM RYAN, Ohio
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas             C.A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama        MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida
TOM GRAVES, Georgia

NOTE: Under Committee Rules, Mr. Rogers, as Chairman of the Full
Committee, and Mrs. Lowey, as Ranking Minority Member of the Full
Committee, are authorized to sit as Members of all Subcommittees.

Rob Blair, Paul Terry, Walter Hearne, Tim Prince,
Brooke Boyer, B G Wright, Adrienne Ramsay, Megan Milam Rosenbusch,
Collin Lee, and Cornell Teague,
Staff Assistants

Sherry L. Young, Administrative Aide
_______

PART 1

Page
FY 2016 Navy / Marine Corps Budget Overview....................       1
FY 2016 Air Force Budget Overview..............................     157
U.S. Africa Command............................................     237
FY 2016 Department of Defense Budget Overview..................     261
FY 2016 National Guard and Reserves............................     343
United States Pacific Command and United States Forces Korea...     449
_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

97-457                     WASHINGTON : 2015

COMMITTEE ON APPROPRIATIONS

----------
HAROLD ROGERS, Kentucky, Chairman

RODNEY P. FRELINGHUYSEN, New Jersey        NITA M. LOWEY, New York
ROBERT B. ADERHOLT, Alabama                MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
KAY GRANGER, Texas                         PETER J. VISCLOSKY, Indiana
MICHAEL K. SIMPSON, Idaho                  JOSE E. SERRANO, New York
JOHN ABNEY CULBERSON, Texas                ROSA L. DeLAURO, Connecticut
ANDER CRENSHAW, Florida                    DAVID E. PRICE, North Carolina
JOHN R. CARTER, Texas                      LUCILLE ROYBAL-ALLARD, California
KEN CALVERT, California                    SAM FARR, California
TOM COLE, Oklahoma                         CHAKA FATTAH, Pennsylvania
MARIO DIAZ-BALART, Florida                 SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia
CHARLES W. DENT, Pennsylvania              BARBARA LEE, California
TOM GRAVES, Georgia                        MICHAEL M. HONDA, California
KEVIN YODER, Kansas                        BETTY McCOLLUM, Minnesota
STEVE WOMACK, Arkansas                     STEVE ISRAEL, New York
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska                 TIM RYAN, Ohio
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida                  C.A. DUTCH RUPPERSBERGER, Maryland
CHARLES J. FLEISCHMANN, Tennessee          DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
JAIME HERRERA BEUTLER, Washington          HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
DAVID P. JOYCE, Ohio                       CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
DAVID G. VALADAO, California               MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
ANDY HARRIS, Maryland                      DEREK KILMER, Washington
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama
MARK E. AMODEI, Nevada
CHRIS STEWART, Utah
E. SCOTT RIGELL, Virginia
DAVID W. JOLLY, Florida
DAVID YOUNG, Iowa
EVAN H. JENKINS, West Virginia
STEVEN M. PALAZZO, Mississippi

William E. Smith, Clerk and Staff Director

(ii)

DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE APPROPRIATIONS FOR 2016

----------

Thursday, February 26, 2015.

FISCAL YEAR 2016 NAVY/MARINE CORPS BUDGET OVERVIEW

WITNESSES

HON. RAY MABUS, SECRETARY, UNITED STATES NAVY
ADMIRAL JONATHAN W. GREENERT, CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS
GENERAL JOSEPH F. DUNFORD, COMMANDANT, UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS

Opening Statement of Chairman Frelinghuysen

Mr. Frelinghuysen. This is a Navy-Marine sort of a day. We
hear through the grapevine that a lot of other hearings have
been canceled, so we want to thank you for making your way
here. We fully expected you would be here, hell or high water.
The committee will come to order. This morning our
subcommittee begins a series of Defense posture and budget
hearings with our military services, our combatant commands and
other major components of our Armed Forces. In this time of
rapidly expanding threats to our national security our goal in
these hearings in our fiscal year 2016 bill is to make sure
that our soldiers, sailors marines, and airmen and their
families have the resources they need to execute their assigned
missions. At the same time in an era of constrained budgets, we
must make every dollar count.
This morning we hold an open hearing on the budget request
for the Department of the Navy. We welcome the leadership of
the Navy and the Marine Corps, the Secretary of the Navy, Ray
Mabus, thank you for being back with us. And for the last time
testifying is the chief of Naval operations, Admiral Jonathan
Greenert. Admiral, thank you for 40 years of service. Let us
give him a round of applause.
It is also my pleasure to welcome back to the committee,
although for the first time in his capacity as a Commandant of
the Marine Corps, General Joe Dunford. Thank you, General, for
being here as well. I am sure I speak for every member of our
subcommittee in thanking you for your valuable service to our
great Nation and for those you command. Of course, we recognize
those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice, those who have been
wounded that we continue to care about. We owe all of you and
all of them a great debt.
Gentlemen, the business at hand is the President's fiscal
year 2016 budget request. Unfortunately, the variable that will
have the biggest impact of your budget next year and for years
to come is not actually part of this request. Unless there is a
dramatic legislative change, the law of the land requires the
Appropriations Committee to mark up bills this year to the
level dictated by the Budget Control Act, the BCA. In the case
of the Department of Defense, I expect our allocation to be
approximately $34 billion below the President's request. Since
this is the first of our hearings, I am going to take a point
of personal privilege to discuss some of my personal views and
what I think are realities facing our Nation.
Today and over the next few weeks, the American people will
be hearing a great deal about the so-called sequester, it is a
concept born decades ago and only revived in recent years.
While it sounds like a lot of procedural jargon to the
taxpayers, the sequester will have serious ramifications for
our troops and our national security. This is precisely why we
will be hearing from our witnesses today and in the weeks to
come about how an additional $34 billion sequester cut next
year will harm our defense capabilities in the era of expanding
threats. And yet, the President is threatening to precipitate
that very sequester by sending up a budget that ignores the
law, the Budget Control Act, which we have to support.
For the record, I agree that the law needs to be modified
to avoid dramatic, negative consequences to our ability to
protect our homeland and to assure our mission around the world
and our support for our allies. But let us also be very clear
that the sequester alone is not the problem here. After all,
the sequester did not create the existing security climate that
reflects indecision, hesitation, or some call it ambivalence in
our defense in foreign policy. The sequester did not create
ISIS. That deprived barbaric force was brewed as a result of
our premature withdrawal from Iraq. The sequester is not
responsible for the over 200,000 deaths in Syria or millions of
refugees throughout the Middle East. The sequester had nothing
to do with the President's public declaration, the United
States was no longer in what he called a war footing. The
sequester did not prompt Vladimir Putin to ignite a new cold
war and brutally violate the sovereignty of his neighbor,
Ukraine. The sequester did not lead us to liberate Libya and
turn our back while that country devolved into a dangerous
breeding ground for terrorists. Sequester did not reduce our
Navy to the smallest number of ships in recent memory nor
create the oldest Air Force in its history, nor threaten to
bring the Army's end strength down to pre-World War II levels.
I recognize that the sequester is a clear threat to our
security. However, we are bound to follow the law until
instructed otherwise. The President's request for the Navy is
approximately $13 billion above the level the Navy would be
allocated under the BCA. So the Department will certainly have
to bear a sizable portion of any reduction. So I need to say
right up front that we all need to work extremely close
together to ensure that the funding we are appropriating is
sufficient to take care of our soldiers and marines and
maintain your readiness at the highest possible level. But it
bears repeating; barring some dramatic change in course, the
committee will mark up the fiscal year 2016 bill that is in
compliance with the BCA. Of course, we would like to have your
input. With respect, I will advise you that we will cut the $13
billion with you or we will cut it without you, but we need to
do the job that the law requires us to do. However, having said
that, I remain concerned about the core of the Navy, I think
all of us do, the ships and the shipbuilding program.
Mr. Secretary, you have told us in previous hearings that
since you have been in your position, the Navy has awarded the
largest number of ship construction contracts. May I say I
think this committee more than the other body has been very
generous in that regard because we think ships are important.
While that is admirable, the stark reality is that your fleet
size has fluctuated around 280 over the past several years, far
short of your stated requirement of 304 ships. While the Navy
continues to promise more ships in the outyears, those outyears
always seem to slip further out.
A few years ago the Navy was projecting a fleet size of 313
ships in 2016. Last year, you predicted the Navy would reach
and exceed your ship requirements some time in fiscal year
2019. This year you project you will achieve the illusive 304
ship fleet in 2020. For the welfare of our Nation's defense, we
need to come to grip with the resources available to us and
settle on the plan.
You have heard me say this before, when it comes to ships,
numbers matter. In addition to the quality of ships, I am
concerned about their capacity, I am concerned about their
adaptabilities, I am concerned about the mix of ships. I think
all of us are, submarines, surface combatants, amphibs, support
ships and how they are operated and how they are maintained.
More and more of your ships are not being operated by your
sailors but by civilian mariners. In fact, even your newly
minted fast frigates, the vessels formerly known as littoral
combat ships don't deploy without two permanently assigned
civilian contractors. The subcommittee also wants to hear your
assessment of the conventional and unconventional threats posed
by China, Russia and Iran.
Gentlemen, this former army draftee sees troubled waters
ahead. Sequestration looms large over the Navy, and we owe it
to our sailors, and marines, and citizens to develop the best
solutions possible. I can promise you that our subcommittee
will work hard alongside each of you to insure that our Navy
and Marine Corps are ready and able to be where it matters when
it matters.
I look forward to your comments and an informative
question-and-answer session, your written testimony will be
entered into the record, so feel free to summarize your
statements this morning. Having said that, let me turn to my
good friend, Mr. Visclosky, for any comments he may wish to
make.

Opening Remarks of Mr. Visclosky

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate your comments and because this is the first hearing
of this cycle, I would simply offer a few remarks. I did not
vote for the Budget Control Act, and it is very difficult to
find anyone in this institution now who admits that they did,
but we are living with the consequences of it. And I would
offer the observation that I voted against the President's
proposal for the use of force last year. I believe then and I
believe today that there is a conflict within the
administration--I am not suggesting that is your problem, the
three gentlemen before us--as far as what our policy is in the
Middle East and if we are going to ask people to sacrifice
their lives, be injured and give the time of their life to this
country, we ought to be very precise.
From my perspective looking ahead as far as our
deliberations and the preparation of the budget which includes
more than half of all discretionary spending in this country,
Congress has the responsibility, and Congress has a role, and
we have not met our responsibility. We have roads, as I like to
explain to people in Indiana, that counties are allowing to
revert back to gravel because there is not enough money to keep
them paved in this country. We have to make an investment and
we have to raise revenue, that is a failure. I often point out
to my colleagues who complain about the budget that 73 percent
of spending is mandatory and not under the jurisdiction of this
committee. We have failed to deal with that responsibility to
find savings on the entitlement side, specifically Social
Security and Medicare. So from my perspective, is a huge
bipartisan failure.
Given that failure of responsibility, and certainly the
administration bears some brunt here too because they can speak
with one voice as opposed to many disparate voices. We have a
role to perform. And as the chairman rightfully pointed out,
our role is to prepare legislation according to the law it is
today. And I do not anticipate unfortunately that that is going
to significantly change between now and October 1st. There is a
degree of difficulty as we proceed with this budget and looking
over what the administration has asked for and what we are
going to mark to, and would hope that as we proceed, there are
very close communications because the chairman, and I agree
with him, acknowledges we are not investing enough in this
Nation's defense, there is no question about that. We are now
finding ourselves in a position where we have to govern
according to the law as well, and that is going to increase our
degree of difficulty.
I would simply also add my thank you to each of you for
your service to this country as well as each one of those
individuals you represent, both military and civilian for what
they have done for this country. And also I do look forward to
your testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky, Mr. Secretary,
the floor is yours, thank you for being here with us.

Summary Statement of Secretary Mabus

Mr. Mabus. Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member
Visclosky, members of this committee, thank you so much for the
opportunity to discuss the Department of Navy together with the
Chief of Naval Operations, Jon Greenert, Commandant of the
Marine Corps, Joe Dunford. I have the great privilege of
representing the sailors and marines who serve our Nation
around the world, the civilians who support them, and all of
their families.
As you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, this is Admiral
Greenert's last posture testimony before this committee. He's
been a steady hand on the helm of the Navy through the past 4
years of international instability and budget turbulence. Every
day his judgment, his advice, his counsel have been critical.
It is an honor to serve with him. He is going to leave a
lasting impact on the Navy.
Today our security interest places an increasing array of
threats and demands while our budget situation grows ever more
challenging. It is clear that the Navy and Marine Corps team
offer the best value to advance both our global security and
our global economic interest. Uniquely, the Navy and Marine
Corps provide presence around the globe, around the clock. We
are the Nation's first line of defense, ready for any challenge
that may come over the horizon. Presence means that we respond
faster, we stay on station longer, we carry everything we need
with us, and we do whatever missions are assigned by our
Nation's leaders without needing anybody else's permission.
We have always known that America's success depends on an
exceptional Navy and Marine Corps. Article I of our
Constitution authorizes Congress to raise an Army when needed,
but directs you to provide and maintain a Navy.
From the first six frigates to our growing fleet today,
from Tripoli to Afghanistan, sailors and marines have proven
the Founder's wisdom. American leaders across the political
spectrum have understood the vital significance of sea power.
We are truly America's away team. We deploy in peacetime just
as much as in war, and our role over the last 70 years in
securing sea lanes and freedom of commerce has boosted our own
in the world's economy.
Nearly half the world's population lives within 100 miles
of the sea, 90 percent of our global trade goes back to sea,
and 95 percent of all data and voice goes under the ocean. The
shelves of our stores are stocked with just-in-time delivered
products from all over the world some 38 million American jobs
are directly linked to seaborne international trade. For seven
decades, the Navy and Marine Corps have been the primary
protector of this system that has created unprecedented
economic growth. While we have led this effort, we have worked
with allies and partners increasing in our operability and
establishing relationships that also help keep the peace. That
is why our national defense strategy is so clearly focused on
the maritime domain and requires investments in our maritime
assets.
For the past few years, the Department of Navy has
attempted to minimize the impact of an uncertain budgetary
environment marked by numerous continuing resolutions,
imposition of sequester-level funding and the threat of a
current sequestration has been mentioned here before. This
environment has made it more difficult, but even more critical
to set priorities and to make some hard choices.
The presence of our Navy and Marine Corps uniquely deliver
is built on four foundations, our people, our platforms, our
power, or partnerships. These are the key to the capability,
the capacity and the success of our Naval services, and they
remain my top priorities.
Our sailors and marines are well-known for their ability to
exercise independent judgment. The flexibility to adapt to
changing circumstances and events. We remain committed to
providing our sailors, marines and our civilians with the
training and support they need to maintain a naval presence.
And we include in this our injured, our wounded and all the
dedicated families.
We have launched a comprehensive approach to ensure the
world's healthiest, fittest, most resilient and best educated
force, and a force that also truly represents America's
diversity. We continue to aggressively combat sexual assault
abuse, ethical failings, similar challenges. And we are
exploring innovative ways to improve retention and recruitment,
particularly in critical areas. Our people, as great as they
are, can't do their job without platforms. Providing presence,
being where we are needed, when we are needed, requires ships,
submarines, aircraft, systems, vehicles and equipment.
I couldn't agree with you more, Mr. Chairman, quantity has
a quality all its own. That means we have got to have a
properly sized and balanced fleet. I have been over these
numbers before, but think they bear repeating. On September 11,
2001, the Navy's battle force stood at 316 ships. By 2008,
after one of the great military build-ups in our Nation's
history, our fleet declined to 278 ships. Our focus on two
ground wars only partly explains that decline. In the 5 years
before I became Secretary, the Navy contracted for only 27
ships, not enough to stop the slide and the size of the fleet.
In my first 5 years, we have contracted for 70 ships, reversing
and halting that decline. And as you stated, by the end of
decade, our fleet will be at 304 ships. We have accomplished
this with a direct and fundamental business approach, increased
competition, relying on fixed price contracts, and thanks to
this committee's and Congress's help a multiyear and en bloc
buying, but budget instability, budget uncertainty, seriously
erode our ability to grow the fleet, manage our resources and
maintain the industrial base.
Without a correctly sized and shaped fleet, the Navy Marine
Corps will not be able to meet the demand for the kinds of
missions for which the Navy and Marine Corps are the best and
often the only option. In the face of this budgetary
uncertainty, cutting ships is among the most damaging and least
reversible course of action, which is why I am committed to
preserving shipbuilding.
Fueling the ships, aircraft, vehicles of our Navy and
Marine Corps is a vital operational concern and enables a
global presence necessary to keep the Nation secure. That is
why the Navy has a history of innovation, especially in energy,
moving from sail, to steam, to oil, and pioneering nuclear. The
fuels market has seen an incredible price volatility in the
last 6 years. New domestic sources are reducing our reliance on
foreign oil, but can't stop the wild price swings. At the same
time, the competition for power, and energy, and the ability to
use fuel as a weapon remains an international security issue.
In all cases, we believe our national security interest and
the ability of the Navy and Marine Corps to meet its missions
must be enhanced by increasing our energy diversity and
efficiency. Our ability to maintain presence and advanced
global security will also be augmented through partnerships,
cooperation helps make us more effective. It diffuses tensions
and reduces misunderstandings.
Again and again, Naval forces have proven themselves most
immediate, the most capable, the most adaptable option when a
crisis develops. Overall, the fiscal year 2016 presence budget
balances current readiness needed to execute our assigned
missions of sustaining a highly capable fleet all within a
tough fiscal climate. That climate demands our most rigorous
examination of every dollar we spent in continuing our
aggressive efforts to cut unnecessary costs in every program
and shift our resources from tail to tooth.
When America is called, the Navy and Marine Corps has
always answered. In order to ensure that we continue to supply
the Naval force our Nation's leaders and the American people
expect, the Commandant and Chief of Naval Operations and I look
forward to answering your questions. And we look forward to
working together with this committee and the Congress to
maintain our great Navy and Marine Corps, because in the words
of the President Theodore Roosevelt, a great Navy is not a
provocation of war, it is the surest guarantee of peace.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.
[The written statement of Secretary Mabus follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Admiral Greenert, again, thank you for
40 years of service.

Summary Statement of Admiral Greenert

Admiral Greenert. Thank you, Chairman Frelinghuysen, and
Ranking Member Visclosky, and distinguished members of the
committee. Thank you all for the opportunity to testify today.
Mr. Chairman, you were right, this committee has been wonderful
in supporting the building of ships and the supporting of our
sailors. And you are also right, the mix of ships matters a
great deal, it is just not the whole number. I thank you very
much for your kind words here this morning today.
It is my honor to serve--I have the best job in the world,
I have had it. I get to enable and to serve 600,000 Active and
Reserve sailors, Navy civilians and their families. I am
especially pleased with the 41,000 sailors who are underway and
deployed around the globe today. The dedication and their
resilience of these people continue to amaze me, Mr. Chairman.
And the citizens of this Nation can take great pride in the
daily contribution of their sons and daughters who are out
around the world today.
I am very pleased and honored to testify this morning
beside Secretary Mabus and General Dunford. Your Navy and
Marine Corps team is united in fulfilling our long-standing
mandate that you mentioned--to be where it matters, when it
matters, ready to respond to crises, ensuring the security, and
the underpinning of the global economy.
Now, to that point, recent events exemplify the value of
forward presence. Last August, the George Herbert Walker Bush
carrier strike group had to relocate from the north Arabian Sea
to the north Arabian Gulf. That is 750 miles where they were on
station, and they did this in 30 hours, in less than 30 hours.
In that time, Navy and Marine strike fighters flew 20 to 30
combat sorties per day over Iraq and Syria. And for 54 days,
they were the only coalition strike option to project power
against ISIS.
The USS Truxtun arrived in the Black Sea to establish a
U.S. presence and to reassure our allies only a week after
Russia invaded Crimea, and most of that time that week was due
to paperwork getting established.
The USS Fort Worth, a Littoral Combat Ship and the USS
Sampson destroyer were among the first to support the
Indonesian-led search effort for the AirAsia Flight 8501 in the
Java Sea. So we have been where it matters when it matters.
Mr. Chairman, as I have testified before, the continuing
resolution and the sequestration in 2013 deeply affected Navy
readiness and capabilities. We have not recovered yet. Navy
overall readiness is at its lowest point in many years. Budget
reductions forced us to cut afloat and ashore operations that
generated ship and aircraft maintenance backlogs and compelled
us to extend our unit deployments. Since 2013, many ships have
been on deployment from 8 to 10 months or longer, and that
exacts a cost on the resiliency of our people, the
sustainability of equipment on the ships and service lives of
the ships themselves.
Our degraded readiness posture has also affected our
ability to satisfy contingency response requirements. In
addition to what is deployed globally today, our combatant
commanders require three carrier strike groups and three
amphibious ready groups ready to deploy within 30 days to
respond to a major crisis. That is our covenant to them.
However, on average we have been able to keep only one
carrier strike group and one amphibious ready group in this
readiness posture. So we are at one-third of the requirement we
need to be. Assuming the best case of an on-time, an adequate,
and a stable budget, and no major contingencies, we might be
able to recover from these accumulated backlogs by 2018 from
our carrier strike groups, and by 2020 for our amphibious ready
groups so that is 5 years after the first round of
sequestration and that is just the glimpse of the damage that
sequestration can and will cause if we go back there.
Not only do we face several readiness problems, but we have
been forced to slow our Navy modernization. We have lost our
momentum in fielding emerging critical capabilities for future
fights. We are losing our technical edge, the overall impact of
budget shortfalls in the past 3 years has manifested in the
continued decline of our relative war fighting advantages in
many areas and notably anti-surface warfare, anti-submarine
warfare, air-to-air warfare, and what we called the integrated
air and missile defense.
We have been compelled to accept significant risk in the
execution of two key missions that are outlined in the
strategic guidance. I have a little handout that I provided
which summarizes what those missions are and where we stand.
But the two missions that we have the most risk in we call
deter-and-defeat aggression. That means to win a war at sea
while deterring a war at sea in another different theater. And
number two, to project power in an anti access area denial
environment. Now when I say risk, I mean that some of our
platforms, and our people, and our systems--they will be late
arriving to the fight. And they will arrive with insufficient
ordnance, without a superior combat systems and sensors and
networks that they need and they will be inadequately prepared
to fight. This means longer timelines to arrive, like I said,
less time to prevail, if we do, more ships and aircraft out of
action when in battle, more sailors, marines and merchant
mariners killed and less credibility, frankly, to deter
adversaries and assure our allies in the future.
Given these circumstances our President's budget 2016
submission represents the absolute minimum funding levels
needed to execute our strategic guidance, our strategy. To
bring the Navy program into balance within fiscal guidance, we
focused first on building the appropriate capability and then
to deliver that capability at a capacity that we could afford.
Similar to last year, we applied the following priorities:
Number 1, we have to maintain the sea-based strategic return.
That is a homeland defense item; number 2, sustain forward
presence; number 3, develop the capacity and capability to win,
improve our readiness, develop asymmetric capabilities; and
lastly, but not least important, to sustain the industrial
base.
Choices were made using these priorities. For example, we
were once again compelled to take reductions in aviation
programs, munitions and shore infrastructure. So Mr. Chairman,
over the last 3 years the Navy has been provided budgets that
were $25 billion less than the President's budget request. And
frankly, if we continue on this track, it will be $55 billion
less across this FYDP. The primary result has been deferred
modernization, but the cumulative result has been a loss of
current and future readiness and future capability.
Today's world is more complex, more uncertain, more
turbulent. You mentioned it in your opening remarks, Mr.
Chairman. This trend around the world will likely continue. Our
adversaries are modernizing and expanding their capabilities.
It is vital that we have an adequate, predictable and a timely
budget to maintain an effective Navy.
The proposal that we provided represents the floor, any
funding level below the floor of this submission will require
revision to our defense strategy. Put simply, it will damage
the national security of the country.
I look forward to working with the Congress to find
solutions that will ensure our Navy retains the ability to
organize, train and equip our great sailors and their families
in the defense of this Nation. Thank you for your continued
support and for what this committee has provided your Navy.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Admiral, for your testimony.
[The written statement of Admiral Greenert follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Dunford, good morning. Thank you
for being with us.

Summary Statement of General Dunford

General Dunford. Thank you, Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking
Member Visclosky, distinguished members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today and I am
honored to be here with Secretary Mabus and my shipmate,
Admiral Greenert, to represent your Marines.
I will begin by thanking the committee for your steadfast
support over the past 13 years. Due to your leadership, we feel
that the best trained and equipped Marine Corps our Nation has
ever sent to war.
I know this committee and the American people have high
expectations for marines as our Nation's expeditionary force in
readiness. You expect your marines to operate forward, engage
with our partners, deter potential adversaries and respond to
crises. And when we fight, you expect us to win.
You expect a lot from your marines and you should. This
morning as you hold a hearing, over 31,000 marines are forward
deployed and engaged doing just what you expect them to do. Our
role as the Nation's expeditionary force in readiness informs
how we man, train and equip the Marine Corps. It also
prioritizes the allocation of resources that we receive from
the Congress.
Over the past few years we have prioritized the readiness
of our forward deployed forces. Those are the forces you count
on for an immediate response in a crisis. Those are the forces
that supported the recent evacuation of U.S. citizens in the
South Sudan, Libya and Yemen. Those are the forces currently
conducting strikes in Syria, in Iraq, training the Iraqi army
and protecting our embassy in Baghdad. Those are the 22,500
marines in the Pacific west of the dateline.
I can assure you that your forward deployed marines are
well-trained, well-led, and well-equipped. We have had to make
tough choices to deal with the effects of two wars,
sequestration in 2013, and reduced budgets in 2014 and 2015, in
order to maintain the readiness of our forward deployed forces.
We have not sufficiently invested in our home station
readiness, modernization, infrastructure sustainment and
quality-of-life programs. As a result, approximately half of
our non-deployed units, and those are the ones that provide the
bench to respond to unforeseen contingencies, are suffering
several personnel, equipment and training shortfalls. In a
major conflict those shortfalls result in delayed response and/
or the unnecessary loss of young American lives.
Over time, underinvesting in modernization will result in
maintaining older or obsolete equipment at a higher cost and
degraded capabilities. It will eventually erode our competitive
advantage. We do not ever want our marines and sailors in a
fair fight.
The readiness challenges we have today provide context for
my message this morning. We can meet the requirements of the
Defense Strategic Guidance with the President's budget, but
there is no margin. BCA funding levels will exacerbate the
challenges that we have today. It will also result in a Marine
Corps with fewer available Active Duty battalions and squadrons
than would be required for a single major contingency. Perhaps
more concerning it will result in fewer marines and sailors
being forward deployed and in a position to immediately respond
to a crisis involving diplomatic posts, American citizens or
U.S. interests. As we saw in the wake of Benghazi the American
people expect us to respond to today's crisis today. And we can
only do that if we are properly postured forward.
In closing, my assessment is that funding below the
President's budget level will require that we develop a new
strategy. Thank you once again for the opportunity to appear
before you this morning, and for your leadership in addressing
today's fiscal challenges. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, General.
[The written statement of General Dunford follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

SHIPBUILDING

Mr. Frelinghuysen. And thank you gentlemen on behalf of the
committee. The Budget Control Act is the law of the land, we
are going to mark to that bill, so we need to talk about new
strategies. We also need to know if, Mr. Secretary, your
focuses on people, platforms, powers and partnership, your key
factors, fixed factors, your personnel costs, where will you be
making reductions in order to meet the objective of the $13
billion that would be reduced.
Mr. Mabus. Mr. Chairman, first I want to agree vehemently
with what the CNO and the Commandant said, the President's
budget is the minimum that is required to meet the national
defense strategy. And we have seen when sequester hit in 2013
what the impacts are. And we have seen how long-lasting those
impacts are.
I have said that I am going to do everything I can to
protect shipbuilding, regardless of the budget situation. I am
doing that because it is not reversible. If you miss a ship, if
you don't build a ship in a year, you never make that ship up.
And we are living with the decisions that were made 10, 15
years ago in terms of numbers of naval ships and it takes a
long time to reverse that.
But if you do protect shipbuilding and the industrial base
and the ability to build the Navy ships, things like the
maintenance requirements, our public shipyards, when
sequestration hit in 2013, we had a hiring freeze, we had a
furlough, we had a government shutdown. And we don't have
enough people in those public shipyards. Now we are hiring, but
you lose skill sets. And so as the CNO pointed out, the
maintenance requirements for our ships, it will take us until
2018 or 2019 to catch up, same thing with our aircraft. The
backlog in our depots for modernization and for maintenance on
our aircraft will require us almost the end of this decade to
make up. So what is certain is that if sequestration level
funding is where we end up, is that something is going to
break.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACTS

Mr. Frelinghuysen. So if the shipbuilding thing is
irreversible, and I do read your statements before you come,
and you made a point of that, if that is the critical mass, and
God only knows that is what the Navy is identified for, it is
the most formidable part of our defense posture, what else is
going to give? We--in other words, I like having the mission
impacts, I understand that. But I think we need to know what
specific platforms, what is going to give if we are going to
maintain the shipbuilding, and having just visited Norfolk, I
have seen it firsthand that incredible workforce, but something
has got to give if we get under the $13 billion figure.
Mr. Mabus. Well, the things that you have heard from me
just in the maintenance requirements which affects readiness,
from the CNO reduced sailing, the reduced surge capacity that
we have, the reduced training opportunities that we have. What
you have heard from the Commandant, the reduced readiness of
the next to deploy, the reduced equipment for units and home
station, reduced the ability to put sailors and marines
forward. But I also will have to say that the budget that we
put in, we have a responsibility to put the budget in that will
meet the defense plan.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We have, of course, a responsibility to
meet the law as does the administration.
Mr. Mabus. Well, the President said repeatedly that he
would veto a budget that locked in sequestration level funding.
And so we are putting forward the minimum budget that we feel
will meet the defense strategy. If it goes below that, we will
break that strategy and we will----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We are going to work with you to do
whatever we have to do and I think a closer working
relationship is better than one from a standoff.
Let me, before I turn to Mr. Visclosky, to Admiral Greenert
and General Dunford, is there anything you can do in the fiscal
year 2015 budget to minimize the impact of the negative
consequences of the sequestration, are there any things you can
do now? I mean, this is all about setting priorities here, I
know everybody wants to do everything and you do an incredible
job and do it well. Sometimes we don't always know all the
things that you do. Marines are deployed in areas now where
they have not always been, of course, you always have somebody
at the embassy, so you have larger missions. I am wondering,
taking a step back, are there things we could examine now in
this fiscal year that might minimize the impact in outyears?
Admiral Greenert. I will take a stab there. This is
difficult because as what happened in 2013, you are talking
about what we call the POM drop. If it was sort of measured
approach to 16, it would be different. So here is what I mean,
if you need money now, you have to go where the money is now.
So that would be operations and maintenance, well that is only
a 1-year appropriation, so that is out. Modernization, that is
out. I am trying to get out of a readiness trough so to try to
do that in 2015 while trying to support operations in 2015 is
not--I can not do that. So my point would be if you are marking
a 2016 budget to a different level, you are going after
modernization, likely procurement, that is where the money is
in the fiscal year that you need it. Doing something now while
operating is not really--there is not much there, chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. General.
General Dunford. Chairman, if you take a look at our budget
between people and operations and maintenance as the CNO was
talking about, that is 88 percent of my budget. So the only way
that you could realize savings in a given year is divest
yourself of people which we have not done. We have been trying
to keep faith with people as we have done the deliberate
drawdown or stop training operations and making money, which
further degrades the readiness challenge that we have. So I
think my short answer to your question is there really is not
anything we can do in 2015 to set the conditions for what we
actually donate, we do not know what 2016 is actually going to
look like.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, before returning to Mr. Visclosky,
we would like actually a list of what you would have to do
under sequestration scenario. We endorse doing things on the
George Washington. There are issues relative to end strength,
we would like a better picture of what you would do, what your
priorities would be if we had to go into that scenario, which
is what we will be marking our bill to. I think we need a more
comprehensive list, specifics, decommissioning ships, reduce
procurement. I think we need some specific answers. Mr.
Visclosky.

NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL AND USS HALSEY

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all,
General Dunford, I do want to thank you and congratulate the
Corps, because they now do have auditable books and I do not
say that lightly. I think it is very important and realize that
there are other milestones ahead for the Corps. I hope that you
will continue to be very diligent and hope other services can
take a page out of the Marine Corps book. I do think it is
important.
I have two questions, if you could, for the record, because
they are very important to me, but we have a lot of members and
in the interest of time. There was an OPNAV study last fall
that validated requirements for between 1,200 and 1,300 FTEs at
the naval postgraduate school, but the Navy comptroller has a
cap of 884 as far as FTEs at that school. For the record, if
you could provide the justification for not accepting the
study's recommendation. And also, have an interest in the
continued improvement of conditions on the USS Halsey. My
understanding is there were two suicides early last year in
midsummer. I have had a meeting most recently in July of last
year with Admiral Howard and have a series of questions for an
update as to whether or not there is any additional suicide-
related behavior on board, if there is any additional resources
that have been vested or needed.
[The information follows:]

The primary mission of the Naval Post Graduate School is to
increase the warfighting effectiveness of Naval Officers. Over time NPS
expanded this primary mission by engaging in education and research
activities for a variety of other customers including counterparts from
other Services, international partners, OSD, and other executive
agencies. The OPNAV study examined staffing requirements for the NPS
workload, inclusive of all these other non-core mission activities. The
result was a recommended staffing requirement in excess of data
residing in the official Department of Navy manning data base which is
used to determine Full Time Equivalent (FTE) controls by activity or
command. NPS took on this additional workload, much of which is non-
Navy, without developing or maturing commensurately complex business
practices and without appropriately requesting official changes to the
data base, which would have been subject to review for compliance with
the NPS core mission and resource requirements, including FTE. At this
time, any increase to the manning data base requires a corresponding
decrease to other functional areas and/or commands within the
Department. In the current budget environment, it has become more
critical than ever before that Department of Navy ensure an appropriate
balance between resource requirements for the NPS primary mission and
all other staffing requirements. A formal Department of Navy review of
NPS functions and their associated resource requirements, including
sources and uses of funds, is ongoing. Once this comprehensive review
is complete, a final decision on NPS FTE staffing requirements and
allocations will be made.

No, there have been no more suicides in USS HALSEY. In fact USS
HALSEY recently (on 5 February 2015) safely returned from a highly
successful seven month deployment to the Western Pacific. Programs that
were implemented, and are ongoing, include several visits by mental
health experts over a period ranging from a few days to two weeks
within the first two months of deployment (and the second suicide) to
regular visits by Chaplains over the course of deployment; a follow-up
survey by the Naval Unit Behavioral Needs Assessment Survey at the 6-
month mark; and a three-week capstone of classes offered onboard by
Commander, Destroyer Squadron 31 (CDS-31) Chaplain and Military Family
Support Center Psychologist to assess USS HALSEY Sailors and help with
transition back to home life from deployment. Additionally, two Flag
Officers visited USS Halsey to speak with the crew and provide
mentoring to the ship's leadership.
The USS HALSEY Sailors have continued to seek and receive treatment
for individual and group mental health needs. Identification, caring,
and intervention is emphasized at every level of a Sailor's chain of
command.

NUCLEAR ENTERPRISE REVIEW

Mr. Visclosky. The one question we can have a brief
discussion here, and again, I would then defer, Mr. Chairman,
is on our nuclear deterrence. The Nuclear Enterprise Review has
suggested that the composition of the stockpile be changed to
essentially five unique systems from the existing 12 systems
today. Obviously, the Navy has a very large interest in the
issue. The estimated cost as far as the transition for the
National Nuclear Security Administration is somewhere between
$50 billion to $60 billion over the coming years. The fiscal
year 2016 budget for the Navy is about $2.2 billion included
this year for nuclear enterprises.
The two questions I have, either Secretary, Admiral, is if
we have some discussion here about the BCA levels do not
change, what happens relative to funding nuclear enterprise?
Secondly, much more broadly, is there any ongoing discussion
about the triad itself in whether or not that composition from
3 to some other number may be changed?
Admiral Greenert. In answer to your first question the sea-
based strategic deterrent is my number 1 program, Mr.
Visclosky. So I would fully fund that to its requirements. That
defense of the homeland, that is top priority. That is what I
would submit to Secretary Mabus in my recommendations. Put it
another way, I would propose no reductions to the nuclear
enterprise that you see in the President's budget 2016
submission.
Number 2, there are discussions going on within the
Department as to the future of the nuclear deterrent
enterprise. I would say, if you will, everything is on the
table. We are trying to improve it to make sure that the
modernization of it, this would be the third big modernization
since you got the inception, then you have a new bomber, a new
SSBN, that is the Ohio. We are into a new phase where we have
to look and see what do we want to with the Minute Man, the
ICBMs, what about the new bomber and you are familiar with the
Ohio replacement. Those discussions are ongoing, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Vice chair, Ms. Granger.

SPECIAL PURPOSE MARINE AIR-GROUND TASK FORCE

Ms. Granger. Thank you very much. Thank you all for your
service. General Dunford, crisis response is an important
mission, the Marine Corps has devoted significant resources to,
and that includes the establishment of a crisis response force
and a marine security guard augmentation unit. Would you give
me some examples of how funding readiness has enabled crisis
response?
General Dunford. I would, Congresswoman. Frankly, I can
give you an example that is really attributable to this
committee. Two years ago we identified the requirement for
additional crisis response capability, both in AFRICOM and in
CENTCOM. So we established special purpose marine air ground
task forces in both of those combatant commanders area of
responsibilities.
The special purpose MAGTF crisis response AFRICOM that this
committee funded, was the first force that responded to Ebola.
It was the force that conducted the evacuation operation in
south Sudan, it was the force that conducted the evacuation
operation in Libya. The force that you created in the United
States central command, one day 10 days ago simultaneously was
evacuating the embassy in Sana'a, was protecting the embassy in
Baghdad, was flying strikes from Bahrain into Syria and Iraq.
Was conducting V-22 type of recovery and aircraft personnel 600
nautical miles to support those strikes. With training Iraqi
army forces in al Assad, it was also training Jordanians. That
is a 2,500-man force that was conducted 18 months ago.
So when you talk about marines being forward postured and
forward engaged, that is what you get when you talk about
crisis response. I would add that those forces that were
training the Iraqis were not forces generated specifically to
train the Iraqis. General Austin was able to begin almost
immediately after the President's decision to train Iraqis
because he already had those forces available to him in
theater.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACT ON CRISIS RESPONSE

Ms. Granger. I will just follow up on that. So if the
crisis response is at the sequestration levels, then something
else has to go, can you give us an example of what would be cut
to keep that?
General Dunford. Congresswoman, we are meeting those crisis
responses. It is important I think for the committee to
understand, we are meeting those crisis response requirements
today at about a 1-to-2 deployment as well. What that means is
our marines are deployed for 7 months and home for at or less
than 14 months. At the BCA level, the only thing we can do as I
was alluding to earlier, the only thing the Marine Corps can do
is reduce capacity, because over 60 percent of our budget is
people. And if you add that with operations and maintenance
money, you are at 88 percent. So the only thing you can do is
reduce capacity. So I would tell you that crisis response would
be affected. And what really happens is it exacerbates
readiness challenges of units at home station. Why do I raise
that? Because the units that would be most likely to respond in
the event of a major contingency are actually the units that
are back at home station not the units that are out there
conducting crisis response.
What would happen if we go to BCA levels is those forces
will have a choice, we will either delay a response in a major
conflict or we will send young Americans that do not have the
equipment, the training and the leadership necessary to
accomplish the mission. I really do think it is a function of
time and or American lives is what we are talking about. Our
experience in 1950 in the Korean war was instructive in that
regard.
Ms. Granger. Thank you so much.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Israel.

SEA-BASED BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE

Mr. Israel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
homage to the congressional district.
Admiral Greenert, I want to ask you a question about a
ballistic missile defense capability. Our adversaries continue
to develop at a very rapid pace ballistic missile capabilities,
and we need to stay many steps ahead. I was wondering if you
could address the demands on the fleet in maintaining a
proactive ballistic missile defense. I am also concerned about
the current plan to place Aegis cruisers in reduced operating
status and would like you to address that issue.
Admiral Greenert. Today we have on the order of, I think it
is 15 ballistic missile defense capable ships. I will send you
a paper on that so I get it straight. We need, by the end of
the FYDP, and that kind of tends to be our goal, 40 available
around the world, this is ballistic missile defense capable.
They have the sensors, they have the weapon. So it is a pretty
high demand. To get there, Congressman, you have to modernize
the cruisers and the destroyers. They have to have the cooling,
the power for this really high powered radar. It takes a lot of
power, it takes a lot of cooling, and you have to have the
right weapon. So that tends to be, that is what we are rushing
to get done.
[The information follows:]

We currently have a total of 33 BMD-capable ships in our Fleet.
This force is comprised of 28 destroyers (DDGs) and 5 cruisers (CGs).
Twenty-three of the ships have the initial or basic level of
capability, seven have been upgraded to an intermediate level of
capability, and three are equipped with advanced capability, which
allows these ships to conduct true Integrated Air and Missile Defense,
simultaneously conducting BMD and air defense. Working closely
together, MDA and Navy are steadily increasing the number of BMD-
capable ships by both modernizing existing destroyers and delivering
new construction ships built with inherent BMD capability.
This BMD Fleet is currently meeting about two-thirds of the demand
that is being levied on the Navy by the Combatant Commanders. In order
to do that, our BMD ships are making longer, more frequent deployments
than we would prefer. In addition to increasing both the capacity and
capability inherent in the ships of our BMD Fleet, I am working to
ensure that the demand signal levied by the Combatant Commanders is
correctly validated, serviced efficiently, and is sustainable for the
long term.

What has been very helpful, because today we are doing most
of missile defense from the sea ashore, if we can put a site
ashore to get that done, that helps dramatically, much bigger
aperture, more resolution. And so today we are standing one up
in Romania as I speak, it will be in service at the end of
December, and in 2 years one in Poland. That will dramatically
help the European situation. So we are on track. My concern is
to what end? I am speaking President budget 2016 levels. You go
to the Budget Control Act levels, as I said before, most of
what we do will come out of modernization. Well, that is a key
part of modernization.

LONG ISLAND CONTAMINATION

Mr. Israel. Thank you, Admiral. And finally, Mr. Secretary,
this is a very parochial concern I am going to ask if you could
send some folks up to see me regarding a contaminated plume on
Long Island; the Navy and the Grumman Corporation worked on the
Hellfire in the 1940s, that site has been contaminated. The
contamination is growing. I would appreciate it if you would
send somebody up to see me so that we can address those issues.
Mr. Mabus. I would be happy to, Congressman. We have been
working very closely with Congress and also with the State of
New York to address that, but I will be happy to send some
people up with not only information but with our plan of
action.
Mr. Israel. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and thank you again,
Ms. McCollum.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Israel. Mr. Crenshaw.

GUIDED MISSILE CRUISER MODERNIZATION

Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me first welcome
all of you back. The Navy has a pretty strong presence in my
district in northeast Florida, so I have worked with you all
and developed what I would consider a very trusting
relationship, friendship and I thank you for that. Admiral
Greenert, I know you will be leaving, but not everybody knows
that the Secretary of the Navy is on his way to becoming the
fifth longest serving Secretary of the Navy. I do not know
where you rank in your service as CNO, but in terms of length
of service, but certainly you have been one of the best, so
thank you all for being here today.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Looks like the Secretary wants equal
time. Okay, excuse me.
Mr. Crenshaw. He will probably be back, right?
Mr. Mabus. I think he has got the quality, quality edge, I
may have quantity.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. That time does not come out of your
time.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you very much.
One of the things I know that you all have been working on
is a plan to modernize some of the guided missile cruisers.
There was a time when the Navy wanted it to lay up, whatever
that means, they were going to lay up 11 cruisers which this
committee and this chairman thought was probably short-sighted.
So now there is a plan I guess when you think of the tumultuous
times we live in and we talked a lot about ships today. When
you lay up a ship and do not have a crew, and you don't have
any modernization money, more than likely it is going to be
decommissioned, and I think this subcommittee thought that is
probably a bad idea when we talk about the number of ships that
we need. And so, under the leadership of the chairman, we
developed this plan called 2, 4, 6, these 11 cruisers are going
to be modernized. I had a couple of questions about that,
because I think the plan is that no more than two ships will
enter the modernization schedule each year. None of the ships
will stay there more than 4 years and there will not be any
more than six ships there at any one time.
The question becomes, and maybe for you, Secretary Mabus,
how have you all decided to benchmark the 4 years that they
were going to be in this modernization? Is there some--like,
when does that begin and when does it end so that we can comply
with that 4-year of 2, 4, 6.
Mr. Mabus. Congressman, first, I want to thank the
committee for setting up the so-called SMOSF funds to modernize
these cruisers. We agree wholeheartedly, we need to keep these
cruisers, and we need to keep them for as long as we possibly
can; we need to extend their lives and modernize them as long
as we possibly can. In answer to your specific question, the 4
years would not include the time getting ready to go into
modernization or the time after they come out of modernization
that you do the shakedown, the testing and this sort of thing.
So it would be 4 years in modernization.
Having said all of that, the reason that--and I fully,
fully understand the concern of the committee and Congress,
words like ``lay up'' were used, words like ``decommission''
were used. The plan that we put in in 2015 to put 11 cruisers
into modernization at once, we were going to continue to have
those ships on commission. They were not going to be laid up,
they were not going to be completely out of service. They were
going to remain under the control of the CNO. If contingency
arose that we had to have extra cruisers, we could have manned
those, or up-manned them, because they would be minimally
manned and gotten them out to sea.
By doing that, by putting all 11 in, we need 11 at a time
in the fleet, by putting the 11 in, we would extend the life of
those cruisers, from the mid- to late 2020s when they are
scheduled to retire now to the mid- to late 2040s. The 2, 4, 6
plan which we are absolutely complying with now would not--it
would extend the lives, but about 10 years shorter than the
original plan.
And what we do not have is the money that would be gained
from the manpower that we could put into the modernization
effort and we would run out of the SMOSF funds far earlier. And
that is the reason that we still believe that putting the 11
cruisers into modernization at times. Whatever assurances or
whatever actions we can take to assure the committee, to assure
the Congress that these 11 cruisers are going to stay in the
fleet, we need all 22 of the cruisers, and we need these 11 to
be modernized to replace the cruisers that will reach the end
of their lives. Whatever actions we can do to do that, because
we do think that the original plan will do that and we will
keep these cruisers in service and more modern longer than any
other plan that we have been able to come up with.
Mr. Crenshaw. Just one quick follow up to Admiral Greenert,
one of the things we just talked about you have got the SMOSFs
so to speak, and then you have to fund the manning outside of
that. I know that is in 2016, is that still the plan to do that
in the outyears?
Admiral Greenert. It is, if that is the intent and that is
what you tell us to do, that is what we will do. We got the
bill, the 2015 bill in December, we had about a week to put
this together. We said, look, we have got to man the 2016 in
our submission to comply, so we did. We did not get it all put
together, so we have to get after that.
The SMOSF fund when it first come out was Ship
Modernization Operation Sustainment Fund. That was good and we
appreciate it, especially the operations and sustainment when
they are not physically in modernization. Well, that has become
the SMF fund, ship modernization fund, no money for operations
and sustainment. That hurts, that is a burden we are bearing
that was not originally intended. That is the intent of the
Congress, so be it, we will comply. But we sure would prefer
the other, it would be very helpful if we can extend that back
to SMOSF, Congressman.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Ms. McCollum.

ARCTIC ROADMAP

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, it has been pointed out that the Budget Control Act
is the law of the land. Congress, without my help, passed that
law, and Congress, with my help, can change that. We can remove
sequestration from this conversation. The President put forward
in his budget a way to move forward without sequestration, and
I appreciate that. We are awaiting the Budget Committee to give
us our numbers, our allocations. And so I wake up optimistic
and hopeful every day that the Budget Committee will do the
right thing and help us bring sequestration to an end.
People are chuckling on the other side of the aisle, but
like I said, I wake up hopeful even though it is zero in
Minnesota and 19 in Alaska.
Which leads me to my question. The U.S. Navy Arctic
Roadmap, which I found really interesting, so, Secretary and
Admiral Greenert, I would like to get your thoughts on the
Arctic. The effects of climate change are particularly evident
in the Arctic. The polar region is warming twice as fast as the
average rise on the rest of the planet, which means more open
Arctic waters.
Now, I know the Navy is thinking about the Arctic, and I
want to commend you for the work for the report that I just
held up, the Navy's Task Force on Climate Change, for its
Arctic Roadmap report last year. We have clear national
interest in the Arctic, along with our Canadian and Nordic
allies. In fact, there is a Nordic Council, which the U.S. is
chairing right now, which is part of the State Department. But
your focus in this area is really important. It is a resource-
rich environment. We should expect the Russians and the Chinese
to be very active in this region.
So, Admiral, as you look to the future, what are the
challenges, opportunities, resources, and investments this
committee needs to be thinking about as the Navy operates in
this very harsh and changing climate?
And then to General Dunford, similar climate change is
affecting sea levels, which impacts equatorial coast lines. So
how is the Marine Corps thinking about climate change and its
impact on your mission, as well as where you will have to have
marines based?
Thank you, gentlemen.
Admiral Greenert. Thank you, Congresswoman. First question,
when will it be navigable? When are the navigable sea lines of
communication open, number one. We think it is about 2023,
2024. And by the way, just because the ice is kind of slushy,
unless you have a hardened hull, you still don't want to go
through that. So it has to be clear. We think it is about 2024.
When it is navigable? And that means open. Is there a
threat? Are there disputes on the routes that are navigable?
And by the way, that is not just open ocean. That is also you
have got to look at the draft. It is fairly shallow up there.
And big container ships have deep drafts, 60, 70, 80 feet. You
talk to big companies--and I have--they say, I don't know if
this is a really a big deal to me.
And are there disputes? There are some, territorial. And as
you mentioned, ma'am, how do we resolve them? Well, the Arctic
Council is certainly a good way to look at that.
What kind of changes? Programmatic. Well, we already put in
place, it is in there, in that roadmap there, that when we
build in new systems, communications, hull, mechanical,
electrical, you have to answer the question, how will it
operate in an Arctic environment? And that includes all that
stuff topside, all the superstructure and the infrastructure.
We need to go up and look at it more often. We have an
exercise we used to do every 3 years called ICEX. Makes sense.
And we did it mostly under the sea. It was a submarine thing.
It had been going on for three decades. We are pretty good at
it. We can go up and establish an ice camp and get that done.
I say we have got to do it every 2 years, and we are for
the first time. And I will talk to the secretary about maybe we
ought to do this annually. We are going to look at the
acceleration. And it is not just about the undersea. We need to
do the surface and the air, invite industry up there, and
assess this place up in an Arctic ice camp and take it from
there.
So it will be communications. It will be the systems
onboard the ships. It will be the satellite imagery so we can
communicate up there, as well.
General Dunford. Congresswoman, I know you are describing
the broader issues associated with climate change. From a
Marine Corps perspective, we view that as certainly one of the
sources of conflict, and also it creates an increased
requirement for humanitarian disaster relief operations. And I
think the kinds of things that we have done in the Pacific over
the last several years are probably prologue for what might
have to be done in the wake of the climate change you describe.
So for us it is a question, once again, of being forward
deployed, forward engaged, and be in a position to respond to
the kinds of natural disasters that I think we see as a second-
or third-order effect of climate change.
Ms. McCollum. But planning for that now, not forestalling,
not doing anything about it now, because on a priority list we
were talking about the military-industrial base, but putting
this off, pushing this down the road has the potential of
making us more vulnerable in the future? Would you agree or not
agree?
Admiral Greenert. I do agree. That is why I say we have got
to get this ICEX exercise to a biannual or annual. And as I
said, our programs today have to prove that they can operate in
an Arctic environment.
Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Members are invited to be part of the
ICEX program if you haven't done it. It is worthy of doing it.
Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CIVILIAN WORKFORCE

Good morning, Secretary Mabus, Admiral Greenert, General
Dunford. First of all, thank you for coming here today.
Certainly, thank you for your service. All of us here
understand the difficult challenges, and we look forward to
working with you to support the men and women of the United
States Navy and the Marine Corps.
Obviously, difficult decisions must be made, but looking
through the DOD budget over the years, I noticed that in 2003
the number of defense civilians was approximately 636,000
relative to 1,434,377 Active Duty military. That ratio is about
1.225. Today, there are 776,841 defense civilians relative to
1,332,991 uniformed services. That ratio, obviously, the
civilian employees versus military employees, obviously, is out
of whack significantly.
In 2010, the Defense Business Board recommended a reduction
of defense civilians to the fiscal year 2003 levels, or 15
percent, whichever is greater. According to experts, that would
save approximately $82.5 billion over 5 years to do that. And,
obviously, the authorizers are working on procurement reform
and other types of reform to help streamline the Department of
Defense to have savings that could be kept within DOD for more
end strength for Marines, procurement for the Navy, et cetera.
What is your position on that, to get those savings in the
civilian workforce. Secretary?
Mr. Mabus. Congressman, first, I think you need to break
that out into where those civilians are. I think the services
have done a pretty good job of making the trade that you have
to make in terms of uniform versus civilians. DOD is a much
larger place, though, than just the services, so as you are
looking at civilian employment, look wider than just the
services.
Second, in terms of the Navy in particular, those civilians
include people in our public shipyards that maintain our
nuclear submarines. They include the people that maintain and
modernize our aircraft. And one of the reasons that we are in
such a readiness trough now in both the Navy and the Marine
Corps, in aviation and in ship maintenance, is that we lost
some of those civilians during sequester, furlough, hiring
freeze, and we are just now catching up.
And finally, I do want to say a word about Navy civilians.
We lost 12 of them, killed in action in Washington Navy Yard,
and we would not have a fleet to put to sea without those
civilians.
So I think that the Defense Business Board has a good
point, but I think you need to also look at the specific jobs
that those civilians are doing instead of simply a broad metric
of what percentage to cut.
Mr. Calvert. Mr. Secretary, several comptrollers who have
come to see, from both parties, and believe that the Secretary,
the Secretary of Defense, should have discretion to make
determinations on how we can over time bring the civilian
workforce into compliance to what has been historically the
ratios within the Department of Defense. We are operating under
the same pool of money that we have to make determinations of
where it is going to go.
And I am not arguing that depots are important or fixing
aircraft, the civilian employees that have a critical role in
what we are trying to do, but it is not anecdotal to say that
there has been a growth in middle management in the Department
of Defense, there has been a growth in other activities in the
Department in the civilian workforce. And if we have to make
decisions, is it better to look at the civilian workforce
versus cutting Marines' end strength, which we have cut
probably more than we should, or ordering new ships and
operations and maintenance of those ships?
Mr. Mabus. Again, I think that the important distinction to
make here is between the services and the Department of
Defense.
Mr. Calvert. And that is the Secretary's job. The Secretary
of Defense needs to look at everything across the board,
throughout the Department of Defense, to make those difficult
decisions.
Mr. Mabus. Absolutely, Congressman. I think it is all of
our jobs to make sure that we are not out of whack. But I also
think that we need to not just look at cutting a Navy ship to
build a Navy ship or cutting a civilian for a specific reason.
Mr. Calvert. No, I am just talking about bringing into
historic compliance. We had 636,000 civilian employees in 2003.
Today, we have 776,000. And we have dropped the military
component by well over 100,000 in that same time period.
Mr. Mabus. Congressman, I think you and I are very much in
agreement here. It is just where you look. And instead of
saying everybody cut 15 percent, look and see what the
civilians are doing.
Mr. Calvert. I am not saying that. I am not talking about
across-the-board cuts. I am talking about the Secretary, like
any business manager, making determinations throughout the
Department where they need to be made.
Mr. Mabus. And, Congressman, I agree with you, again,
wholeheartedly, and I hope that when those looks are made that
they will be looked at more in tail or overheard, business
terms, than in tooth, Navy, Marine Corps, forward presence.
Mr. Calvert. Admiral, would you have any pointers?
Admiral Greenert. I agree with what the Secretary said. You
know, Congressman, you could really help us by giving us--it
would be the Secretary of Defense and all of us--by giving us
the authorities to manage our civilian workforce like we manage
our military. And what I mean is to provide appropriate
incentives to do shaping of the force, to man the civilian
workforce like we man military, to function, to task, so that,
as you said, we have a core that is important, as the Secretary
said and you agree.
That is where the real rub becomes, sir, whenever we try to
manage. Then we go in and say, okay, how do we do this? And we
find that the ability to make changes is so onerous it becomes
across the board and then we throw the baby out with the
bathwater, as they say.
Mr. Calvert. And I have been told anecdotally, when you put
a uniformed person in there to do that job or you have to bring
a contractor in to do that job because you do not have the
flexibility to manage the civilian workforce. Is that correct?
Admiral Greenert. That is correct. We don't have the
flexibility to properly manage the civilian workforce, in my
opinion, yes, sir.
Mr. Calvert. General.
General Dunford. Congressman, maybe to help put what
Secretary Mabus was speaking about in some perspective, in the
Marine Corps our ratio of civilians to Marines is 1 to 10; in
the Department as a whole, it is 1 to 2. We have in fact----
Mr. Calvert. You have done a great job.
General Dunford. Well, we do benefit from some of the other
civilians that are out there. But, again, looking at it from a
purely parochial perspective, we don't have much to cut,
although we are involved in a 10 percent cut. We will achieve
that by 2017.
But the real important point for us is someone has an image
of the civilians. Ninety percent of our civilians are outside
the national capital region. They are working at our depot.
They are providing force protection at our bases. They are
running our training facilities. They are running our family
programs.
So as I look at it as a service chief, I look at our
civilians as tooth, not tail. In other words, they are directly
contributing to the combat effectiveness and the readiness of
the United States Marine Corps. And if they are not, then I
agree with you 100 percent, then we need to take a hard look at
whether or not we have them.
Mr. Calvert. Okay. And I understand, and I just think that
we have a take a serious look at that, because we would rather
have the money stay in the Marine Corps and the Navy and to
give you better flexibility, Secretary Mabus, to operate your
Department.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Point well taken.
Mr. Ryan.

MENTAL SKILLS TRAINING

Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, gentlemen. This is clearly very challenging
times, and we appreciate your service and all that you are
doing day to day to try to meet the goals that are set for you,
as unreasonable as sometimes we seem to have placed them for
you.
I have got a couple of questions. First, General Dunford, a
few years back when we met we were working on this mind skills
program and mental fitness training with Dr. Liz Stanley from
Georgetown. I was a few years ago stunned by the fact that many
times the warriors' stress level was almost at its highest when
they were preparing to go off to war, the family situations,
just getting ready to leave. And we now know that that
diminishes your working memory capacity, your cognitive
functions, and all the things that you are going to need when
you are out into the field of battle.
And this mental skills training program has shown some real
signs of increasing working memory capacity, increasing
cognitive function, increasing resiliency so that we are really
making some key investments into the warrior that are going to
prepare them for the kind of high-level stressful situations
that they are going to be dealing with.
So there were some positive studies that came back, and
then there was a study that was put out for mental skills
training and basic reconnaissance in the Marines, and it was
funded by the Office of Naval Research. And it was a 2013
study. I am waiting for the results to see how that is going.
General Dunford. Congressman, thanks for asking the
question. And as you alluded to, I really started getting into
this probably back in 2010 when I was the commander of our
Marine Expeditionary Force on the West Coast. And we started a
pilot program that has come along apace with some other
research efforts that you spoke about.
Right now, we have the data that says this is absolutely
the right way to go, that this can, in fact, reduce the stress
of our Marines across, whether in predeployment, deployed, or
postdeployment. But as you point out, some of the most
stressful period of time is the predeployment phase. We found
that. That is analytically based.
Right now, what I am trying to do is figure out how to what
I describe as marinize it. We have 35,000 new marines every
year. We have got an Active Duty force of 182,000, another
38,000 marines. And what Dr. Stanley has been able to do to
date is work with relatively small groups and small units, but
not necessarily give us a program that can be applied across
the Marine Corps.
And to be honest with you, this is one of those items that
is on my checklist. I have been on the job just about 4 months
right now. And as I came into the job, I did ask some questions
about where are we in the research. I have had a conversation,
I guess, a couple of conversations with Dr. Stanley since I
have been in the job. And over the next couple months what I
will be looking to do is figure out how we can integrate these
types of techniques so that we are doing nothing more, nothing
less than exercising the brain the same way we do with the body
to contribute to the combat effectiveness of our marines. Part
of that is reducing stress.
Mr. Ryan. Great. Well, if you could check on the study, the
latest, see what the results are so we can get moving on that.
And, Mr. Chairman, I know I have talked to you about this
several times, on trying to dig a little bit deeper in, not
only the resiliency of the warrior, but in many instances I
think this can inoculate from some post-traumatic stress issues
that come down the line. So I appreciate that.

PIVOT TO THE PACIFIC

Admiral, just a quick question on the Asia-Pacific
rebalance. If you could give us a little bit on that and where
the Navy stands in the rebalance and rebasing, reassignments of
units, and that kind of thing.
Admiral Greenert. The rebalance I put in three categories:
forces, capability, and what I call understanding.
So with regard to forces, we are putting more forces in the
Asia-Pacific region, some in our forward-deployed naval force,
that means forward station. So in the next 2 years we will put
two more destroyers in Japan. This year we are putting another
submarine in Guam.
We have the Fort Worth, which is the number two hull
number, Littoral Combat Ship. She is on deployment over there.
That is the second deployment over there, would be out of
Singapore in that area. So when she completes this deployment,
it is a 16-month, she is about 5 months into it, changed out
the crew once, the next ship that comes over will stay in
Singapore, then another, and two more. So we will have four
Littoral Combat Ships by 2017, by the end of 2017, in
Singapore. So four Littoral Combat Ships, two destroyers, a
submarine in Guam. That is part of the force structure.
Our P-8, it is a maritime patrol aircraft, it is a 737-800
series aircraft, replaces a propeller aircraft, four-engine
propeller aircraft. They have been on deployment now for three
deployments out there. So that is in the Asia-Pacific and that
is the first area we have deployed this.
Our Joint Strike Fighter, by the end of this decade, will
deploy to the Western Pacific, so you see the trend. We are
putting all the forces out there, either forward station or
they will deploy there first. All on track, sir.
Number two, capability. We benchmark anti-air,
antisubmarine, electronic attack, cyber, all to how it would
perform in the Western Pacific against potential adversaries
out there. That is going apace. The modernization is delayed. I
spoke to that in my opening statement. It is in my written
statement. That one has slowed down. The point is, the
benchmark is in place.
And then lastly, understanding. It is really about
reassuring our allies, establishing partners, and really
establishing ad hoc partners where the case may be.
Mr. Ryan. Are there any new countries involved?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I want to make sure Mr. Womack gets his
oar in the water here too.
Mr. Ryan. Are there any new countries that are involved in
what you are doing out there?
Admiral Greenert. By new countries, friends that are doing
more, Malaysia, in particular, Indonesia, in particular. I just
mentioned Singapore, who has really come forward. You are
familiar with the Philippines interest level, Vietnam interest
level. So there is a pattern there. Southeast Asia is emerging.
And lastly, I would say, we have a great opportunity
emerging now with the President and Prime Minister Modi, the
recent get-together with India, and what that partnership
means.
Mr. Ryan. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Ryan.
Mr. Womack.

TRANSITIONAL OCO REQUIREMENTS TO THE BASE BUDGET

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I too want to offer my thanks to the service of these
gentlemen that are before us today, and, particularly Admiral
Greenert, your service. The time that I have spent in the last
year on the Nimitz and on the West Virginia and with some
special guys down in Coronado has been a real highlight of my
time in Congress, and never crease to be amazed at the
competence of our men and women in uniform.
And, General Dunford, your service, particularly your most
recent service in Afghanistan. I truly appreciate your
hospitality when we traveled there. It is remarkable what you
guys have been able to do.
You all have had to rely not only on base funding to
account for readiness shortfalls, but OCO, as we commonly refer
to it, and I understand that the need for OCO doesn't go away
when we leave the Afghan theater. OCO is used to get our
equipment home, get it into the proper maintenance posture and
ready for its next mission.
The conversation has come up again and again how to scale
OCO down, perhaps 1 day even to zero. I don't know if that is
realistic. And I know we don't live in an ideal world. But have
you begun to transition OCO enduring requirements in the base
yet? Or help me understand how we are planning in that regard.
Admiral Greenert. Well, Congressman, we started in that
direction about 4 years ago. And what happened was, either at
the defense level, the OMB level, or here in the Congress, the
decision is made to put more operations in OCO and then replace
where that came out of with maybe some procurement.
So I think what we need is we need an agreement by all
three of these entities to say, here is the plan, here is how
we are going to transition from maybe what is called OCO today
to a new supplemental fund used for emergent operations out
there. Today, my readiness accounts of, say, $21 billion, about
$3.6 billion of it is OCO, that is funded by OCO. And about 2
of that, I would say, probably eventually belongs in a base,
belongs in the base.
So I think we can do this, but I think we need a
deliberate, coordinated action so that I ask the Secretary,
hey, let's put this in the base, and then somebody pulls it out
of the base and replaces it with OCO and then does something
else with that money. That is confusing to our folks.
Mr. Womack. General.
General Dunford. Congressman, thanks. Two years ago, in
2014, we had a little over $4 billion in OCO. This year we have
a little over 2; and our request in 2016 is a little over 1, it
is 1.3 billion. So we have, in fact, come down about half each
year. But like Admiral Greenert, now I am starting to see
challenges of training for the contingencies that we are
involved in that were not anticipated 2 or 3 years ago.
So a combination of the operations and maintenance money to
train for the unexpected, combined with the continued
requirement to reset is the foundational requirements for our
OCO right now. We will be done with the reset requirement from
Iraq and Afghanistan by 2017, so this is the last year we will
request money for reset. But of course that assumes steady
state requirements in the United States Central Command,
AFRICOM, and elsewhere.

BUDGETARY RISK

Mr. Womack. My other question is, and I bring this up every
year, I think, it is levels of acceptable risk. And of course
this budget that we are dealing with, whether it is sequestered
budget or maybe even as high as the President's budget, that is
still to be determined. How are we able to square risk in
budgets? This seems to me to be a very difficult exercise,
because you almost have to plan two different budgets. I guess
you almost assuredly have to plan two different budgets. How
are we able to measure and assess risk?
Mr. Mabus. We manage and plan for risk in--it is one of
these hard choices you make--what is the highest probability of
what is going to happen, and what are the results if it does?
So high probability, small result; low probability, but a very
bad result on the end. And you have to balance force structure,
so people, platforms, and readiness, to meet, number one, the
most likely contingencies, and number two, to have the most
flexibility for the contingencies that you don't plan for. But
the very word ``risk'' means you take some chances in some
things that are low probability, that you simply don't have the
resources.
Mr. Womack. Mr. Secretary, if we have a sequestered bucket
in fiscal year 2016, in your opinion, in your professional
opinion, is it an acceptable level of risk?
Mr. Mabus. I will quote the Commandant here: We go from
risk to gamble. It is no longer risk. It is simply a gamble.

DWELL TIME

Mr. Womack. I have one followup question, Mr. Chairman, and
I know my time is up, but this will elicit only a short
response from General Dunford.
You mentioned in our opening one-to-two dwell time. Where
do we need to be on dwell time?
General Dunford. Congressman, optimally, it would be at one
to three. That is what I grew up with most of my career,
deployed for 6 months, back for 18 months.
Mr. Womack. One to three is sustainable?
General Dunford. We can maintain one to two. We are
maintaining it right now. One to three is optimal. What you
really start to see when you are at one to two is the inability
to train across the range of military operations. So you are
really preparing for the next deployment as opposed to
preparing across the range of military operations. That is the
difference between one to two and one to three, as well as,
obviously, the human factors, how much time you spend back at
home with the family.
Mr. Womack. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack.
Mr. Ruppersberger.

SEQUESTRATION IMPACT ON CYBER COMMAND

Mr. Ruppersberger. First, thank you for being here and for
all of your leadership throughout the years.
First thing, you have been testifying today, Secretary,
clearly, is crippling policy. Mr. Womack, I thank you for that
question and the answer that we are now putting our national
security at a gamble phase. And I think it is really incumbent
upon this committee, our other committees, to let our peers,
whether it is Democratic or Republican, this should not be an
issue of partisanship, it should be about the American national
security and what is right for our constituents.
And I think that this testimony, if the average person--
whatever their position is in Congress--understands where we
are. You know, budgeting is about priorities. It is not about
cutting across the board and you throw the baby out with the
bathwater. And we need to rely on you with our oversight
because of to say on the funding to make those priority
decisions because we have to deal with the issue of spending.
There is no question. That is out of control. Areas we can deal
with and that is our committee oversight also.
But with that, I want to thank the chair for your
leadership, and also for our ranking member for raising this
issue, and for the members on the other side of the aisle for
asking the questions to show where we are.
You know, Judge Carter is cochair of the House Army Caucus,
we are going to get the same thing from the Army and Air Force.
Now it is time for us, I think, and people who have insight on
what is going on with our national security, that we are
putting America at risk. And we can't let it go. So we have to
educate people that have another point of view as it relates to
sequestration.
With that, I want to refer you to Fort Meade.
Is that my district, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Just about everything in this area is
your congressional district.
Mr. Ruppersberger. And the U.S. Fleet Command, that is the
Cyber Command. You know, you talk about the issues that are so
important, the danger of our country, you know, we talk about
the terrorism, we talk about the rush of China and the Iran
threat. And sequestration is, I mean--sequestration, got it on
my mind, and cyber is right there one of the most serious
issues we are dealing with. We see the attacks coming more and
more, constructive attacks, stealing attacks, and we really
have to be on our game as it relates to that.
Now, in the Cyber U.S. Fleet Command in Fort Meade, can you
provide details on the consequences that sequestration at this
point would have on U.S. Fleet Cyber Command, what cyber
capabilities on the U.S. Fleet Cyber Command fleet lose with
that sequestration level bucket? You might want to say to the
committee what the U.S. Fleet Cyber Command, what their mission
is. And I don't know who wants to answer the question first.
Mr. Mabus. I will take an overall shot at it, and then I
would like the CNO to weigh in as well. But what Tenth Fleet,
U.S. Naval Cyber does is it provides our cyber capability for
the Department of the Navy and it folds in under the U.S. Cyber
Command. And you are absolutely right, cyber is a new area of
warfare, and you only have to look at what happened in Ukraine
or any of a number of places to see how it is being not only
integrated into warfare, but a warfare area all its own.
What we have been providing is teams, cyber teams to the
Tenth Fleet and to U.S. Cyber Command. We are on track to
provide about 40 of those teams that are the warfighting teams
in cyber. I will have to get you for the record the exact what
would happen if our budget went down, but it would have an
impact on both the capacity and the capability of cyber.
[Clerk's note.--The Navy did not provide a response.]
Mr. Mabus. And it reaches farther than Tenth Fleet, because
cyber is a concern all around the world in every one of our
platforms and every one of our bases. And how we operate and
how we both defend and go on the offense in cyber is critical,
and Tenth Fleet and U.S. Cyber Command provide the underpinning
for that.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Admiral, or whatever is called the air
gap between systems and that is to make sure that we can secure
our network, our computer network and physical, they penetrate
air gap, they can, I think, all classified information. And I
know we are continuing to work Cyber Command focusing on that.
So if you can answer my question, if you can address that area.
Admiral Greenert. Yes, sir. What that refers to really the
ability to what I call put sentinels in the system, automatic
sentinels. They scan all of your networks at each level to see
if there are attempted intrusions or there are intrusions and
in some cases take automatic action. So we need to upgrade our
systems to put these in. Right now that is done by people who
methodically kind of go through each and every network looking
for unusual activity. So we have got to get to what is normal.
What I would tell you, Congressman, is cyber is a very high
priority. I would very much hesitate to come to Secretary Mabus
and recommend much reduction in cyber, even at Budget Control
Act levels.
Mr. Ruppersberger. My issue in answering the question is
what would the results be if sequestration continues on. We are
going to have to deal with it.
Admiral Greenert. Here is what would happen. Well, here is
what would slow down: upgrading our networks on our ships and
even ashore with systems that are already, if you will,
resistant, that have this building capability that we are
referring to that we would put up there in the headquarters. So
going to application-based communications on our ships, going
ashore as well. Program is called CANES, it is called NGEN,
Next Generation. That would slow down. So we are more
vulnerable for longer at getting these replacement systems put
on. And so, as we say, the risk, the gamble would go on in a
very critical area, cyber.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Ruppersberger.
Judge Carter. Thanks for your patience down there. Poor Mr.
Graves.

CLOSE AIR SUPPORT ALTERNATIVES

Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize for
coming in late. I, as you can imagine, have a bill that is
giving me problems.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Chairman of the Homeland Security
Committee.
Mr. Carter. As my cochair over there mentioned, I represent
the Army, Fort Hood is in my district. I have a lot of interest
in the debate we had last year on close air support, and I ran
across some information that I wanted to ask you all about. In
a test last year, a team of U.S. marines called in an upgraded
Tomahawk missile strike at a nearby target, just like they
routinely call in arterial or aerial attacks, Cobra
helicopters. Bob Work, the deputy secretary of defense,
declared a similar test a potential game-changing capability
for not a lot of cost. This kind of innovation provides the
military with a powerful new weapon without actually buying
much new hardware.
Can you speak to any of the opportunities associated with
deploying Tomahawk cruise missiles as innovative alternatives
to putting close air support, jets, in the air? And can you
speak to any potential cost differential associated between
close air support missions executed by Tomahawk missiles versus
aviation?
Admiral Greenert. I think what Mr. Work was talking about,
as it refers to Tomahawk cruise missiles, a Tomahawk cruise
missile, you give it a point, you say go hit that point.
Incredibly accurate, and we have been going that way. The
Tomahawk called Block IV, what you can do is send it up there
and instead of sending it right to that point, it will loiter
and you can upgrade the point you want it to go to.
The next step is you keep updating that aim point, and you
have a constant feed to the missile as it is coming in, and it
changes, and it becomes, if you will, its own sensor. So what
you need is a link of constant information feeding it. We found
a way to do that, with the right network in the air of sensors.
The key to that is that link, that constant upgrade. We figured
out how to do that, Congressman, and that is the key of that.
So now a moving target, which used to be such a problem
because you were looking for a point, you can't avoid the
missile now as much with this accountability.
Mr. Carter. Well, that is pretty cool. But how does it
compare effectiveness and cost-wise as you look? And according
to this article, a bunch of marines called it in on a target on
the ground and they also used it to hit a ship.
Admiral Greenert. What is cool about it is you have the
weapon now, not in 2018.
Mr. Carter. You don't have to develop it, yeah.
Admiral Greenert. Yeah, it is now, with a couple of changes
and a data link we already have, with a missile we already
have, with sensors we already have. Just get them all talking
on the same link, and now you have that accountability.
Mr. Carter. And cost-wise, how does it compare with air
resources?
Admiral Greenert. A few million versus tens and tens and
tens of millions.
Mr. Carter. General, do you want to comment on it?
General Dunford. The only thing I was going to say,
Congressman, I mean, I can see where that Tomahawk missile
would be helpful for a high-end operational target or a
strategic target, but probably not routinely the most effective
weapon system for a tactical target or close air support.
Mr. Carter. Well, that is kind of what I was curious about,
because the way the article read, it sounded like it was being
used for that kind of tactical target. And of course we had the
big A-10 debate last year and there is still a bunch of ground
troops that like that aircraft, and so I was curious about
that. And I thank you for the answer to that question.

ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES

Mr. Chairman, I may have time for another question.
Can you elaborate on how the Navy is working to apply
advanced technologies to achieve more with less? What I am
referring to is in 2014, on occasion, the U.S. executed a
series of five air strikes against ISIS targets at a cost of
$2.5 million. The tactical victory entailed was one destroyed
truck, one antiaircraft artillery piece, two small boats, and a
fighting position. This seems to be a relatively high cost-
benefit scenario.
Today's realty is defined by fiscal constraint amidst this
complex national security environment. In light of this, we
need solutions that are cost effective. What are you looking at
as far as advanced technologies? And I would say the cruise
missile discussion would be one of them, but are there others
that you could enlighten us about?
Mr. Mabus. I can give you two very quick examples here. We
have deployed a laser weapon on the Ponce in the Arabian Gulf
right now. This laser weapon, the shots are measured in cents
per shot, and it is an almost endless magazine because all you
have to have is energy. You don't have to have a physical
weapon. And we are testing it now, and so far the tests have
gone very well.
Mr. Carter. That is good.
Mr. Mabus. That is an example.
The second example is the railgun, which we are also going
to put on a ship later this year to test in the maritime
environment. Last week, I got to go to the Naval Research Lab
and actually shoot one of those railguns, and it comes out so
fast, Mach 7, Mach 8, you don't have to have high explosive on
the other end, and all you have to have is the right shape, the
right kind of projectile. But, again, it is measured in very
low cost, and the amount per shot is fractions of----
Mr. Carter. And actually one of the things I was going to
ask in particular with the railgun, because they developed part
of that at the University of Texas, and I was there when they
fired the railgun, and it is pretty impressive. And they
pointed out that on a ship in a large size it can do major
damage a long way away without any explosives.
Mr. Mabus. It can do major damage to almost anything, and
it is about $30,000 a shot versus a million for a missile.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Judge Carter. There is always
a Texas solution somewhere.
Mr. Diaz-Balart.

COUNTER NARCOTIC EFFORTS

Mr. Diaz-Balart. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And since I am new, I am more listening and learning, but I
have couple things that have come up. When Chairman Rogers,
Chairman Granger, and a few others and I were at SOUTHCOM--I
don't know, maybe 6 months ago, I don't know how long ago it
was--we learned something that was rather astonishing, which is
that, obviously, the Navy and the Coast Guard have a crucial
role in interdicting narcotics. And we know that, I forget the
number, but something like 40,000 Americans die every year--
don't quote me on that number--from illicit drugs.
What we learned is that what SOUTHCOM sees, they can only
interdict, I think it was something like 20 percent. And,
again, don't quote me on the numbers. And so it is an issue of
assets.
So are there plans to increase our assets in our hemisphere
to deal with narcotics? And how would sequestration potentially
affect that?
Mr. Mabus. Congressman, that is one of the best examples of
what happens when you don't build enough ships. And it doesn't
happen right away. It happens 10, 15 years down the road. We
had frigates that were performing this mission in SOUTHCOM.
Those frigates were built in the late 1970s, early 1980s, and
they have reached the end of their lives. We are retiring the
last of those frigates this year.
The follow-on to those frigates are mainly the Fast Frigate
or Littoral Combat Ship that we are doing, but we didn't start
building them soon enough. And so there was a gap. There was a
gap in SOUTHCOM.
Now, the Littoral Combat Ship, the Fast Frigate will bring
far more capabilities when they get there, and we are building
them. We have got 24 under contract today. And so we are
getting them there. We can also use this platform, the Joint
High Speed Vessel, to interdict drugs. But it is one of the
crying needs that we have, is to have enough assets in places
like SOUTHCOM.
But when the size of the fleet goes down and you have to
prioritize where you put those assets, and you have Central
Command, you have the Western Pacific, you run out of assets.
And that is, as I said, the best example I can come up with of
the effects of not building ships today will have on the people
who are sitting here 10, 15 years in the future.
Mr. Diaz-Balart. And, obviously, that is real life and like
that there have to be, obviously--and we have heard them
today--dozens, if not more, examples of specific issues that
actually are harming our national security interests. In this
case, again, lives are being lost every single day. So it is a
real impact.

MANDATORY SPENDING REDUCTIONS

I just also--if I can ask one more question, Mr. Chairman--
first, I agree with what Mr. Ruppersberger said, that it is
really our responsibility to explain to people what their real-
life situation is, and it is real. And the number that was
never supposed to get here, which is sequester now is here and
we have to live with it.
Now, the ranking member also, I think, made a great
explanation of explaining that more than two-thirds of the
federal budget now is mandatory spending--we don't touch that--
and so we continue to have to deal with a diminishing source of
funds.
Last year, the President put on the table in his budget
some reforms of mandatory spending. So forget about whether
they were good ones or bad ones, he at least put some reforms
of the majority of the budget which we don't touch. This year,
he did not. And so we have a responsibility to do our job. The
administration has also a responsibility if we are going to
deal with this sequester issue, which I think we have to deal
with.
Do you know if there is any indication that the President
is going to be looking at putting forward any proposals to
reform some parts of the--which he hasn't done this year--on
mandatory? And again, it is up to us to do our part, and I
think we have not succeeded in doing it, but I think it
requires all of us to play. And also being on the Budget
Committee, one of our frustrations is that we have seen no such
recommendation. Any idea--because we see the impact of not
doing it--any idea if the President might be looking at
actually putting forward some amendment to his budget on that?
Mr. Mabus. Congressman, that is so far out of my lane that
I am going to get in trouble no matter what I say.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Let's keep the Secretary in the naval
lanes.
You would probably appreciate that, wouldn't you?
Mr. Diaz-Balart. Again, I am still learning, Mr. Chairman,
as I said before. So I am just trying to see what the
parameters are. But, again, clearly we have real-life effects
of when we don't adequately fund our military.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We will make sure we do a mine sweep
earlier in the hearing. Thank you, Mr. Diaz-Balart.
Mr. Graves.

OHIO REPLACEMENT PROGRAM

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, thank you each for being here. And certainly no
matter where the seat is at the table, I am grateful to be at
the table, Mr. Chairman, and have this conversation. It is so
important.
Admiral, a question for you, if you don't mind. And you
have touched on it a little bit with your----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. One of them needs to be turned off or
something. I am not sure what is going on.
Mr. Graves. All right. We are on. We are good. Attempting
to reclaim my time.
Admiral, as it relates to the Ohio Replacement Program, can
you share with us your expectation of where that is on your
priority list and where you see that going and how it might
maintain that priority to see completion on the proposed
schedule?
Admiral Greenert. Well, it is at the top of the program
priority list. So when I come to Secretary Mabus, I will
describe to him, okay, here is the priority, Boss, that I am
laying before you. The Ohio Replacement is the replacement for
the Ohio, which is the sea-based strategic deterrent part of
the triad. Number one, it is homeland security, the protection
of the homeland. We have to replace it. The youngest Ohio-class
submarine is 17-years-old. So many of them, the first, they
will be over 40 years, they were designed for 30, whenever
their time comes, which is starting in the mid-2020s.
So we have to start building, that is bending steel, as we
like to say, in 2021, so that the boat is complete by 2029, so
it goes on patrol by 2031. There is no slack, Congressman. We
have to fund it. If we have to endure it in our shipbuilding
plan, if there is not some assistance outside, which has been
the case in the past for national programs like this, that is
about a $9 billion bill in 2021 alone.
The best we do in shipbuilding in a year is $14 billion. So
you can see how much of that shipbuilding account, which has
been going so well for so long. We are committed to it. It has
to be done. It is a national priority right now.

IMPACT OF BUDGET CONTROL ACT ON NATIONAL SECURITY

Mr. Graves. Great. Thank you for sharing that.
Mr. Chairman, if I might try to attempt to stay in the lane
for a second.
Mr. Secretary, I am hearing certainly, I guess, the
agreement about sequestration and where it has taken us. But I
think back to 2011 and the Budget Control Act, and I am trying
to recall if I remember the Defense Department openly speaking
in opposition to the Budget Control Act and the potential
implications.
Can you point to any remarks you made at that time that
indicated what a threat that would be to our country? Because
we find ourselves here today with a lot of people saying what a
bad idea it is, but I don't recall that being said back then.
Mr. Mabus. I know I said it, and I will search through
files that nobody looks at, which are my old speeches, to find
you some examples.
But I think at the time everybody thought that it was such
an awful thing that it would never happen. And that was what
was being said pretty much universally, that the consequences
for defense and nondefense were so horrendous that it just
couldn't come to pass. And we have seen how bad those
consequences are as a result.
Whatever people said in 2011, I think that it has been
pretty consistent down the path that the effects of
sequestration for the things that we are responsible for, the
Navy, the Marine Corps, were in 2013 devastating and will be in
the future. And of that, everyone has said it. What we said in
2011 when it was still a theory, I can't remember exactly, but
there is an old Yogi Berra quote that said, in theory, there
should be no difference in theory and practice; in practice,
there is. And in practice, sequestration is pretty awful.
Mr. Graves. Well, this is serious stuff. This is a Yogi
Berra kind of situation in my opinion. And I have looked and I
haven't found any public statements of your opposition at that
time. And, in fact, in 2012, in front of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, you indicated that you would work within
the constraints of the Budget Control Act with those involved.
A lot has changed since then. And you publicly since, probably
in 2013, 2014, that is when your comments turned more to the
negative.
I guess when I think about where we are and the role that
the Defense Department plays for our country in trying to
project risk assessments, and not seeing that, and no one in
the Defense Department is seeing that at that time, can you
point to any one person who now has accepted responsibility for
putting our Nation in a position in which, it has been stated
today, where the risk assessment is a gamble? Anyone accepting
responsibility for that, putting us in that position?
Mr. Mabus. I am not sure I understand the question in terms
of--Congress passed the bill. We have had to live with that and
we have had to express what the risks are to this country, and
that is what we have tried to do today, that if we go back to
that, what the gamble is going to be.
Mr. Graves. Your statement today was, we didn't think it
would happen.
Mr. Mabus. Well, I think that is true for everybody who was
here.
Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Secretary.

COMPOSITION OF TODAY'S FLEET

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Graves.
I know members have some questions. I do. I want to talk,
Admiral Greenert and Mr. Secretary, a little bit about the
makeup of today's fleet. And the perception is it is pretty
light on capital warships, destroyers and cruisers, and we have
a greater reliance on other types of ships.
Given the headlines we see today, ``China Submarines
Outnumber U.S. Fleet,'' one of your admirals made some comments
relative to that, ``China Rebuffs U.S. Requests to Halt South
China Sea Island Work,'' I mean, I am not sure we should ever
leave a pivot to the Middle East because I think we have some
major commitments there. We certainly have commitments to the
Mediterranean. But I would like to know a little more about the
capability of the fleet that we have given what we see the
Chinese developing, the Russians developing.
I know people mock what the Iranians did in the recent
days, but in reality that is to some a show of force, and
sometimes, if we are not prepared, we can be vulnerable. So I
would like some comments relative to the robustness of the
fleet that we have, given the traditional view of our need for
more capital warships.
Mr. Mabus. Mr. Chairman, as I said in my opening statement,
we have and we are building a balanced fleet. We are building
two DDGs a year. We are building two Virginia-class attack
submarines a year. We are building amphibs to get to the
minimum number of 33 that the Marines need. We will get there
by 2018. And we will continue to build all three types of
amphibious ships that we have.
We have a need for other types of ships too. We have a
demonstrated need for 52 small surface combatants. They do
different tasks than the large surface combatants. It is one of
the reasons that we are working so hard to make sure that we
keep the cruisers into the 2040s.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, there was a time when the cruisers
were supposed to be put into retirement, and so there has been
sort of a recognition that--yeah.
Mr. Mabus. Absolutely. And there is a recognition that not
only quantity, but quality and capabilities. We have, I think,
the right balance of capabilities. And I am going to turn to
CNO in terms of very specific capabilities, but one of the
things that the CNO has focused on here today is if we go back
to sequestration-level funding, one of the main hits is going
to be to things like the modernization, to things like
upgrading capabilities, to things like the technological edge
that we possess. So we are building a balanced fleet. We are
going to have enough----

SUPERIORITY OVER ADVERSARIES AND RULES OF ENGAGEMENT

Mr. Frelinghuysen. So the balanced fleet that we are
building and our committee is invested in, I assume we continue
to have overwhelming--we used to call it--overwhelming
superiority over other players, particularly China, which has
done a remarkable job challenging us in the South China Sea. So
we still have the naval edge there?
Admiral Greenert. Today, yes, sir. I talked about it. If we
go down the road we are on, sooner or later we are going to get
there. We won't have it in the future.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. One of the issues here, and normally I
raise this issue with the Army, the rules of engagement here. I
mean, it seems we are already engaged and confronted on a
fairly regular basis. Tell me if we are not. What are the rules
of engagement given the type of confrontations we have had?
Admiral Greenert. That is a long topic.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is a long topic.
Admiral Greenert. We have adequate rules of engagement
for----

SIZE AND COMPOSITION OF THE FLEET

Mr. Frelinghuysen. It goes to our sailors that are in the
Pacific. It goes to the issues of the bravery of our Navy
SEALs. There are issues of rules of engagement here. And there
is sort of a growing perception that we are sort of tying our
hands of some of those who are so well trained, so capable, so
motivated, so patriotic.
Admiral Greenert. Well, Chairman, a few things for the
record. Today we have 71 submarines. China has 53. Forty-four
of them are diesel. But they are building nuclear submarines.
So there is a metamorphosis going on, but it is not there yet.
So it is out there, though. We are on the track.
We have to have the balance of fleet. You mentioned it
twice, it was in your opening remarks. We have recently had
destroyers, Aegis destroyers, $2 billion ships running around
chasing pirates, thugs, doing counterpiracy. As the Secretary
said, we are balancing the fleet. We are building Joint High
Speed Vessels to do piracy, to do humanitarian assistance, to
help the Commandant of the Marine Corps' folks move marines
around there.
We need today 38 amphibious ships, gray hull ships to do
combat. To do the business of the world today, we would need
50--to do humanitarian assistance and all those others--
amphibious ships. So we build, with your support, things like
the Afloat Forward Staging Base so that we can provide counter-
SOF, special forces, do counterterrorism, do the kind of
missions that resonate with the capability you have. It is the
right expenditure of money.
Today, we have 87 what we call large surface combatants.
Those are the capital ships you mentioned earlier, Chairman.
Twenty years ago we had about the same number in a fleet we
were so proud of. We had 400. So the combatant balance is
pretty good today. We are going down in submarines, you
mentioned it yourself, Chairman, and that is a function of
submarines we built 30 years ago, two, three, four a year, we
are building two today. So that is going to go into a dip
before we come out of that dip and get to the 48 we need.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, this committee has been very
supportive of our submarines----
Admiral Greenert. Very supportive.
Mr. Frelinghuysen [continuing]. The two Virginia class.
Certainly there are investments in the Ohio class. I am just
wondering where it measures up to what the future challenges
are. We have the near horizon. We have the far horizon. And
over the years people have been somewhat dismissive of what the
Chinese are doing.
And, obviously, we always weigh in on the side of diplomacy
and good relations, but in reality they are denying us areas
where there has been free transport, the world's commerce in
oil passes. There have been issues of us denying us access to
areas where we have traditionally maintained actually the
world's commerce. I want to make sure we still have that.
Admiral Greenert. Chairman, I can't think of a place in
this world of oceans that our Navy can't go today. Nobody is
denying us anything. We talk about threats and we will throw
out scenarios and future scenarios and people will tell you,
you will be denied to go in there. That is a scenario, we could
speculate to that and I could talk a long time with you,
particularly in a classified arena. But I will tell you this,
Chairman, if we go on the path we are on and we go to Budget
Control Act numbers, it is a different world. It is a different
situation. I would be giving you a different story 3 or 4 years
from now.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, that is all the more reason--
getting back to my earlier comments--that we need to know
exactly what the impacts will be to what we are about to embark
on here. I think we are on your side, but we actually need,
should we say, more meat on the bones as to what actually we
would be losing if we get into this situation.
Let's see. Mr. Visclosky.
Any question?

PERSONNEL MISCONDUCT, WOMEN ON SUBMARINES, SEXUAL ASSAULT

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am going to have three more personnel-type questions. I
will do all three of them at once, and as you have time to
answer in full committee, I would appreciate it. Anything you
can't get to, please, get back to us in writing.
Secretary, I want to touch on the Glenn Defense Marine Asia
scandal. I understand that naval officers have been charged in
the case. Three admirals were censured just a couple of weeks
ago. News Defense reported earlier this month that 36 flag
officers are under investigation with only 219 flag officer
billets, so this is a serious problem for you. Can you comment
on how this is impacting the Navy's ability to properly manage
operations?
And, Admiral, I am interested to hear your views on the
underlying cause of this case. Could you tell us what processes
were missing in the payment review that allowed such a scheme
to last for over a decade? And so what we are doing to keep
this from happening again.
Another question that I have has to do with the Navy
opening up submarine duty positions to women in 2011. In June
2013, you submitted an implementation plan to open all
occupations with limited number of closed positions and equal
professional opportunities for females in every officer
designation enlisted ranking in the Navy in January 2016. So I
would like you to tell us what is ongoing and where the Navy
will be in meeting this January 1 update.
There was also an issue where there was an incident where a
female officer was videotaped in the shower, and I would like
to know where you are with the punishment and discipline with
the sailors involved.
And then last, Secretary, you came before us, we had big
discussions about what to do about sexual assault. One of the
things that you asked for was for an increase in resources for
the Naval Criminal Investigations Service and judge advocates.
Could you please describe to the committee what additional
resources you made available in fiscal year 2015 that supported
your desire to strengthen NCIS and Navy JAG to investigate and
prosecute sexual criminals, and do you plan to continue or
strengthen those resources in 2016?
Thank you. And if you would start with the Asian scandal
first.
Mr. Mabus. I think one important thing to remember about
GDMA is that the reason that situation came to light was that
we set up some tripwires that raised a red flag and NCIS
started investigating it. They investigated it for 3 years with
no leaks. They found an NCIS agent who was passing information
to GDMA, to Leonard Francis. They fed him false information to
convince him that the coast was clear. We stopped this. It was
Navy that found it. It was Navy that did it.
Now, it shouldn't have gone on nearly as long as it did. I
assigned the assistant secretary of the Navy for RD&A,
research, development, and acquisition, to look at how we do
these husbanding contracts, not just in Asia but around the
world, and also the head of the Naval Audit Service to go in.
We have substantially strengthened the way we do husbanding
and the internal controls in husbanding. To give you a couple
of quick examples. The way Glenn Defense Marine was able to get
away with so much of this was you would have a list of things
when a ship went into port that the ship would need. Glenn
Defense Marine would say we----
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Secretary, with all due respect, though,
my question was, can you comment on how this is impacting the
Navy's ability to properly manage operations?
Mr. Mabus. It has not impacted our ability to manage
operations, Congresswoman.
Ms. McCollum. So you are able to move positions and fill
positions even though people are under investigation and people
are able to retire, even though they are under investigation? I
might have misinformation. I am just trying to clear it up.
Mr. Mabus. Because the investigation is taking so long,
because the decision on the people who may or may not be
implicated is taking so long, it is frustrating, because it
limits our ability in some cases for people to retire or for
people to move around. We are completely on the timetable of
the U.S. Attorney's Office in terms of when these things come
out. When they do and no criminal charges are filed, I have set
up a consolidated disposition authority to say, it might not be
criminal, but did it meet Navy ethic standards? And that is
where the three letters of censure came from. Those were
recommended to me and I signed those.
We are able to manage it now. If the timetable stays as
slow as it is, we are going to have some problems in the
future. And I am sorry I misunderstood your question.
We are meeting women in subs, the timetable that we set
forward, women are reporting right now to Virginia-class
submarines, and I will get back to you. I have some very
specific numbers. And we have expanded NCIS and Navy JAG and
sexual assault.
Ms. McCollum. Mr. Chairman, I am looking forward to the
committee having more information. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The Representative has posed some
questions. I think some more answers are required for the
record.
[Clerk's note.--The Navy did not provide a response.]
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you for raising the issue.
Ms. Granger.

F-35 JOINT STRIKE FIGHTER

Ms. Granger. I have questions for Admiral Greenert and
General Dunford regarding the F-35.
Admiral Greenert, you have said that the F-35C will allow
the Navy to ensure access and project power. Can you tell me
why the capabilities of the F-35, what they bring the Navy and
why that is so important?
Admiral Greenert. Well, the F-35, first of all, it is
stealthy. So right off the bat you can avoid certain bands of
radar, and I will stay out of the clarification, but search
radar. So that is good. That gets you access right there.
What people don't talk about is it has got tremendous
range. You almost double the range from an aircraft carrier
with F-35C. It carries more ordnance, has a detection radar for
air to air, which is much advanced, and it can network with
other aircraft and other of our assets, so ships and the like.
So what you have is you have not only something that can
get you access, deliver ordnance if you need to, jam and detect
and share information for targeting for otherwise. So each of
those is a tremendous leap unto itself, not just stealth. There
is so much more.
Ms. Granger. Thank you. Because we normally focus really on
the stealth almost exclusively. Thank you.
And, General Dunford, the Marine Corps plans on declaring
initial operation capability later this year. Are you going to
make that? Is there anything we could do to help you achieve
that milestone? And I will ask the same thing, how important is
the F-35 to the future of the Marine Corps?
General Dunford. Congresswoman, thanks very much for asking
the question. I was out to visit the squadron about 10 or 11
days ago, and I left very confident that we will meet the
initial operational capability for that squadron in 2015. And
then we will have a squadron of F-35 deployed to the Western
Pacific in 2017. So our fielding of the F-35B program is very
much on pace.
There are a number of issues that have to be addressed.
Each one of the aircraft has 54 separate modifications. That is
one of the things I wanted to go out and look at. But I am
convinced we have the right people on the scene making those
modifications, and we have also leveraged some Air Force
capability to make sure that we get those modifications made in
time. So it is complex, but absolutely optimistic that we will
be able to get that done.
Admiral Greenert had talked about the unique
characteristics of the F-35. For us, it is really two issues.
One, it is a transformational capability. It is not a better F-
18. It is not a better Harrier. It is a transformational
capability. It does what our close air support aircraft does,
but particularly in the information realm it is an
extraordinary change in capability. But also it is the future
of Marine aviation. We are reducing three type/model/series
aircraft, all of which are older then two decades, to move into
the F-35.
So part of my message today talked about readiness at home
station. Fifty percent of our F-18s today are in what we call
an out-of-reporting status, meaning they are not available for
training. And the only way we are going to get well over time
is to complete the transition to the F-35. That is how Marine
air will be capable and ready in the future.
Ms. Granger. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Crenshaw.

CARRIER ONBOARD DELIVERY ALTERNATIVES

Mr. Crenshaw. I have got just a quick question about
oversight. We take that seriously here in the subcommittee. And
I know we have probably all flown on what they call a COD that
flies out to the aircraft carrier. And last year, I think you
all asked for some money to analyze and look at some
alternatives to replace the COD. And then, as I understand it,
all of a sudden the Osprey, which I have flown on, it is a
great airplane, that selection was made, but there wasn't a lot
of backup as to it seemed like a quick decision which hopefully
saved money.
I am just curious, from our oversight standpoint, how you
made that decision, and will we get to see kind of the analysis
that you all did, looked at alternatives. Just briefly, can you
tell us about that whole selection process?
Mr. Mabus. Sure. And absolutely we will give you all the
documentation, the backup that went into that. We have been
looking at the COD replacement for a good while, as you know.
The further we got into the analysis of alternatives, the
clearer it became that we had an aircraft, the Osprey, the V-
22, that was a hot line, it was being made, that we could do
the Navy version to do the COD mission with a change order to
inside a multiyear.
And so it was a very affordable aircraft that would not
only meet the needs of the COD, but also the COD, which you
have flown on, I have flown on, requires a tail hook, they have
to get in the landing pattern, and they have to be a part of
the arrested and catapulted off aircraft.
The Osprey does not. They can be used in different parts of
the carrier. They can also be used on other ships that the COD
cannot. And so it is a more flexible platform. And the further
we got in, the clearer that that option became. We have got
voluminous backup. And, again, I will be happy to get you that
and to do it in writing and also do it personally or with the
folks who went through the analysis.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Womack.

AIRBORNE ELECTRONIC ATTACK AIRCRAFT

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry I had to excuse
myself for another hearing.
I have a question for Ander Crenshaw. Is it the arrest or
the catapult that you don't like on the COD? Because I know it
is maybe both of those. I don't know. I kind of like the COD
myself.
I have got a Growler question.
Mr. Mabus. You would be the one----
Mr. Womack. Say again?
Mr. Mabus. You would be the one person.
Mr. Womack. I really enjoyed that. I did.
For the Admiral, I have got a Growler question. Last year--
and if this has already come up, I apologize--but last year the
request was for, like, 22 and we were able to provide 15. And
now I understand that that requirement has basically been met
with the 15, that there is no other need for the Growler. So in
consideration of the electronic magnetic spectrum and the
future of that space, what can you tell me about the need for
additional Growlers?
Admiral Greenert. First of all, I appreciate the support of
the Congress and the committee on the urgent need that we had.
I felt 22 was the appropriate number. We are tweaking that in.
15 is certainly helpful. That is the platform. The real payload
is the key, the jammer. And so we need to get to the next
generation jammer. That is what gets you the access.
But to your point, we are doing right now in the Department
of Defense a study that looks at all electronic attack, to your
point. What is the situation in electromagnetic warfare across
the spectrum in our maneuver? So as I sit here today,
Congressman, I say, I think we have enough. That gives us a
total of, I think, 153, it takes us to. That is about right. I
am going to hear from the whole Department of Defense because
we are the jammer provider, if you will, electronic attack
provider in that. So more to come shortly.
Mr. Womack. Good. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Ruppersberger.

MQ-4 TRITON AIRCRAFT

Mr. Ruppersberger. Yeah. The Triton unmanned aircraft
system. I know that the Navy's maritime surveillance fleet is
reaching the end of its service life and the Navy is
recapitalizing this mission. Given the critical importance of
maritime surveillance to our national security and our economy,
we cannot afford a gap in this capability. Do you agree?
Admiral Greenert. I agree, sir. And there is language we
have to meet, and particularly in that regard, not to mention
it is an important requirement.
Mr. Ruppersberger. A big part of the recapitalization plan
is MQ-4C Triton unmanned system. And this will provide
persistent surveillance with an advanced maritime radar capable
of providing detailed surveillance of millions of square miles
of the ocean. So my question is, does the Navy have sufficient
resources to meet its global requirements for maritime
surveillance? And have you explored opportunities to accelerate
new and advanced maritime surveillance capabilities like the
MQ-4C Triton?
Admiral Greenert. The answer to that is yes. In our
President's budget 2016 request, we have sufficient resources
to do that transition, as you describe, from the EP-3, from the
legacy systems that provide that, into the MQ-4 and its family
there. We have that. We are looking at accelerating it. If an
opportunity provides itself, we will accelerate it.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Judge Carter, any comments?

KOREAN PARTNERSHIP

Mr. Carter. Real quick, I want to talk about Korea. I have
got a brigade from Fort Hood that is scheduled to resume
command in the summer. There has been a lot of discussion about
behavior of the folks of North Korea, tensions they are
creating. Can you discuss how the Navy has changed its posture
in the vicinity of the Korean Peninsula to complement support
forces there and speak to any allied partnerships the Navy is
working with to counter the North Korean threat to reassure our
allies?
Admiral Greenert. Well, our posture on the peninsula, we
don't have a naval posture that is indigenous to Korea. But the
forces in Japan are in direct support. In other words, they
would all change operational command over to Korea if there is
a contingency there. So as I mentioned, we are bringing two
destroyers. Each of those has 96 missile cells, if you will, so
that is pretty formidable.
Another submarine in Guam. That submarine would do, among
other things, ensure that the waters in and around the Korean
Peninsula are protected, if you will, for our purposes in that
regard.
We are strengthening our alliance with the Korean Navy as
we speak in that whole joint force concept. And so what I mean
is, sir, it is not just force structure, it is our ability to
operate together in a joint and combined entity there. And we
increase the complexity of our exercise every year, and the
Korean Navy is coming along very well. They have a substantial
ballistic missile defense capability. They have the sensor, and
they are looking to choose the weapon. When I say sensor,
sensor on destroyers, and they have three with an option to
build two more that they are looking at right now.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.

LITTORAL COMBAT SHIP SURVIVABILITY

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Diaz-Balart, any comments?
I just have a couple questions. I am concerned about China.
In our trips to the Philippines, Indonesia, Singapore, I
understand we have got some Littoral Combat Ships, a/k/a
frigates, now in Singapore. The general consensus from our
visits was that the 800-pound gorilla has won in terms of its
dominance in the region, and I am concerned about that. And I
know that we have huge capabilities, but there is a general
consensus when we meet with the leadership that they are
throwing their lot in with the Chinese. I worry about that. I
think we need to work much more closely with the Filipinos.
The notion that not only their aircraft carriers may not
ever match our capability, but numbers, again, count if they
are working on the submarine fleet, admittedly most of them
diesel. That is a defense projection that we need to seriously
consider, the notion that they would ever shut down the world's
channels for commerce. People say it will never happen, but in
reality I think we need to be prepared for that. You aren't
dismissive of that, but in reality we need to provide the
capabilities for you to match them or overmatch them.
I do want to ask one last question. Continuing discussion
within the Navy in terms of the vulnerability of Littoral
Combat Ship, where do we stand on that? I know we have some
issues here of upgrading, sort of taking a look at new designs
and so forth. Where do we stand on that?
Mr. Mabus. Last year, about this time, Secretary Hagel
directed Navy to look at a more lethal, more survivable, but
continue to be affordable small combatant Littoral Combat Ship.
We set up a task force to do that. We made it very transparent.
People from this committee's staff, people from the Hill,
people from our testing organization, people from the Office of
the Secretary of Defense were taken through the process.
And I think the process was as exhaustive and as thorough
as any process we could have done. They looked at more than
14,000 designs, modifications, this sort of thing, and came up
with a more lethal, more survivable, and continuing to be
affordable, about an additional $75 million a ship, that brings
capabilities that the fleet said it needed, an over-the-horizon
missile that will be organic to the ship, a Towed Array Sonar
for countersubmarines.
And the direction was to look at--we have a need for 52 of
these--was to look at the last 20. We will start building those
20 starting in 2019, and all these modifications will go into
those ships. The hull won't be modified, so you can do this
within the existing ships. Our plan now is we are doing the
engineering work, we are doing the technical work, we are
hopeful that we can bring up, in advance of 2019, the upgrades
to these ships.
And the reason that I renamed them frigates, is you look at
what frigates are supposed to do and you look at what these
ships do and they are frigates. The last thing is, because it
is a modification and not a new design, not a new hull, you can
go back and modify any of the first ships that were built if
you feel a need to do that.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. The committee continues to have an
interest in this issue, and certainly we are highly respectful
of the industrial base that produces the models. But the whole
issue of survivability is tied to capability and force
structure in a rapidly changing world, and I am sure you will
stay on top of it.
Mr. Visclosky.

LITTORAL COMBAT SHIP TESTING

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to follow up on the chairman's question about
the Littoral Combat Ship. I appreciate the Navy has completed
its review and that there would be modifications, but I also
understand that the director of operational test and evaluation
has gone on record and stated that the proposed modifications
to the LCS designs do not satisfy significant elements of
survivability.
He apparently has stated that the LCS is not expected to be
survivable in high-intensity combat because its design
requirements accept the risk that the ship must be abandoned
under circumstances that would not require such an action on
other surface combatants. Did you have a reaction to that
observation?
Mr. Mabus. Sure. Number one, Operational Test and
Evaluation were in the room during this process. They were in
the room when the decision was made as to what to do.
Number two, I think it is important to remember that this
is a small surface combatant. You expect it to do different
things than you do from a large surface combatant or from other
types of ships. You can make it, you can make any ship more
survivable. As the task force looked at it, as you went down
the more lethality or more survivable pathway, it became a
destroyer, it became a $2 billion ship, which is not the
mission. The CNO said we have got $2 billion destroyers out
chasing pirates right now. A $500 million LCS or FF now can do
that and do that much better.
In a high-intensity conflict, we are not going to be
sending these ships out by themselves. They are going to be
part of a much larger structure, a much larger strike group,
and they will benefit from all the lethality and all the
protection from that entire strike group.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, if I could, two more
questions.

RUSSIAN NAVAL CAPABILITY

Admiral, people are concerned about Russia in Eastern
Europe. What about the Russian Navy?
Admiral Greenert. The Russian Navy is spending a good sum
of money, billions of dollars to recapitalize their submarine
building and in their surface building capability. They have
invested in submarines and they are producing a new class of
cruise missile submarine and SSBN, which makes sense, that has
been their mantra for some time, their strategy.
In this decade, unlikely they will have dramatic
improvement, based on where they are going right now, in their
surface fleet. However, if they continue on the path they are
on, and I am talking about investment and shipbuilding, I would
say next decade they will have some substantial improvement in
frigate-like, 2,300, 2,500 tons, and destroyer-like capability.
So they are definitely modernizing.
Air, I haven't seen much recently. They are operating more,
they have kind of gas money, but not as modern.

AMPHIBIOUS COMBAT VEHICLE

Mr. Visclosky. One last question, if I could, Mr. Chairman.
General, there is research the Marine Corps is undertaking
as far as the Amphibious Combat Vehicle. Given how marines are
placed in situations of danger or in combat--I think of the
evacuations in Somalia, I think of Iraq, Afghanistan--looking
ahead, just as far as the tactics and strategies the Marine
Corps is looking at considering, what is that balance and
relationship between amphibious landing craft and the
difficulty in designing one that meets your requirements and
airlift?
General Dunford. Thanks, Congressman. We have got a plan
right now that really addresses our tactical mobility across
the range of military operations. We require two marine
expeditionary brigades to come from the sea and conduct
amphibious assault, and so our program will account for that.
We also have other vehicles that account for the protection and
the land mobility that are necessary for a wide range of other
operations.
So I think the simple answer to your question, Congressman,
is that we have got balance in our ground tactical vehicle
program.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I would like to thank all the members
for their attendance and questions.
And, gentlemen, thank you very much for being with us.
The committee is adjourned until 9 a.m. tomorrow, when we
will conduct a hearing on the budget of the United States Air
Force. We stand adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Clerk's note.--Questions submitted by Mr. Aderholt and the
answers thereto follow:]

Joint High Speed Vehicle

Question. In recent testimony both CNO and SECNAV have been
supporters of the Joint High Speed Vessel, yet the budget request does
not increase the number. Does the Navy plan to request more in future
budgets? What is the likelihood of the JHSV being included in DoD's
Unfunded Priorities List?
Answer. The Navy's 2014 update to the 2012 Force Structure
Assessment re-validated the requirement for Joint High Speed Vessels
(JHSV) at ten ships. The Navy did not request any additional JHSVs in
the FY 2016 President's Budget because the battle force inventory will
already reach ten ships in FY 2018 and 11 ships in FY 2019, thanks to
the additional JHSV that Congress included in the FY 2015
Appropriations Act. JHSVs were not included in DoD's FY 2016 Unfunded
Priorities List

SWO Training Program

Question. What oversight is there of the surface warfare officer
(SWO) training program?
Answer. There is extensive oversight of the Surface Warfare Officer
(SWO) training program beginning at the fleet level where the SWO
training program is administered by Commander, Naval Surface Forces
(CNSF) through the chain of command to the Commanding Officers of every
U.S. Navy surface ship The Commanding Officers are responsible for
application of the SWO training program within their commands and for
developing and managing a command training program to facilitate the
SWO qualification process within the overall ship's personnel training
program. These Commanding Officers are charged with the mentoring and
training of their Officers, and they themselves are mentored and
observed by their Immediate Superiors in Command (ISIC).
The CNSF SWO training program requires all Surface Warfare trainees
to attain SWO qualification within the first 22 months of shipboard
service. Every ship develops a training plan for each individual
Officer for his or her professional development. The ship's Training
Officer, Senior Watch Officer and Commanding Officer closely monitor
their progress. Every Junior Officer is assigned to under instruction
watches rotating through all the required watch stations under the
supervision of qualified SWO's to develop watchstanding proficiency and
learn the required skills. They are also provided opportunities to
conduct daily and special evolutions until they demonstrate competency
in these skills in preparation for SWO qualification. Additional time
is made available and cross deck opportunities are arranged when
extenuating circumstances with the ship's operating schedule or
personal hardship preclude an Officer from completing the watchstanding
prerequisites within the 22 month requirement.
Question. What percentage of SWOs recommended for non-attainment by
their commanding Officers are subsequently approved (for non-
attainment) by Commander, Naval Surface Forces, and what type of
reviews are conducted at each level of the approval process to ensure
that the Officer does not in fact have the ability to qualify?
Answer. The Surface Warfare Officer Qualification program provides
every Junior Officer with a fair and standardized process to qualify as
a Surface Warfare Officer with greater than a 96% success rate. All
positively endorsed non-attainment recommendations have been approved
by CNSF. Statistics for disapproval in the review process below CNSF
are not maintained. However, there are many cases where the ship's
Immediate Superior in Command (ISIC) has facilitated cross-decking
struggling Junior Officers for evaluation to other ships with different
Commanding Officers to ensure impartiality in the process.
When a Junior Officer is recommended by their Commanding Officer
for SWO non-attainment, the report is reviewed and endorsed by the ISIC
for an 0-6 and/or Flag level review prior to forwarding to CNSF for
final adjudication. The Officer recommended for non-attainment is
afforded the opportunity to comment on the Commanding Officer's
recommendation as an attachment to the report. The ISIC review verifies
the Officer recommended for non-attainment was afforded a fair
opportunity to qualify and provided adequate support and mentorship by
their command.
Question. How have those numbers and that process changed over the
past several years? This part of my question was ignored last year, and
I again request an answer. Please investigate.
Answer. Over the past three years, Commander, Naval Surface Forces
annually approved an average of thirty-one SWO non-attainment packages
per year from an average accession year group of 864 SWO Junior
Officers. In 2012 there were 36 non-attains falling to 28 in 2014.
There has been no change to the SWO non-attainment approval process,
but there has been a significant change in the preparation of all SWO
Junior Officers for success through the recently implemented eight week
Basic Division Officer Course (BDOC) at the beginning of their initial
sea tours. This course imparts baseline understanding of core SWO
skills in all Division Officer fundamentals, damage control,
seamanship, navigation, shiphandling, engineering, maritime warfare,
anti-terrorism and force protection, and leadership.

Command Climate

Question. If an officer or sailor on a ship believes he or she was
the victim of a dishonest afloat commanding officer, what checks and
balances exist in the Navy, and what recourse does he or she have?
Answer. If an officer or Sailor believes they are a victim of a
dishonest Commanding Officer, they may elevate the issue above their
chain of command by filing a formal grievance, such as a Complaint of
Wrongs Against the Commanding Officer (Article 138), a Complaint of
Wrongs Against a Superior Outside your Chain of Command (Article 1150),
or an Equal Opportunity (EO) complaint, depending on the circumstance.
Service members who feel they have been reprised against by a superior
in their chain of command may also file a Military Whistleblower
complaint with the Department of Defense Inspector General or the Naval
Inspector General.
However, we encourage personnel to attempt to resolve complaints at
the lowest possible level and use command channels available within the
command. There are many resources within the command to help resolve a
vast number of issues, such as the legal staff, chaplain, human
resource personnel, equal opportunity advisor, and immediate
supervisors.

Navy Inspector General

Question. I am told that there is a shortage of Navy Inspector
General investigators, particularly in the field offices. How many
investigators does each field office employ, and how many complaints
does each field office receive annually?
Answer. The Office of the Naval Inspector General (NAVINSGEN),
Department of Navy (DON) level, employs 24 and Echelon II/III/IV
employs 175 full time investigators to handle approximately 4,000
Hotline contacts annually.
Workload: The 4,000 annual Hotline contacts fall into General,
Military Whistleblowers or Reprisals, and Congressional contacts. A
Course of Action (COA) is determined for each contact (Assistance,
Discard or Dismiss, Investigate, Refer, or Transfer). Current
statistics show that most contacts end up being assistance cases (e.g.
pay, allowance, medical, etc.) and the least number of contacts end up
as investigations. For those contacts that end up in investigations,
most (32%) end up not substantiated and only 23% end up substantiated.
Current time to complete an Assistance contact is 14 days, a Discard/
Dismiss contact is 18 days, an investigation is 417 Days, and a Refer
or Transfer is 26 Days.
Manpower: In addition to DON investigative workload, NAVINSGEN
utilizes its investigative staff to administer the DON Hotline Program
and to serve as the designated Defense Hotline Component Coordinator
for the Department of Defense (DoD) Inspector General Hotline Program.
NAVINSGEN tasks many of the contacts to 32 Echelon II commands. The
number of contacts and investigations handled by Echelon II and
subordinate commands (Echelon III/IV) varies widely depending on
command size. Small commands may have none over the course of a year;
where large commands (e.g. Fleets) may have over 1000 contacts per year
and over 100 issues requiring investigation per year. It is important
to point out that these are not field offices, rather Echelon II/III/IV
investigators report directly to their Commanders. Echelon II command
IG offices have from one investigator to eight investigators depending
on the size of their Area of Responsibility.
Question. What are you doing to ensure that there are sufficient
investigators for every complaint to be able to receive due process?
Answer. In 2012, the Office of the Naval Inspector General
increased its Headquarters staff by 13 investigators, but must continue
to rely heavily on Command Inspector General resources to administer
the DON Hotline Program and to provide due process to every
investigative matter. In addition to increasing the number of
investigative personnel, the Office of the Naval Inspector General has
taken steps to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of existing
personnel resources. To this end, the Office of the Naval Inspector
General recently established a separate Training and Certification
Division. This division will provide the Navy Inspectors General
community-wide integration of training, leadership development, and
individual training with the intent of improving DON Hotline
investigation timelines and quality.

[Clerk's note.--End of questions submitted by Mr. Aderholt.
Questions submitted by Mr. Visclosky and the answers thereto
follow:]

USS Halsey

Question. In July 2014, former crewmembers of the USS HALSEY (DOG
97) brought to Ranking Member Visclosky's attention the high incidence
of suicide and related behavior on the ship. In subsequent meetings and
correspondence, the Navy confirmed two recent suicides by crewmembers
of the HALSEY--April 30, 2014, and June 27, 2014. Further, the Navy
provided Mr. Visclosky with details on the ``postvention'' programs
that had executed in support of the crew of the USS HALSEY.
Admiral Greenert, could you please provide the Committee with an
update on the USS HALSEY? Have there been any additional incidents of
suicide-related behavior since Ranking Member Visclosky's meeting with
the Vice-CNO, Admiral Michelle Howard, in July 2014?
Answer. There have been 6 people out of a crew of 315 (
absorbing work into existing government positions by
refining duties or requirements, or

establishing new positions to perform contracted
services by eliminating or shifting

equivalent existing manpower resources (personnel)
from lower priority activities.

Question. Your predecessor Bob Hale told our counterparts on the
Senate Defense Appropriations Subcommittee in 2013 that service
contractors generally cost two to three times what in-house performance
costs, particularly for long-term functions. Given the need to reduce
costs, what efforts has the Department undertaken to save costs from
insourcing long-term functions performed by contractors?
Answer. The Department continues to improve its accounting of and
visibility into contracted services utilization as part of its annual,
statutorily required Inventory of Contracted Services. As part of that
process, DoD component heads are directed to conduct reviews of their
use of contracted services to determine if more appropriate, or cost
effective, performance of that function can be achieved by in-sourcing
that work to an organic government workforce. Accordingly, the
President's Budget FY 2016 reflects a total force and manpower mix
strategy that aligns functions and work among military, civilian, and
contracted services in a cost-effective and balanced manner consistent
with workload requirements, funding availability, laws, and
regulations.

[Clerk's note.--End of questions submitted by Mr.
Visclosky.]

Tuesday, March 17, 2015.

FY 2016 NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVES

WITNESSES

GENERAL FRANK J. GRASS, CHIEF, NATIONAL GUARD BUREAU
LIEUTENANT GENERAL STANLEY E. ``SID'' CLARKE, III, DIRECTOR, AIR
NATIONAL GUARD
MAJOR GENERAL JUDD H. LYONS, ACTING DIRECTOR, ARMY NATIONAL GUARD
LIEUTENANT GENERAL JEFFREY W. TALLEY, CHIEF, UNITED STATES ARMY RESERVE

Opening Statement of Chairman Frelinghuysen

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Good morning. The committee will come to
order.
Happy St. Patrick's Day, everybody.
And a number of our members have other committee hearings,
but I know they want to participate and they will be here in
due course.
This morning the committee will hold a hearing on the
posture of the National Guard and U.S. Army Reserves. We will
focus primarily on readiness issues related to personnel,
training, equipment, modernization, reset, and the effects of
fiscal constraints on the force.
Ladies and gentlemen, we owe a debt of gratitude to the men
and women of the Reserve component. The soldiers and the airmen
of the Guard and Reserve performed magnificently in Iraq and
Afghanistan, and some, of course, still do in Afghanistan and
throughout the world. They have worked seamlessly with their
Active-Duty colleagues in ways that allows mission after
mission to be accomplished. And may I add they have paid a
price.
Of the 6,800 military personnel who died in the war zones
of Iraq and Afghanistan, nearly 700 were Guard, Army Reserve,
or Marine Reserve members. We also never forget that the
military is an inherently dangerous job, even far away from
combat. So this morning we note the loss of four members of the
Louisiana Guard who, along with seven Special Forces marines,
died in service of the country last week in a training accident
off the coast of Florida. We mourn with their families and
thank them for their services. And, gentlemen, please, extend
our greatest sympathy to those families for their sacrifices.
We would also like to thank your troops for their
dedication to their communities, to their States, and to their
country during a time in which our way of life continues to be
threatened.
We are pleased this morning to welcome four distinguished
General officers as witnesses:
General Frank J. Grass is the Chief of the National Guard
Bureau, a permanent member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
representing more than 460,000 citizen solders and airmen in
the Army and Air National Guard.
I would also like to extend the committee's appreciation
for General Grass's better half, Pat, for being here this
morning. And she sits behind him, but she does much more than
sit behind him. She stands alongside him, working on behalf of
all of those in the Guard and Reserve.
I would also like to welcome Lieutenant General Stanley
``Sid'' Clarke, III. He is a Director of Air National Guard.
General, we appreciate the experience and expertise that you
bring to this hearing.
Major General Judd Lyons is the Acting Director of the Army
National Guard. This is General Lyon's second year to testify
before the committee. We welcome you.
And, finally, we are pleased to welcome back the Chief of
the U.S. Army Reserves, Lieutenant General Jeffrey W. Talley.
Thanks, also, General, for your contributions.
Welcome. We are eager to hear your testimony, which will
assist the committee to better determine the needs of guardsmen
and reservists, whether in their home State or deployed around
the world.
Of course, this committee is worried about the funds that
will be made available for the Guard and Reserve under the
Budget Control Act. Even given limited resources, this
committee will continue to do everything possible to ensure
adequate funding for the equipment, modernization, and
readiness for both your homeland and wartime missions.
We remain, as a committee, very concerned about the
readiness of the National Guard and U.S. Army Reserves
following over a dozen years of war and the likelihood of
further conflict across the globe.
End strength. How do we right size your forces to maximize
your military effectiveness while making our national security
dollars go as far as possible? The Army Aviation Restructure is
the big Army's top priority. We look forward to your
perspectives on the future of Apaches, Black Hawks, Lakotas and
Kiowa Warriors.
The committee also understands the NGREA has been a
critically important tool in the modernization of the Guard and
Reserve. We want to hear from you on how this fund is working,
since we were very much involved in funding it.
The committee is also eager to discuss your increasingly
important role in the cyber world. It seems to many of us that
guardsmen and -women bring critical skill sets from the private
sector into their military job, and we must find a way to take
advantage of those special skill sets.
Generals, we look forward to your testimony. But, first, I
would like to call on my ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, for any
comments he may care to make.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Sorry for holding everybody up. I apologize.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding the hearing and,
gentlemen, for your service. I look forward to your testimony.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Grass, we welcome your
testimony. Your entire statement will be put in the record.

Summary Statement of General Grass

General Grass. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
And, Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member Visclosky, and
distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is a pleasure to
be here today with my wife, Pat, and my fellow National Guard
and Reserve leaders.
I am honored to represent 460,000 citizen soldiers and
airmen and their families, communities, and employers that
support them. I would also like to echo chairman's condolences
to the families of the Louisiana National Guard and the Marine
Special Operations warriors who lost their life in the accident
in Florida last week. This tragedy is a reminder of the
sacrifices our members and families make on a daily basis.
Over the past 13 years of sustained conflict, with the help
of the Congress, the Guard has transformed into a premiere
operational force, serving with distinction as the primary
combat reserve of the Army and Air Force. The Nation's
investment in the Guard has resulted in the best trained, led,
and equipped Guard in history. It is the finest I have seen
throughout my career.
The Guard is tremendously appreciative of this committee's
support. I want to thank you for funding programs, such as the
National Guard and Reserve equipment account, improving Army
Guard readiness, HMMWV modernization, new radars for our F-15
fighters, Black Hawk helicopter procurement, and other critical
dual-use priorities.
As we look to the future, we face three realities shaping
the security environment: the global realities, the fiscal
reality, and the reality of change.
A global reality that includes asymmetric adversaries and
regional instability is intertwined with a fiscal reality that
requires us to balance the need to provide security to the
Nation with other domestic spending requirements.
These realities exist aside the reality of change, change
that has resulted in a borderless world and a more informed
U.S. population that expects the government to respond to
natural and manmade disasters at greater speeds.
In view of these realities in the security environment, I
am concerned that, with sequestration, the Nation will have its
smallest National Guard since the end of the Korean war,
despite the U.S. population approximately doubling since 1954.
This will create challenges in responding to the needs of
the Governors at a time the Army and the Air Force will rely
more heavily on the operational Reserve to accomplish combatant
command missions. If funding levels are below the President's
budget request, we risk not being able to execute the defense
strategy.
The solders and airmen who serve and their families,
communities, and employers who support them are our most
treasured resource. The Nation's investment in developing
combat and mission-ready guardsmen through a wide array of
resourced, accessible, and effective programs is greatly
appreciated, but must not be left to degrade or return to a
strategic reserve. Moving forward, finding the right balance in
our military, active Guard and Reserve will be more critical
than it has been in history.
Your National Guard is a proven option for rapid, cost-
effective and seamless expansion of our Armed Forces. Modest,
but necessary, investments in training, manning, and equipment
will maintain the readiness of the National Guard as an
operational force.
Thank you for allowing me, sir, to be here today. And I
look forward to your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, General.
[The written statement of General Grass follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Summary Statement of General Clarke

Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Clarke, good morning again.
General Clarke. Good morning, sir.
Good morning Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member
Visclosky. Thanks for the opportunity.
This is my third time to appear before this committee, and
I remember how cozy it is here in here.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Very cozy in here.
General Clarke. The broad shoulders of my Army colleagues
makes it interesting here.
We have over 105,500 members of the Air National Guard and
just one member here, but I am very proud to be at the helm of
leading the Air National Guard, part of the National Guard
Bureau, but also working with the Air Force.
And I want to tell you that the relationship between the
Air National Guard and the United States Air Force is
excellent. We get along very, very well. And we do things
collaboratively, transparent, and we work with the States
Adjutants General in almost everything we do in an open,
transparent way.
So we have--of the 105,500 consistently deployed members of
the Air National Guard, in fact, over 2,000 are deploy-delayed
today across the globe, doing a variety of operations. I see no
slowdown whatsoever for the Air National Guard in the next
year.
Indeed, with 12304b mobilizations, volunteerism, and 12302
authority, we see one heck of a lot of support of the Air
National Guard supporting combatant commanders around the globe
continuing to be a proven choice for the warfighting operations
that we support.
With regard to the homeland, the Air National Guard
provides multiple capabilities that are used on a daily basis.
Our firefighting capability, the explosive ordnance disposal
capability, along with a variety of other things that we also
dual-use for the overseas fight that we use at home, are
consistently put to work on a daily basis, including the rescue
operations and other capabilities.
With regard to security cooperation, we continue to be
supportive of the State Partnership Program around the globe.
We also have bilateral relationships that don't even exist
inside the State Partnership Program that we support. An
example of that would be what we do for the air forces of Iraq.
We are doing the training for the C-130Js that they have at one
of our units. Additionally, the F-16 foreign training is all
done at Tucson by the Air National Guard.
And, finally, I would like to say that we are doing a
variety of theater security cooperation package--cooperation of
elements that are overseas supporting combatant commanders on a
daily basis. What I just said is we are heavily invested in the
operational Reserve concept in multiple ways.
And let me tell you, our airmen love it. They love being
operationally engaged. More than half of our people who have
joined since 9/11, they know the future holds that they will be
engaged. Their employers know that. Their families know that.
There is a balance that has to be struck between all of it,
but they like being a part of the operational Reserve and
supporting the United States Air Force and the Nation when we
do things overseas, and they love doing things at home
supporting our citizens in need.
Our priorities: First, taking care of our airmen. That
always stays at the top of my list. I look at that from a
variety of lenses, whether it is preventing sexual assault,
diversity. Those kinds of programs are important.
I do want to tell you that I am a bit concerned about the
future with regard to MILPERS. That is an important funding
stream, one element of our funding that we need to sustain in
order to be able to get to the schools that they have to have
and the follow-on courses for future education and training
that make sure that they are good partners with the Air Force
and the joint community.
Another priority: We need to maintain a strong operational
Reserve from perspective--not just the deployments I was
talking about, but a concern of mine is being able to
participate in the big exercises that we do as a part of our
Air Force. These exercises are what makes our Air Force
different from any other Air Force in the world, and I have to
have funding in order to support those exercises in the future.
Third priority: Modernization and recap of our legacy
force. We operate a lot of old airplanes. I will give you one
short vignette, sir, if you will bear with me.
In January, the Secretary of the Air Force and I were
invited down to Antarctica by the National Science Foundation
to see what happens with our operations there. The New York
Guard flies LC-130s. These are the Ski Birds, the only ones in
the Nation that we have. We fly the Ski Birds down to McMurdo
Station in Antarctica and further, all the way to the South
Pole.
The airplane that we flew the Secretary of the Air Force on
from McMurdo Station to the South Pole was a 1972 model LC-130,
originally purchased by the U.S. Navy, flown by the Navy, put
into the boneyard into retirement, pulled back out into our
inventory to fly, and, yet, we have enough confidence in the
airmen and the weapons system sustainment the Air Force
provides in order to fly that airplane in a most--fairly
austere environment. I would invite you to come down and see
that operation sometime.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I have been on it.
General Clarke. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. We provided the--you know, the skis for
the planes through our committee and, also, the crevasse
finder.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is that mountain division out of Fort
Drum or something.
General Clarke. And the crevasse is just one part of that
austere environment I am talking about. So, since you have been
there, you have seen it. But we have enough--the point being,
with a 43-year-old airplane, at some point, that airplane is
going to need to be recapitalized. We can continue to
modernize. At some point, it has got to be recapitalized.
And the last thing is I would say, beyond the NGREA part
that you just talked about, we support and really appreciate
your support on the NGREA funding that we received. A unit last
year, for the last half of 2014, did 6 months of combat duty
over Afghanistan modified with two important programs by NGREA
funding.
It changed the airplane from being a fair precision
munition delivery capability to an outstanding delivery
capability. It provided the center display units inside the
cockpit so you could see the enhanced images, and it provided
the helmet targeting capabilities that we did not have
previously.
So this NGREA money is very well spent. It makes a big
difference for combatant commanders. It makes our airplanes
safe, reliable, and compatible with combatant commander
requirements and possibly with air space management and other
concerns we have in the future. Again, we appreciate your
support on that.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, General Clarke.
[The written statement of General Clarke follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Summary Statement of General Lyons

Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Lyons.
General Lyons. Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member
Visclosky, distinguished members of the subcommittee, it is an
honor to appear before you today.
I would like to begin by echoing the condolences, Chairman,
that you expressed and General Grass expressed for the families
of the four National Guardsman and the seven marines who were
taken from our ranks this last week. They will never be
forgotten.
I am here representing nearly 350,000 soldiers in the Army
National Guard. Our force is manned, trained, and equipped to
serve wherever and whenever the Nation calls. The Army Guard
maintains facilities in nearly 2600 communities where we built
relationships with local leaders and first responders. And it
is this community presence that enables the Guard to react so
quickly when civil authorities request our assistance.
The Army Guard responded to 45 major disaster declarations
in 32 States and territories in 2014. Our missions never cease,
and they don't end at the water's edge. Through years of war,
the Army Guard has trained and deployed with the Army as a part
of the joint team. Since 2001, we have mobilized soldiers more
than 536,000 times. Our units have performed every assigned
mission, from counterinsurgency operations to peacekeeping.
This experience has transformed the Army Guard from a Cold War-
era strategic reserve to a combat-seasoned operational force.
I would like to thank Congress for providing the vital
resources and specifically the committee for their continuing
support of NGREA that has been needed to transform the National
Guard. Through your efforts, our Total Army remains the most
formidable, capable land force in the world.
In an unpredictable and dangerous world, the Army Guard
serves as a powerful hedge against uncertainty. The need for a
ready, scaleable, and experienced force at home and abroad
remains constant. Funding below the President's budget will
further exacerbate readiness challenges in personnel, training,
equipment, and facilities. If permitted to atrophy, the wide-
ranging capabilities of the Army Guard will be difficult to
restore.
The President's fiscal year 2016 budget increases funding
for our operations and maintenance and personnel accounts, and
this begins to restore vital programs and sustains readiness.
While the President's budget presents less risk than we faced
in fiscal year 2015, some readiness concerns remain, and I
would just like to highlight a couple.
The budget provides for Army Guard end strength at 342,000.
That is 8,200 less from our current authorized strength. This
could lengthen response times for domestic emergencies, and it
leaves fewer forces available for overseas missions. The Army
Guard achieved the highest level of medical readiness in our
history in 2014. This readiness is beginning to trend down,
though, due to the risk we have already accepted in these
accounts in 2015.
The budget calls for increased training funds which are
essential for leader development and maintaining the Army Guard
as an operational force. This funding provides for two combat
training center rotations, but limits the majority of the force
to individual crew and squad-level proficiency.
Our soldiers' readiness and the well-being remains a top
priority. I thank Congress for supporting our behavioral
health, suicide prevention, sexual assault prevention, and
other critical programs. The dedicated men and women of our
Army Guard formations present tremendous value to our Nation
and to the communities where we live, work, and serve. The Army
Guard has proven our strength as a combat-ready operational
force, a role that, with your support, we will probably
continue to perform for the Army and for our Nation.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today, and I look
forward to your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, General Lyons.
[The written statement of General Lyons follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Talley, good morning again.
General Talley. Good morning.
Chairman Frelinghuysen, Ranking Member Visclosky,
distinguished members of the committee, this is my third time
before the committee, and I want to start by thanking you.
Last year I testified that we needed help on getting our
HMMWV ambulances, and you guys came through. I recently got
$48.4 million of a $60-million Congressional markup, which will
bring us up to 100 percent equipment on hand for ambulances.
That is this subcommittee's work. I want to thank you up front
for that.
It is certainly an honor for me to represent soldiers,
civilians, and family members of the Army Reserve. And on their
behalf, I want to thank the committee for everything that you
are doing today and you will do in the future to continue to
support us.
Also, with my background, I want to wish everyone a happy
St. Patrick's Day, and may the luck of the Irish be with me
today.
Mr. Chairman, the decision to place the majority of the
Army's combat support and combat service support capabilities
in the Army's Reserve committed the Nation years ago to
maintaining the Army Reserve as an operational force. It did
not, however, anticipate the increased requirements that that
structural shift would generate for the Army Reserve in terms
of resourcing.
The Army, as a service, integrates and synchronizes all
services when sustained unified land operations are required,
but they can only do so with the support of the Army Reserve.
The Army Reserve has most of the Army's critical, technical
enablers, such as logisticians, transporters, medical, full-
spectrum engineering, civil affairs, legal, and chemical
capabilities.
As a Federal force under Federal control and the only
component of our Army that is a single global command, we are
already embedded in every Army service component command and
combatant command worldwide. This allows us to respond to any
mission at home or abroad and, in many cases, with little
notice.
Currently, the annual demand signal from the Army in order
for us to meet combat or contingent missions is 27,000 soldiers
each year. In many cases, these troops and their units may be
required to immediately deploy overseas. So they must be
maintained at a higher level of readiness. Although we have
historically received additional resourcing, the standard model
of 39 base-funded training days per year produces only a
strategic force. This is insufficient to train, equip, and
maintain the Army Reserve as an operational force.
In the past, readiness beyond the strategic level was
purchased with overseas contingency dollars. That flexibility,
as you know, no longer exists. And base budgets must reflect
funding consistent with mission requirements. Readiness must be
balanced with modernization and strength, which, again, require
resourcing. If we lose that balance, our ability to support the
Army and fulfill the Nation's global security requirements are
at risk. We face that dilemma today.
Sequestration and budget uncertainties have created a
requirements resource mismatch and they threaten our ability to
support our great Army and the Nation. Readiness is bought by
robbing one unit, Peter, to fix or pay for another unit, Paul.
This can't be a sustainable business model.
While my posture statement discusses all of these concerns
in greater detail, I want to highlight quickly three areas that
are essential to generate readiness. The first is annual
training and operational tempo accounts. Cuts to these accounts
limit our ability to conduct individual, leader, and unit
training. For example, reductions in school funding leave the
Army Reserve unable this year to pay for 8,000 training and
15,000 educational seats, negatively impacting our morale,
endangering promotions and pressure and retention and
increasing attrition.
The second area of concern is equipping and modernization.
Today, the Army Reserve comprises 20 percent of our Total Army.
Yet, our share of the Army's equipping budget is less than 3
percent. To illustrate this point, the Army Reserve provides 92
percent of the Total Army bulk petroleum assets. Unfortunately,
much of this capacity has not been modernized, reducing our
interoperability within the force. Unchecked, the Total Army
and the joint force literally could run out of gas.
The third and final area of concern are the reductions in
full-time manning. These great AGRs, MILTECHs, and Department
of Army civilians execute the foundational requirements that
range from paying our soldiers to facilitating training.
Currently, the Army Reserve is filled only to 76 percent of our
authorized requirements. That jeopardizes our ability to
execute missions.
Mr. Chairman, in closing, the Army Reserve is uniquely
postured to support the Nation, but we can only maintain that
capability when properly resourced. In order to sustain our
current readiness levels, we need the committee's continued
support with funding for full-time manning, individual
collective and unit training, and equipment, including NGREA.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before the
committee today and for the outstanding support that Congress
has always provided the soldiers, civilians, and families of
the Army Reserve. With your help, we can stay twice a citizen
and Army strong. I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, General.
[The written statement of General Talley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. And I thank all of the Generals for
their testimony this morning.
And thank you, General Talley, for raising the Irish
profile a little higher today. May I say we probably wouldn't
be an independent Nation unless George Washington were able to
count on the Irish brigades.
A very high percentage of those who fought with Washington
were of Irish heritage. A lot of people don't know that. But we
never would be the Nation we are today without that incredible
contribution. So let me thank you for mentioning that.
I yield to Mr. Crenshaw.

Remarks of Mr. Crenshaw

Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for being here today. Welcome back. We
are going to discuss some of the challenges that you all face
every day.
And, first, let me pass along a message to you. I served in
State government before I came to Washington. And a lot of my
colleagues also served in State government. In fact, 5 days
after I became president of the Florida Senate we had something
called Hurricane Andrew, which, at the time, was the largest
natural disaster in our Nation's history.
And so I can tell you that me, along with a lot of the
colleagues that served in State government, all sleep a little
better at night knowing that the Guard and Reserve are ready at
a moment's notice to deal with not only natural disasters, but
just about any kind of problem that occurs around the world. So
I wanted to pass that along to you.
And now, as a Member of Congress that represents just about
every area of the Guard and Reserve in my district in north
Florida, I clearly see firsthand what you bring to our national
security. And I think everybody in this room appreciates the
work you do.

F-35 PROGRAM

Let me ask General Clarke a question that deals with the F-
35 program.
As you all know, there are plans to have F-35s at four
units around the country with the Air National Guard, and it
concerns me a little bit when you see the delays that have
taken place in the F-35 program. Now we see the problems with
the sequester that maybe is going to drastically cut what the
Air Force has.
And I guess I am concerned that the Air Force might
sacrifice the Air National Guard F-35s before they reduce any
of their active squadrons, and I think that would be a move
that wouldn't be in the best interest of our national security.
I don't think it would be smart strategically. I don't think it
would be smart fiscally.
But, General Clarke, I want you to talk about that, why you
think that basing F-35s with National Guard units around in
those four areas--why is that smart, both tactically and
fiscally? And then tell us what you think the right number of
F-35s that are needed with the National Guard so they can
remain proficient.
And then, finally, maybe this subcommittee will want to
know any tripwires that you might see that--any signals that we
might be seeing from the Air Force that maybe they are moving
in a direction that would be against the plan to actually house
them with you.
So can you touch on those three aspects of that F-35
program.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. I would be happy to.
Of course, the F-35 is an important airplane for the future
of the Air Force and for the Nation. It is truly a fifth-
generation fighter. So it goes beyond what fourth-generation
capabilities can provide today for the Nation.
With regard to your first part about why it is important
for Air National Guard units to have them, we are a warfighting
component of the United States Air Force. That unit I was
talking about in Afghanistan previously was an Air National
Guard unit that did this deployment on their own with no
support from anyone with regard to other units coming in and
backfilling them, rounding them out. They mobilized from their
home station, didn't go somewhere else to get spun up for this.
They went direct to the combat fight, a proven choice for
warfighting operations.
Every single one of our units reflects that same
capability. Why? Because previous senior leadership of the Air
Force made sure that we could do that. So when we talk about
the bed-down of new platforms, recapitalizing the old ones,
replacing fighters that are approaching 30 years of age on into
40 years by the time we get into the F-35 program where we
start delivering the numbers, I think we are going to see the
appropriate recapitalization of the Guard in parallel with the
United States Air Force. That is a full part of the plan.
In fact, the first unit has already been announced up at
Vermont, where we are going to put in Air National Guard
fighters there. What we are doing is we are wedding a lot of
expertise that the Guard brings and experience with newer
people that come into the regular Air Force at these units.
So we will have active associations, Active-Duty members
flying with the Air National Guard at every single location we
bed these down, Air National Guard-assigned aircraft, largely
Air National Guard doing it, particularly maintenance, which is
important, and our pilots. But we will see regular Air Force
bedded down with this, also, wherever those units are
identified. So I think it is important that we do that for the
future.
And, by the way, we operate 15 of 16 air defense sites over
the Nation, also. We nearly have 100 percent of all of the air
defense capability over the Nation on a daily basis in the Air
National Guard, another reason why it is good for the bed-down.
With regard to the number of airplanes, the program of
record is 17,063 for the Air Force at large. I think that we
will see the Air Force recapitalize us on par. So we will have
the appropriate percentage of airplanes given to the Air
National Guard for all the great reasons I just talked about.
And the Air Force counts on us for future operational reserve
to support all the things we do at home and overseas.
And with regard to the plan, I see nothing that breaks that
plan apart for the future. The Air Force is fully invested in
making sure that we do get the appropriate number of squadrons
of F-35s as they deliver off the factory.
Mr. Crenshaw. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Ruppersberger.

Remarks of Mr. Ruppersberger

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you, Chairman Frelinghuysen. I am
glad to see your green tie today, acknowledging our Irish.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. I actually wear green on other
occasions, too.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Oh, well, that is good.
So I assume that you are very preppy, then, if you wear
green a lot. Okay. Let me go into my question.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is from your time.
Mr. Ruppersberger. First thing. As Congressmen Crenshaw
said, a lot of us served in either local government or State
government. I was in local government for 17 years as county
executive where we had to deal with the front lines, severe
snowstorm, national disaster. And it was great to have the
National Guard behind us at all times and your expertise and
readiness. And, also, I acknowledge your readiness in Iraq and
Afghanistan, too.
I want to point out, in the severe snowstorm where this
government was closed, all of my meetings were canceled except
for one, and that was General Grass. So the National Guard
comes out in really bad weather, too. And we discussed a lot of
issues.

C-130 AND A-10 TRANSFER

I am going to get into one of the issues that we did
discuss, and that is the C-130 airframe. It is very important,
I think, to the future. The C-130 airframe is very important--
and this is to you, General Grass--to the future of the
National Guard.
For my district, the Second Congressional District of
Maryland, this airframe is especially important. If the A-10
airframe is eventually divested by the Air Force, which I
understand is what is happening, and the C-130s are not
procured by the National Guard, the Air National Guard unit
stationed, again, in my area, Warfield International Guard
Base, will be without a flight mission.
So my question to you: Please provide details on what
efforts are underway to ensure that the National Guard can
effectively compete with big Army for the updated C-130J model
for this airframe?
And, additionally, please explain to the committee the
detrimental effects on airlift capability for the national
capital region, this whole region, if the C-130J airframe is
not procured by the National Guard.
I am going to ask you a question, if I have time
afterwards, about sequestration--I do it at every hearing--the
negative effects it will have on the National Guard and your
ability to do your job for the citizens of our country.
General Grass. Congressman, I will ask General Clarke in a
minute to talk more details on the C-130.
But I will tell you that our relationship, as General
Clarke mentioned, with the Air Force after the publication of
the National Commission on the Future of the Air Force has been
phenomenal. And I credit General Welsh and Secretary Deborah
Lee James every step of the way.
When we talk about modernization, recapitalization, it is
not like the Air Force considers the Air Guard or the Air Force
Reserve an afterthought. We are right up front. Not only are we
right up front, we have a three-member panel that advises
General Welsh, one active Air Force General officer, one
Reserve Air Force General officer, and one Air National Guard
General officer.
They have been on duty now for almost 2 years. We rotate
them. And they look across the board both for the overseas
requirements for tactical airlift and combat airlift, as well
as they look at the homeland for us. We have got a study
underway right now taking a deep dive into what you mentioned,
sir, and really taking a serious look at what timeframes do we
have to respond in on some of the major disasters that we might
get called into.
And the C-130 is a workhorse. You know, originally, we were
going to have the C-27J aircraft that's smaller than the C-130,
but it was going to be a premiere for the homeland. The
decision was made not to field that to the Guard. So the C-130
now even becomes more important because we had a different
aircraft in the Army Guard before called the Sherpa C-23, very
small, but very capable for responding, moving people, moving
equipment, moving supplies, emergency responders in a disaster.
So we are heavily invested for the future in the C-130.
I will ask General Clarke to talk more.
General Clarke. Congressman, with specifically Warfield,
the plan is, under the Total Force Proposal in 2015, if the Air
Force is successful in divesting the A-10 fleet, they do plan
to backfill capability at all of them, including your location
that you are talking about, and the current plan is to put C-
130s, J models, into Warfield if they divest the A-10s.

NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION

Mr. Ruppersberger. Now, how about the question I asked
about the detrimental effect to the national capital region.
Explain what the national capital region is and, if we don't
move forward with the C-130J, how that can have a negative
impact on this region.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. In our discussions with FEMA and
others, this is a complex problem here. Ground movement in the
national capital region is----
Mr. Ruppersberger. What is the national capital region, for
the Members?
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Could you move your mike a little closer
so we could----
Mr. Ruppersberger. What is the national capital region? If
you could, define that and then the impacts.
General Clarke. Pretty much, I think, where WTOP covers
with their radio.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
General Clarke. You can almost be----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. No advertisements here, please.
General Clarke. So I think it is the broader area. It is
the people who also support the national capital region. They
may live immediately outside the national capital region.
But in our discussion with FEMA and others, it is the speed
of response that is important. It is not just in total number
of airplanes out there across the Nation that can respond. It
is the speed of response that we can get those airplanes to the
location where either we are going to have to do the search and
recovery efforts, immediate medical evacuation, other things
that will have to be done.
That is a fairly large footprint for us in the Air Force to
do that. Having airplanes close by, it is actually quite
helpful because they are already there. But it could be a
staging location for other operations as well if it is not part
of the collateral damage or the damage of the event that might
happen in the national capital region.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you very much.
Let me introduce one of your own, Congressman Womack from
Arkansas.

Remarks of Mr. Womack

Mr. Womack. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, again, what a great honor it is to have these four
gentlemen and the folks behind them, including the Chief's
beautiful wife.
It is great to have Pat here today.
And, Mr. Chairman, you and I and Mr. Calvert just recently
returned from a trip overseas where we had an opportunity to
spend some time with members of our National Guard, the first
of the 112th Cav squadron down in Sinai, Egypt, my old stomping
grounds.
And I am happy to report that they are doing a great
mission and the one that the National Guard has been blessed
with now for a number of years and, I think, rotating back and
forth with the Army. I think the Army has it again after the
Cav squadron leaves. But they are doing remarkable work, and I
think it is illustrative of the capability of this
organization.
I would like to call attention to--noteworthy is the fact,
as we just talked about--the relationship between the Reserve
components and our Active-Duty counterparts is a pretty
remarkable relationship. I don't think anybody would disagree
with that.
There is, however, an ongoing discussion and a bit of a
conflict brewing that I want to drill down on just a little
bit. And I am going to throw this question to General Lyons.
And, General Grass, if you want to weigh in, I certainly
would like to hear your thoughts on it.

AVIATION RESTRUCTURING INITIATIVE

But it is about ARI. It is about the Aviation Restructuring
Initiative. And the Army is claiming in all of their reports of
these several billion dollars that they are going to save. And
so, on the surface, to me, this restructuring initiative looks
like that it is kind of a bill-payer for the potential effects
of sequestration and cuts in our defense structure.
However, in kind of drilling down on this subject, it looks
like--and, General Lyons, maybe you can help enlighten us a
little bit--it looks like that a lot of savings, the vast
majority of the savings, they are claiming aren't even going to
be realized until out in the--beyond the 2019 and 2020
timeframe. It is my strong opinion that there will be many
changes to what we are doing in defense between now and then
based on threats and budgets and what have you.
So help me understand, General Lyons. If Apaches were to
remain in the Army National Guard, would the Army truly be
lacking in the capability entirely or are your Apache pilots
able to perform the mission that involves the Army's manned-
unmanned teaming concept?
It is a concern of mine that we have got a major change
that is brewing. We have patched it a little bit in the 2015
process. But in fiscal year 2016 and beyond, this is going to
be a major issue. So help me understand.
General Lyons. Congressman, thank you.
The Aviation Restructure Initiative, as you have outlined,
does have cost avoidances with it that are--that are scheduled
as a part of that program. I will tell you, in answer to your
question about the complex operations, our National Guard
aviators have always conducted complex operations. They have
spent the last 13--almost 14 years of doing that, and they are
fully capable of doing that in the future.
Mr. Womack. Very good at it.
General Lyons. Yes, sir. They are extremely good at it.
So as we speak to the Adjutants General, in particular, on
this, one of the concerns is--that they have voiced is one that
you have hit on, and that is the ability to have capability and
provide strategic depth when that capability is needed. So as
we are currently postured with the airframe in both components,
we allot--that facilitates that strategic depth. That is what
the Adjutants General have mentioned on numerous occasions.
So we are fully capable of conducting those operations. We
have over the course of the war here. And given the quality and
experience of our aviators, we would continue to do so.
General Grass. Congressman, if I could add that, you know,
the bulk of the savings are already moving forward, the
changeout of the trainer at Fort Rucker, which we all agreed
to, the changeout of the Scout aircraft. We have 30 of them in
the National--or we had 30 of them.
Our last unit just got back. Tennessee Army National Guard
unit came back. I saw them in November doing great work, but
they knew that it was a platform that we would go along with
the Army and divest them.
The Adjutants General and the brigade and division
commanders have expressed to me a concern that, when we bring
our Apache fleet completely down to a level that is proposed in
ARI, that they will not be able to train with them anymore in
the future, which further pushes them to a strategic reserve.
But the bulk of the savings will be realized in, really, two-
thirds of that program.
Mr. Womack. Well, the math that they are using leads me to
believe that it is not necessarily being done for fiscal
reasons, but more for operational ones, and that deeply
concerns me, as a Member. I will come back to this subject and
others. I know I am out of time. But thanks for your response
and for hearing me on the subject.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Committee shares your concern.
Ms. McCollum.

C-130S MODERNIZATION

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I am going to go back to the airframe and a little bit on
the C-130s. And I am very concerned----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Ms. McCollum, if you could just move
your microphone a little closer, please. Thank you.
Ms. McCollum. I am concerned about the older H models of
the C-130s. They deliver the troops. They deliver the supplies.
I mean, it might be the Air Force flying them, but the Army is
dependent upon them getting there.
And I am concerned because, for the past 13 years, the
Avionics Modernization Program has been designated to upgrade
the C-130H fleet to ensure that there is compliance with the
national, national, and international regulations before 2020.
Now, our Air Guard base is adjacent, as most Air Guard
bases are--in close proximity to international airports. So I
am concerned about the C-130 modernization efforts made under
AMP.
I would especially like to know if these modernization
efforts are going to result in compliance with the FAA and
international regulations before 2020.
I want to know what is underway to make sure not only the
Air Guard in Minnesota, but all across this country, are going
to be in compliance where not only, as I said, here in the
United States we need to be in compliance, but we need to be in
compliance internationally, too, as we fly with our NATO
partners and we fly in international air.
So what can you tell me that is going to assure me that we
are going to be on time in 2020 with all of the C-130 aircraft
good to go?
And what does this committee need to do to make sure it is
there? Because we can't have you waived off an airport saying
that you can't take off because you are not in compliance.
General Clarke. Yes, ma'am. Important question.
The Air National Guard operates a lot of the legacy
airplanes, C-130Hs. So this is something that concerns us as
well, recognizing that the mandates, like you mentioned, both
domestically and internationally to comply with the management
that is necessary for future air operations, requires these
airplanes to be modified. There is no way around this. We have
to do this. Indeed, there are multiple airplanes in the United
States inventory that need the same modification, not just the
H models in the C-130 fleet.
The plan right now is that is top priority one for
modernization of C-130s. We have got to get on with at least
that part of the modernization in order to meet the compliance
date of 2020 for operations in air space domestically and
overseas.
After that, then there is other modernization programs that
would be, I would say, second tier to that one, but that one
has got to come first. So the Air Force is committed to putting
the resources behind this compliance issue in order to make
sure that we are compatible with the requirements for domestic
and international operations.
And, in my mind, one way to make that happen is to not just
count on, like, one vendor to do that. We are going to have to
have multiple vendors in order to make sure that we can
implement this program or modify the airplanes in time to meet
that mandate. Otherwise, they won't be able to operate in this
air space.
Ms. McCollum. So we have got 5 years to do it and there is
a plan? There isn't a plan unless we change the way we are
doing it right now? Is that fair to say? If we keep doing stay
the course, we will not make the 5-year deadline for all the
aircraft?
General Clarke. Right now we got a little bit behind
because of the issue of whether or not the AMP program was
going to be used or not. All of the Adjutants General that have
them in their States today agree that we need to get this first
compliance issue completed and then we will start worrying
about other modernization programs. I believe this Nation can
do whatever it really wants to in regards to modifying
airplanes, depending on what the pressing priority is to make
it happen.
I know that the Air Force realizes that we have that
capability, that they are going to make this modification
alongside with us to make sure it happens in time to meet that
2020 mandate. Ma'am, it is absolutely priority one for all of
us in the Air National Guard.
Ms. McCollum. Well, Mr. Chair, I am--you know, with
sequestration, we don't know what the budget numbers are going
to look like in decisions that we need to make. I would think
that we would want to have all of our aircraft capable of
flying within the United States and flying internationally, so
to make sure that the committee knows what the schedule is
going to be and we do what we need to do to make sure that this
happens.
This isn't about picking, you know, favorite bases or, as
the General said, I used the C-130 as an example. It is about
making sure that all of our aircraft are able to be up in the
air and flying as needed.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Graves.

CYBERSECURITY

Mr. Graves. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, it is a privilege to have you before us today.
And let me just, on behalf of the committee, thank you, as you
have heard previously, for all you do in providing readiness to
the good men and women in each of our States and as it relates
to the Guard and Reserve units. And you have got a tough task
ahead of you. I know we have discussed that.
And I want to change gears a little bit. The committee is
certainly concerned about a lot of the equipment of old and the
past a little bit, and I want to step and look to the future
some and talk a little bit about cybersecurity as it relates to
a GAO report that recently came out--and I know you all are
familiar with it--that they estimate that there is currently a
need for 40,000 cybersecurity professionals just to satisfy the
government's demand.
And that is a tremendous number. That is a huge number. And
I am sure each of you agree that these are skill sets in the
cybersecurity realm and beyond that reservists and guardsmen
are prime to fill based on the skills that they have developed
in their own civilian careers.
So, General Talley, you have commented in the past that the
demand for cybersecurity professionals and cyber-experienced
soldiers far outpaces the current inventory.
Could you share with the committee and maybe elaborate on
some of the Army Reserves' initiatives that are being pursued
to help recruit some of the most talented individuals with the
particular skill sets that are going to be required in the
future.
General Talley. Yes, sir, I will. And thank you for the
question.
Recently, the Army Reserve, as part of our private-public
partnership, launched an initiative here on the Hill with
support from members and their staff as well as six
universities and the private sector where we have brought
together the best from the private and public and academic
sectors to say, ``How can we take the already strong capability
in cyber in the Army Reserve and leverage it with, again, the
academic and the private sector?''
And that just started--we just launched that about a month
ago, and it was at that event where I was citing the same
report that you just cited that we are showing about a need for
40,000 more professionals in this area.
Well, the Active component has a plan to engage and train
their own cyber warriors and are starting to recognize that the
Army Reserve--and I think the Reserve components, in general,
can contribute a lot more than we have been asked to
contribute.
In the case of the Army Reserve, to run the numbers real
quick, I have almost 7,000 cyber warriors--or cyber-related
warriors. That is my military intelligence capability under the
only one-star MI command in the Army called the Military
Intelligence Readiness Command. They provide offensive support
to the National Security Agency, of course, above a TSI level.
On the defense side, in protecting the platform, which is
the Department of Defense Information Network, that is signal
capability. And I have a two-star command, the 335th Signal
Command, that has a lot of those cyber units under it. So they
protect the platform. They do defense. And then the MI folks do
offense. Put all of that together, we have a tremendous
capability.
Then we also have reinforced with subject matter experts
the USMA West Point Cyber Institute with expertise. And in
addition to the public-private partnership I mentioned, we are
creating IMA billets, individual mobilization augmentees, in
the private sector. So I would have an Army Reserve billet in
Google, in Microsoft. And all of that together provides
tremendous capability, and we are pretty pleased with the way
it is going.
Mr. Graves. That is good. Well, thank you for that
clarification.
And you feel comfortable with the path that the Reserve is
on and moving towards filling that gap? I mean, that is a
tremendous gap. I know that is in totality, 40,000 for
government. But you feel good with the direction that you are
able to work within?
General Talley. Yes, sir. Absolutely.
I want to highlight--there was a classified competition not
too long ago at MIT's Lincoln Labs, and we had our Active
component folks kind of paired up against our Reserve component
folks, Guard and Reserve.
And let's just say the Reserve component guys pretty much
kicked butt because, during the exercise, the RC folks were
actually writing code in their head during the competition as
opposed to just responding.
The expertise of the Army Reserve not just in cyber, but
across all of our areas--the reason we are so sharp is because
they stay sharp because they learn that and stay focused from
private-sector experience and then they bring that in the Armed
Forces. In my opinion, we have got to leverage a lot more of
that capability.

CYBER PROTECTION TEAMS

Mr. Graves. Right. Thank you. And I appreciate your focus
on that area. I think that is an area that this committee and
others will continue to point towards as a focus that is
required of the defense side.
And then one final followup, General Lyons, if you don't
mind. I want to first thank you. We are very pleased in Georgia
to have been selected as one of the locations for the National
Guard cyber protection teams and strongly believe it was a
right decision, good decision, given the talent pool by the
universities and the industry in the State.
In your view and maybe for our committee a little bit, can
you describe to us what is the importance of guardsmen or the
role, as you may see, in meeting the cybersecurity needs from
your perspective on an ongoing basis and into the future?
Because this is very new for a lot of our constituents, to
know that--cyber warfare and cybersecurity. We all know it from
a personal perspective. But from a national defense
perspective, your view of the role there.
General Lyons. Thank you, Congressman.
As you noted, the Army National Guard, the National Guard
at large, has made fairly substantial progress in 2015 year in
what we call cyber protection teams. So we have currently one
full-time Title 10 Active-Duty cyber protection team.
And, as you have noted, we recently announced the first 3
of 10 traditional Guard teams. So these are part-time men and
women that will bring their civilian skill sets, like General
Talley highlighted--bring those skill sets with them to these
teams.
Between the cyber protection teams and, in the Army
National Guard, computer network defense teams that we have in
the 54 States, territories in the district, which are really
protect-the-network kinds of teams, we think that we are very
well postured for the future in cyber defense. And I think that
is important, Congressman, that we continue to have structure
like that in the Reserve component.
I will speak colloquially for the National Guard. As the
Active component stands up their cyber mission force and we
invest tremendous amount of dollars in training and education
for those men and women, should those men and women decide that
they want to continue service, but perhaps pursue a civilian
career with information technology industry and industry like
that, we offer them a place in the National Guard and the
Reserve to continue their service, but do it on a part-time
basis.
And so we harvest those dollars, the training, the
education, and development by allowing them to continue to
serve. So the cyber protection teams in the Army National Guard
are a part of that, and we look forward to standing up the
remaining seven.
Mr. Graves. Okay. Great.
Well, thank you again for your service and, again, the
adaptation to the future demands that we will see as a country.
Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Graves.
Mr. Ryan and then Mr. Calvert.

ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING

Mr. Ryan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Two issues, two questions, one more of a comment and the
other more of a question to all of you. In my congressional
district in Youngstown, Ohio, we have President Obama's first
Manufacturing Innovation Institute, it is additive
manufacturing, three dimensional printing. We are working with
the Air Force and the Air Force Reserve in partnership with the
University of Dayton to figure out how to use this new
capability, this new technology called additive manufacturing
to help us reduce costs for replacement parts and to help save
money for the military, and specifically, the good deal of
money that we spend on replacement parts, whether it is in the
Air Force or another branch.
So I want to bring that to your attention, because I think
it is ripe for a partnership with all of you as well, as we
continue to move, because every hearing we have here, it is
about money, it is about budgets, it is about what we don't
have, and we have a technology coming online that the
Department of Defense is in partnership with the Department of
Commerce, Department of Energy to figure out how to drop the
costs for a lot of this where you would be able to print,
literally print a part for an airplane in theater or a truck or
a tank or whatever. And when you factor this capability into
our long-term budgets, I think we can save a lot of money.
So I wanted to let you know that the Youngstown Air Reserve
station, the 910th, is participating in that, the Air Force is
participating in that in conjunction with the University of
Dayton. So I wanted you to know that, because I think there is
room for a broader partnership here throughout the military.

SUICIDE

I wanted to ask about the issue that I know everyone cares
about. First I want to associate myself with Mr. Graves'
questions. I think the issue of cybersecurity is a huge one and
I am glad he asked that and peeled off the onion a little bit
on that. I want to talk about the issue of suicide, and I just
want to pose one question to all of you. I am looking at, you
know, some of the statistics that are here, Army Reserve had an
increase from quarter two to quarter three of 2014 of 11;
General Talley, and the National Guard has seen a slight bump
as well.
These numbers are still really high. And I wanted to ask
each of you, are there programs that you have gotten rid of?
Are there programs that you are highlighting now? Are you
trying to push men and women into that you are seeing more
benefit and seeing some impact, because it is still amazing to
me today that these numbers are still this high, and it seems
that we are not getting to the levels we certainly need to get
at.
So if each of you can just briefly comment on what is
working, because I think it is important for us to know what is
working as we are figuring out where to spend some of this
money.
General Lyons. Congressman, thank you for the question. And
share your concern and the committee's concern with the
behavioral health posture and support to our men and women that
serve, and our efforts at suicide prevention. So I would like
to address this in a couple different ways, if I could.
First, I would like to say that this is a leadership
priority in the Army National Guard, the adjutants general,
myself, in the 54 States, territories, and the District. We are
approaching this from a holistic and team-based approach. And
thanks to Congress, beginning in 2014, we were able to hire 78
full-time psychological health coordinators out in the 54
States, territories, and the District. That gave us a ratio of
psychological health coordinators to soldiers of 1 to 4,500 in
2014. Again, thanks to Congress's support, in 2015, we were
able to double that number to 157 psychological health
coordinators. That reduced that ratio from 1 to 4,500 to 1 to
2,000.
Now, we think the Army actually has this right. The Army's
goal is to get to a 1-to-333 ratio of psychological health
coordinators to soldiers, so with continued support, we will
continue to pursue that.
I talked about the holistic approach. We see an at-risk
population out there that is a younger generation, so we are
rolling out a Guard-ready application for smart phones to try
and tap into our most at-risk population, but it really goes
beyond that. It is a team-based approach. And when I talk about
that, I talk about our chaplain corps that is available 24/7 to
help our soldiers and family members. It is those first line
leaders in the units; it is those psychological health
coordinators that I talked about; but most importantly,
perhaps, it is their fellow soldiers, the young men and women
that serve with them.
We have devoted a tremendous amount of time in training so
that they can recognize signs of stress, signs of crisis,
escort that person to care. We have seen a 27 percent increase
in interventions in suicides with folks that have suicidal
ideations and we have increased our trained force by 25,000 in
the last year in the intervention skills training.
So we think that with the increase in interventions, we are
seeing a decrease in the number of suicides. In calendar year
2013, we had 120 suicides in the Army National Guard. In
calendar year 2014, that was down to 76.
So we continue to work to reduce stigma, we continue to
work to train our men and women to be there when their fellow
soldiers need them, and to support their families. And I want
to thank Congress's support for our ability to do that.
General Talley. Sir, thank you very much for the question.
It is a very important area. I think we have some good news to
report in the Army Reserve. This year, in calendar year 2015,
we are at five suicides, which is a downward trend from where
we were last year. At the end of calendar year 2014, I had 40
suicides. That is a 30 percent decrease of where we were from
calendar year 2013. In fact, our suicide rate and levels are
the lowest now they have been in over 5 or 6 years.
Having said that, we are not happy where we are, we have
got to continue to drive those down. So--and I have testified
to this a number of times, so I am actually real comfortable
and pleased to get the question again. When I first got on the
job as an engineer, business guy background, I thought I should
be able to tease out where the population was, so I thought the
people that are killing themselves in the Army Reserve are
people that aren't actively engaged in the Army Reserve, they
are not involved in family programs, you know, they are
absentee employees.
I was wrong. Spent about 6 months researching that. I own
almost all the doctors and nurses in the total Army. They are
in the Army Reserve. I own also most of the mathematicians. So
as I drilled down on that, who is killing themselves in the
Army Reserve: predominantly young males, never been deployed,
and they come to drill, and you think they are model soldiers,
and in some cases, their families may be participating in
family programs. Why are they killing themselves? Number one
reason, failed relationships with their--with a spouse or a
girlfriend or a boyfriend; second reason, right there close,
financial stress.
So how have we been getting after it? Using the Army
program, but also an Army Reserve program. So first off, we
look at the Army Reserve as a family, and so part of the Army
funding that is come from you and others have allowed us to
create these directors of psychological health and our RSEs,
also to put in place the suicide prevention program managers
that Judd mentioned, but also we have a great program called
Forward Family. 24/7 a day, you can call Forward Family. They
are not part of the chain of command. So they might get a phone
call for someone who is thinking about suicide, and they often
do, or sharp issues, who won't feel comfortable for whatever
reason going to their chain of command. That is showing
tremendous success in having us intervene and help people
before it is too late.
The other program that we have implemented is a life skills
coping program. So I had Dr. Bryan Kelly, who is a clinical
psychologist who commands--a two-star that commands my Army
Reserve medical command, I had Bryan look into this, and he
looked at--it is really an issue of lack of coping skills. So,
again, I don't want to hog more time than I already have, but
we are trying--we have to create--teach people how to cope with
stress today. For whatever reason, they don't seem to be able
to cope the way that previous generations and populations have,
according to the psychologist. So we have created a life skills
coping skills program in partnership with academia, and we are
starting that program throughout the Army Reserve. We are
seeing success.

PSYCHOLOGICAL HEALTH PROGRAM

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Briefly, General.
General Clarke. Briefly indeed, because I am going to
parrot both of their comments. What I get from my wing
commanders is that the director of psychological health
program, having these people embedded in each of our wings, we
have 89 of them in the Air National Guard, is probably the
keystone to all of it. They have made efforts, they ensure that
there is appropriate focus, they talk to individuals. So that
is a--but to go a bit further just on the--
What General Lyons indicated about the soldiers themselves,
you know, with the airmen, they all know that they are sensors;
every single one of them is a sensor to what is going on, and
they sense things either at drill, they also sense things when
they are off with their civilian employees and with their
families, and they are watching things like Facebook and all
that.
They know--we told them when to watch out. And we don't do
this through computer-based training modules anymore, we don't
send our airmen to go look at a computer to figure out whether
it is how do you be a better sensor for things like suicide
prevention. We tell them face to face now, eyeball to eyeball,
what you need to know, how you need to respond, and who to
contact. And that, we think, is a good intervention effort in
itself.
We are down-trending from our efforts, but even one of
these suicides inside of a unit is devastating to the readiness
and morale of that unit.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Ryan. It is a
critical issue. It is one that the committee has invested in,
and we will continue to invest in it. It is very important.
Mr. Calvert.

UAVS FOR FIRE FIGHTING

Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I apologize for
my tardiness. We had an Interior Appropriations meeting on at
the same time, so--but I appreciate General Lyons, General
Clarke, General Grass and General Talley for being here, and
thank you for your service. All of us understand your
challenges you face, and we look forward to working with you to
support the men and women of our Army and Air Force Guard and
Reserve.
In the job that I have on Interior Appropriations, we deal
a lot with wildfire in the west. Wildfire is as catastrophic as
a tornado or a hurricane or earthquake to many parts of the
country. And in 2013, during the Rim Fire, which was over by
Yosemite National Park in California, the MQ-1B Predator was
utilized for fire mapping and perimeter spot fire detection. It
was highly successful in aiding the firefighting efforts on the
ground. The State of California was the first State to utilize
UAVs in support of a State emergency. The after-action report
showed that the UAVs took off several days of containment time,
saving money and possibly lives in a fire as catastrophic as
the Rim Fire, which the cost of that fire was well over $250
million to extinguish that fire, days, not as extremely--not
just the cost, but the amount of land that is consumed by fire.
However, it did take a huge effort on the part of Congress
to help move along the authorization process for the Predator
to be utilized in a State emergency situation. Many members
personally called the Secretary of Defense, I actually called
him on an airplane going somewhere, and asked Secretary Hagel
to personally, on a piece of paper on the plane, would he
please sign off on this thing, because we need to get on this
right away.
It took 3 days to get the U.S.--use of the UAVs to be
authorized, 3 days. And at that time, we said, look, that is--
you know, in a fire that catastrophic, that can take a lot of
lives, a lot of land and a lot of money. And so there was talk
about efforts to streamline that authorization process to
utilize National Guard UAVs during a state of emergency.
So I am going to ask the question, have we got that problem
resolved so--this summer, I am afraid, we are going to have a
lot of catastrophic fires.
General Grass. Congressman, if I can start, and I will turn
it over to General Clarke. I was on the other end of the phone
when we got the approval to put the MQ-1 up there from
California, and it was a game changer, as you said, sir. We
worked with the National Interagency Firefighting Center, we
worked with the FAA, with Cal Fire, and the Secretary's office
and Northern Command to get approval. We learned so much about
that, that platform and being able to take the live video feed
and infrared feed some nights right into the command center so
the incident commander knew when a flare popped out that they
could get on it quickly versus waiting to see a large scale
fire break out.
We also found that the ability of the MQ-1 to rely on the--
a repeater that we put on it, a communications repeater so that
the firemen on the ground in this very rough terrain where they
can't communicate, can now communicate better.
We are still working through the approval process. As you
know, there are many concerns from a--you know, citizens of
being able to--the military looking at the citizen on the
ground and anything to do with the UAV, human protection, you
know.
The one thing that I think will make some progress on
definitely with the Forest Service and others where there
aren't much of a population out there, those will be much
easier, but we have a lot of detail to work through. I will ask
General Clarke to comment on this, but this is a game changer,
and I know the National Interagency Firefighting Center is
very, very concerned that we have it up and ready for this fire
season.
General Clarke. I agree with General Grass's comments about
the sensitivity. We don't call it an ISR asset at this point,
it becomes an incident awareness asset, and you have to go
through the proper channels, the proper use memorandum has to
be agreed upon, the Secretary of Defense has--anything that
streamlines that, obviously we need to get the appropriate
authorities to make that happen, but we do want to share that
the citizen on the ground realize that our objective is to
protect their life and property, and we have no interest in
doing anything beyond that with these platforms.
With the proper oversight, with the proper integration of
the FAA and others, I think we can get there. As a former
commander of 1st Air Force and Air Force's Northern, any Title
10 asset, including the Predators that we used, would have fall
on their own, but I think there is a way of doing this in Title
32 under the same construct. And it would make a big difference
if it was a little bit faster in the allowance for the use of
these assets in the homeland for things like the fires,
earthquakes, fires, flood--we see a lot of this throughout the
year, so we are a little bit closer to that as the National
Guard watching it. We would appreciate any authority to speed
this up in order to respond appropriately.
And the great thing about the Predator, by the way, because
it is coming out of a training unit, it has an unclassified
line that feeds its information to the training part of what we
do, which then once it is hooked up to the network and global
information piece, it can be exploited out to whoever needs to
see it at that point. We have to be careful to make sure that
that doesn't get into the wrong places, because people would be
concerned about the overhead use of an asset like that, but I
think we can control that also. So I think there is a way ahead
on this, we just need to get the appropriate authorities to----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Will the gentleman from California
yield?
Mr. Calvert. Yes. Be happy to.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So to answer the gentleman's question,
has this been worked out or is this still a work in progress?
General Clarke. From my perspective and opinion, it is
still a work in progress.
Mr. Calvert. Well----
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you.
Mr. Calvert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope it gets worked
out pretty soon, because we are going into fire season in the
West, and these--as you know, these Predators were able to
locate, as the General mentioned, with the infrared camera,
with the--and coordinate with the tanker fleet to pinpoint
where the drops for fire retardants and to take these fires out
very rapidly. And so this can save the taxpayer a lot of money
and it can certainly save a lot of property from being burned
up, so I would hope this can get worked out.
And if any language we need to do in a bill, Mr. Chairman,
I hope you would entertain such a thought, because we need to
get this done. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Calvert.
Mr. Visclosky.

F-16 MODERNIZATION

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Air National Guard is the primary force provider for
NORAD for the defense of the U.S. airspace. And as I understand
it, the Air Guard is responsible for 15 of the 16 fighter alert
sites, including Atlantic City that is responsible for
Washington and New York, but some of these units fly the oldest
F-16s in the Air Force.
Generally what needs to be done to ensure that these
aircraft remain fully capable? And secondly, is there
specifically an R&D need as far as research and development as
far as the upgrade of these aircrafts with the electronics and
other assets?
General Clarke. One of the sites, obviously in New Jersey,
provides the 24/7 response for homeland air defense. What I
wanted to tell you about these airplanes and the people who fly
them and maintain them, it is not just air defense they do.
They also deploy overseas. So anything we do to these airplanes
will be used for both the war fight and homeland operations,
the air defense mission. This--upgrades that we need would be
important for the surveillance and the ability to detect target
threats to the homeland, and in this session, that is about as
far as I can take that conversation, but indeed, it is a
deficit and we need to address this.
And I think with regard to the R&D for that, the R&D has
been pretty much done. Now it is an opportunity to purchase the
equipment and start implementing it into the aircraft. So we
have already tested some of this equipment out at our test
center in Tucson, and we think that it is a perfect match with
current capabilities. There are several vendors out there who
would vie for a competition to implement new radars into the
aircraft, but I think we are ready to go.
Mr. Visclosky. So for 2016, you don't think there is a need
for R&D, or if there is, it is not a significant amount?
General Clarke. Sir, I will take that for the record with
regard to 2016 for R&D.
[The information follows:]

To remain fully capable, F-16 aircraft require active
electronically scanned array (AESA) radars. AESA radars provide a
critical capability for aerospace control alert F-16s to detect and
track multiple airborne targets of interest in dense civilian air
traffic environments near major population centers. Simultaneously,
AESA radars improve the capability of ANG F-16's in close air support,
surface attack and defensive counter-air. AESA radars detect, track,
communicate, and jam in multiple directions simultaneously.
Additionally, AESA radars eliminate several components associated with
mechanical radars, thus significantly improving reliability and
reducing maintainability costs.
Currently NORTHCOM has a Joint Urgent Operational Need (JUON) to
put AESA radars on ANG aerospace control alert aircraft. We anticipate
the USAF will fund the initial RDT&E requirement and procure a portion
of the JUON required radars with current FY15 funding.
In order to exploit the full capability of the radar, we estimate
the need for an additional $75M of FY16 RDT&E for software development,
and up to $150M of procurement funds to compete the JUON radar
purchase.

Mr. Visclosky. If you could, as well as the moneys that
would be needed for the upgrades in 2016, that would be
terrific.
General Grass, for the fiscal year 2014 budget, the Army
National Guard requested reprogramming of $101 million for
military personnel training. As you know, and I think others on
the panel know, the committee was not happy with the request,
and just wonder what actions the Guard has taken to put
controls in place to avoid a situation like that occurring
again?
General Grass. Congressman, thank you. And I thank the
chairman and this committee for your great support that allowed
us to get to the end of the fiscal year and still have a drill
period for all of our National Guardsmen.
In August of last year, we realized that we were on a path
to run out of money before the end of the fiscal year,
primarily because of our tracking, and we had--as we draw down
the number of forces that are deployed overseas, what we found
was that over 13 years of war, our inactive duty training
periods, the money was not--it had been there, but we had moved
it an offset because those forces were gone.
As we come out of war, we found that we had created
internally checks and balances that were lacking to be able to
track that money down to the eaches by each State. So in the
process, I have established a one star in the Army National
Guard that works for General Lyons immediately. He went over,
he is looking at all the processes we use. The material
weaknesses that we found were probably a bit decentralized,
because in the past, we have had significant amounts of money,
but since that account gets smaller and smaller, you have to
manage it much, much closer than we ever had before. You can't
wait until the last month of the fiscal year.
So what we have done, we have done an internal review with
our plans programs chief, Mr. Carpenter, and he has briefed me
and the adjutants general on the first phase of that internal
review, and we have taken corrective action.
The second phase now will be to look at the people that are
involved to make sure they have the right training and that we
implement the right checks and balances for the future. But I
do plan to keep the one star there supporting General Lyons,
you know, for the long-term.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you. If I could for the record, the
Indiana National Guard is actually pursuing a partnership for
peace relationship with Kenya. And, again, for the record, are
you missing any required materials or need any additional
information from the Department of Defense for Indiana to
pursue that?
And, Mr. Chairman, I don't know about time. I have one
more. Would you like me to wait for a second round? I will
wait. I will wait.

READINESS OF THE GUARD

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Well, thank you for yielding. And
may I thank Mr. Visclosky for raising the profile on the good
work that is done out of Atlantic City for the east coast. They
do some remarkable things. And I think the committee's focus of
questions, we have covered a broad range here, including Mr.
Calvert's observation relative to firefighting, that the width
and breadth of what you do, and I know this sounds rather
solicitous, is amazing, domestically and internationally.
I would like to sort of talk a little bit about there is a
feeling sometimes we are not at war, but if we are coming out
of war, maybe we are getting into other wars, so I want to take
a look at the role you will be playing. We seem to go back and
forth in terms of whether we are reducing our force in
Afghanistan or whether we are going to maintain the force or we
are going to increase it, and then Congress is sort of in a--
has been tossed a hot potato in terms of the authorization of
military force, and whatever the force is and whatever our
decisions are, you are going to be a part of that force.
General Grass, you sit on the--as a member of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and I think Congress had quite a lot to do
with that, not only because we thought it was important, but we
obviously have a high regard for you and your professionalism.
How do you--do you have a seat at the table as these types of
issues are discussed? We know the Secretary of Defense has been
over to the Middle East to sort of meet with the combatant
commanders and all of the military brass over there. Where do
you see your role in future hot spots, including what appears
to be somewhat our more enduring role in Afghanistan?
General Grass. Chairman, as a member of the Joint Chiefs, I
do have the opportunity to participate in very senior-level
discussions. And if you look back a year ago at what we knew
about the world situation and what occurred within the last
year was a surprise to everyone between the development, you
know, of the Ebola outbreak, what was happening in eastern
Europe, what happened in the Middle East almost overnight. What
does that do for the Guard? Well, we have to be ready quicker.
General Welch and General Odierno have told me, you have to be
ready quicker. When the Ebola outbreak occurred, I mean, I got
a call in a meeting from General Welch--I mean, from General
Odierno, and he said, you need to be ready to go. Get us a
unit. Well, luckily, you know, the response has mostly been
international. The great work that the 101st airborne division
that went in there, air assault division, but we would have
been the next ones in.
That is on every mission out there for the Army National
Guard today, is there is not much depth left across the force
to respond to this many crises around the world. And I think
General Clarke will tell you as well, we are in every mission
and General Welch has asked us to even mobilize more now just
to meet the requirements around the map, and a lot of that
deals with readiness of the force, but the size of the force is
down to a point where your Reserve component has got to be
ready in much shorter time frames than we ever were 15 years
ago.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So you are really worried about the size
of the force, you are very worried about end strength, and you
have obviously let the powers that be know you are concerned?
General Grass. Yes, Chairman, I have.

TURBULENCE

Mr. Frelinghuysen. And in the mix with just the issue of,
you know, military specialties, I think we have talked about
some of the specialties here, what areas are you weak on that
need to be part of any force that could be mobilized at a
moment's notice? And since many of your men and women have been
mobilized a lot under multiple deployments, you probably have a
pretty good handle on where you have some major gaps, I
wouldn't say deficiencies, but take a look at some of the
military specialties here that are essential to join the fight.

READINESS

General Grass. Yes. And, Chairman, it all comes back to
readiness. On the Army National Guard, again, thanks to this
committee and many others who have modernized our equipment,
but the readiness of our individual soldiers, the ability for a
soldier, a guardsman to go to a school, a 2-week school or to
go to annual training, we have been able to do that throughout
the war so they could stay at a very high level of individual
qualification. That money is gone. So that starts right there.
That means that most of our units will train, as General Lyons
said, at the individual, crew and squad. We need them training
at platoon, company, battalion level, but that is readiness
dollars that make that happen.
On the air side, sir, I think you came out very loud and
clear here: It is modernization, recapitalization.

HUMVEES

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mention was made of the committee's
congressional interest in Humvees, and special attention was
focused on those medical equipped ones. You may have them be
equipped, but in reality, you need people to man those
specialized units. Can you talk a little bit about where we are
here?
General Lyons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you have noted,
what we call turbulence that is associated with drawdowns and
end strength and force structure, there are costs of that
turbulence, and we see that in two different areas, personnel
and material. So as you have highlighted, thanks to NGREA, we
have made tremendous--I mean, it cannot be overstated the
support to allowing us to recapitalize and modernize our
fleets, for example, Humvee ambulances. But what I am concerned
about is as end strength and force structure comes down, people
are still in units, they are out in the communities, but the
unit's mission may change. That soldier then needs to be
retrained into a different military occupational specialty.
There are costs associated for that that is not programmed.
If we have to move equipment from one State to another
State as we rebalance the force at lower end strength and force
structure levels, there are costs for that that is not
programmed. The facilities themselves out in the 2,600
communities, the average age is 43 years old. If there is a new
mission in that community, perhaps that facility needs to be
modified to accomplish that new mission. That cost is not
programmed. So that is turbulence.
But I am also concerned about, to your point, about our men
and women, the intangible aspect of turbulence that is
associated with end strength and force structure reductions.
There is uncertainty that is introduced in their minds about,
am I going to be a member of the same unit? Will I continue to
serve with the same men and women that I have spent my career
with? Will I still accomplish the same missions and the same
equipment that I have been trained on? So that is the
turbulence associated with end strength and force structure
drawdowns that I think introduces both a tangible aspect, but
also an intangible aspect of an uncertainty in the force, and
we are concerned about that.

STATE PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Mr. Womack mentioned our visit to the
Texas unit at the base of the Sinai, and Mr. Visclosky and I
led a group to Egypt, a brief stop in Cyprus and Ukraine. Can
one of you or all of you talk about your connectivity, military
to military, around the world? I know from BG right to my left,
that the National Guard had some very early relationships with
what we used to call the captive nations, the Baltic nations,
but as we see a disassembly in Ukraine and the leadership of
the President, you know, trying to keep his country together
and Russians mobilized in the country, you know, not just
separatists, but Russian command and control, and we see Egypt,
you know, looking for supplies, military support that actually
has been set aside for them but hasn't been delivered, talk to
us just for a few minutes about how the role that all of you
play with your military counterparts, and how, given what is
happening in the world, how that is something which we need to
enhance rather than drawback on.
General Grass. Chairman, if I could open it, the State
Partnership Program that the National Guard has been a part of
now for 22 years, we are getting ready to kick off our 75th
partner here, probably within the next 2 months, but we have 74
countries that we are partnered with around the world. Many of
our states now have two, even a few have three partners.
And one of the missions we got early on from General Phil
Breedlove in Europe was when Crimea first hit the news, he
said, reassure our partners in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania,
Poland, all those partners in eastern Europe, reassure them
that we are still there with them as NATO partners. And only
immediately, the adjutants general, who are partnered with
those states were called by either the chief of defense or the
minister of defense's office and said, we would like you to
come over for a visit, we want to continue. And we are already
doing many exercises there.
So we do that on every continent. Those 74 partners that we
have now, soon to be 75, we will do about 700 engagements in
support of the combatant commands each year. An engagement may
be a chief of defense from a foreign nation coming to the
United States to meet with their partner, it may be an exercise
of a company or a battalion on their land or at home here. And
we do all of that a lot with training dollars and with support
from the combatant command and the Department of State.
Department of State and the combatant command gives us our
strategy for those missions.
So it is a great program. This year we will spend about $9
million above what is in the budget to do 700 engagements. And
I know that all the way to the Secretary of Defense, they have
stressed the importance of this program.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. It is an excellent investment, and we
saw some of it firsthand. I think other nations would benefit
from it.
Yes, General Talley. And then I am going to go to Mr.
Israel.
General Talley. Sir, great question. As the chief of the
Army Reserve, I routinely get asked by heads of states and
other heads of government outside the United States, they want
to use the Army Reserve as the business model for their Reserve
component, and so I routinely engage with them. So, of course,
the United Kingdom just changed the name of their Reserve
component to the Army Reserve, and we see lots of increased
corroboration.
Because we are a global command, we are not tied to state
boundaries. So I am in 32 countries right now, and because we
are directly embedded in every combatant command, we are
engaging mil to mil every day. I have 5,000 forces in the
Pacific, I have 1,500 and a one-star command permanently in
Europe that takes care of all the evacuations and coordinations
for General Breedlove.
So because--again, because we are a global command, because
we are not tied to a state territory as a Federal force under
Federal control, we are directly engaged with these mil-to-mil
programs throughout the globe.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Israel.

PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS

Mr. Israel. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I also apologize
for being tardy. General Grass, I wanted to talk to you and
follow up on the engagement that you all had with Congressman
Ryan about suicides and PTSD. Some time ago Congressman Peter
King and I were able to pass an amendment to the DoD
authorization bill providing $10 million for new public-private
partnerships between DoD, primarily in the Guard and Reserve,
to engage in research, treatment, outreach and other aspects of
PTSD. I have to tell you I am rather disappointed. This is a
bipartisan amendment supported by every member of the House of
Representatives, $10 million was authorized. One program was
stood up under this amendment, one program was stood up in
Indiana, and I have nothing against Indiana, but one program.
In addition to that, it is my understanding that DoD is
intending to roll out a second program. I have two concerns:
Number one, the pace of the program; number two, this was
clearly intended to be primarily utilized by the Guard and
Reserve. My understanding is that the Guard and Reserve has not
been included to the extent that Congressman King and I and the
United States Congress had intended.
So my question is, are you aware of this funding, are you
tapping into it, why so slow, and are you making sure that you
are maximizing the intent of the program for the Guard and
Reserve components?
General Grass. Congressman, let me start by saying this is
where we have to go for the future, private-public. As our
defense budget shrinks, as thousands come back home with 10, 15
years experience, you know, the problems we are going to see
and how people are affected by long periods of war will espouse
in our communities, and that is why private-public partnerships
are so critical.
General Lyons can talk in much more detail as far as what
we are doing, but we started a program just in the last year,
actually, it started some time ago, but it is called Joining
Community Forces, and, in fact, Indiana has one of the models
right there in Indianapolis, but many States now have created
their own Web sites and their own brick and mortar facilities
that if you have an issue, whether it is fiscal, family, you
know, you are a veteran, you don't know where to meet with
medical staff, psychological health, we have a setup now where
you can walk into a facility and they will advise you, and we
don't care whether you are a family member, a guardsman, a
reservist or veteran of any type, retiree.
And, again, it is the Joining Community Forces. We did our
first conference about 3 months ago. We had over 400 attendees,
the Department of Labor, Veterans Administrations, Commerce,
State government was represented there, and we modeled five of
the programs at that session, so the States will pick up on it.
But I think your proposal and your legislation is exactly
what we are going to have to drill drown even further and look
at those programs that have already been tested.
General Lyons. Thank you, Congressman. I wanted to address
the Indiana example that you highlighted. And there are other
States involved in that as well, but I think it represents, as
General Grass said, this idea of joining with community forces,
I believe that is the spirit of the public-private legislation.
So this particular program is pretty innovative, and there
are others out there, but I just wanted to highlight what they
are doing with this one particular program. So the National
Guard has partnered with Purdue University and other local
alliances and they are offering training to civilian behavioral
health providers on the unique challenges that military members
and veterans face, how to recognize those challenges if they
are presented to them. It is a three-tier program that these
civilian providers attend.
They actually get CEUs, civilian education unit credits for
going through that program. And at the end of that should they
complete that, they are actually entered into a registry, so
that if a family member is seeking a behavioral health provider
in the civilian community, they can go to that registry and
they will know that that particular provider has gone through
this program and has been trained to recognize the signals, the
symptoms, the characteristics that military members and
veterans recognize. So it really does reach deeply into the
public-private partnership spirit, I think, of which you are
talking. So I just wanted to commend that one particular
program.
Mr. Israel. Well, I don't dispute anything you have said,
it is a wonderful program, but the point was that $10 million
was meant to replicate that program, to start up that program
and replicate it around the country, and I don't know that that
programmed has been replicated around the country. I guess my
question is, is that $10 million entirely funding the Indiana
program, or are there plans to expand it beyond?
General Lyons. Congressman, I would like to take that for
the record so I can have the staff come back and outline
exactly where that has gone and what the plans are for the
future.
Mr. Israel. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information follows:]

The National Guard Bureau, in conjunction with Purdue University,
the Uniformed University of the Health Sciences and Center for
Deployment Psychology assisted in the development of an exemplary model
of this partnership, known as STAR Behavioral Health Program (SBHP).
The goal of SBHP is to provide not only training in military culture,
but evidence based clinical practice training. Other states have
recognized the value of SBHP; training community providers in local or
remote locations to better serve remote Service Members and Veterans.
California, Michigan, Georgia, South Carolina, Ohio and most recently
New York, are actively implementing SBHP models for behavioral
healthcare. The goal of these community-based public-private
partnership models focus on ensuring access to high quality mental
health treatment for our population, especially in remote locations.
The Star Behavioral Health Program initiated a study of the
efficacy of growing these public-private partnership initiatives. The
research sought to validate the fundamental aspects of these
initiatives--the training of local clinicians on the unique needs and
stressors specific not only to Guard, but all military Service Members.
I am pleased to highlight that these public-private partnership
initiatives have successfully trained many local providers and
accessible registries of all these providers are maintained and
regularly updated. These registries in turn help our Service Members
quickly find the most appropriate care for behavioral health concerns
within their local communities.
In addition to these programs, in the coming months the Department
expects to award a grant to public partners to address Section 706 by
supporting research on the causes, development and innovative treatment
of mental health, substance use disorders, Traumatic Brain Injury and
suicide prevention in members of the National Guard and Reserves, their
family members, and their caregivers. The Department also expects to
award a grant to enhance outreach and education efforts to members of
the National Guard and Reserves, their families and caregivers.

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Israel.
Mr. Womack.

ATTACK AVIATION

Mr. Womack. Thank you. I have just got one follow-up on ARI
for General Grass. You know, Congress last year created the
Commission on the Future of the Army, and one of the many
topics, of course, is attack aviation. It is my understanding
that the Commission's findings aren't going to be available
until February of 2016. General Grass, is that your
understanding as well?
General Grass. Yes, Congressman, it is.

APACHES TRANSFER RESTRICTIONS

Mr. Womack. It is also my understanding that the fiscal
year NDAA restricts the transfer of Apaches to only 48 aircraft
until about the 1st of April of 2016, but after that date,
there is nothing that I see that would currently stop the Army
from going ahead and moving all of the rest of the Apaches. Is
that your understanding as well?
General Grass. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. Womack. It is my understanding that the NDAA
protections expire next April, and as we have indicated, that
they can move those. So, Chairman Frelinghuysen, I would just
like to say for the record that it is my opinion that the NDAA
serves as a Band-Aid to what amounts to an open wound, and if
the Army is allowed to transfer the aircraft in April of next
year, they will probably be gone from the Reserve component
forever. And I would hope that this committee will take steps
to ensure that the right decisions are made and that we don't
live to regret an action by the Army that I think would be
devastating to our Guard. And that is all I am going to say
about that. I think I have made my point about ARI.

ARMY NATIONAL GUARD FULL-TIME SUPPORT REQUIREMENT

General Lyons, it is my understanding the National Guard
full-time support is about 17 percent of the total Army Guard
and the foundational force. These guys do a lot of things that
keep us ready, and 17 percent is a pretty small number to do
such an important job. And I understand it also represents
about 70 percent of the total number required for full-time
manning. So I have just a couple of questions.
When was the Army National Guard full-time support
requirement generated, and is your requirement as a result of
growth during the wars?
General Lyons. Congressman, thank you. In direct answer to
your question, pre-9/11, beginning in about 1999 and up to
January of 2001, so 8 months before 9/11, Congress and the
Army, I think, recognized an underresourced strategic reserve
in terms of full-time manning and took definitive steps to
increase the requirements and authorizations to recognize that
underresourced strategic reserve. So those decisions were made
prior to 9/11.
Mr. Womack. What is the impact on generating combat
capability if full-time support continues to be cut, and does
it jeopardize the Guard's ability to remain operational?
General Lyons. It does, Congressman. It is a deep concern
as we reduce full-time manning, both active Guard and Reserve
and military technicians, you know, about 97 percent of them
are deployable with their units; they are assigned to their
units, they provide the foundational readiness across the
spectrum of our formations for the 83 percent that are
traditional men and women.
So they pay our soldiers, they help account for the
equipment that Congress has appropriated funds for properly,
they take all the actions to maintain our equipment so that we
are able to respond both for overseas and at home. So when we
take reductions in full-time manning, particularly as
programmed under sequestration, it has a direct impact on both
our capability and our capacity, and the response time that we
have for responses here at home and overseas. It has a direct
impact.
Mr. Womack. Do you have a cost analysis of maintaining the
Army Guard full-time posture at previous years' levels?
General Lyons. Congressman, I do. We estimate that in this
fiscal year, to retain the 1,700 AGRs and military technicians
that are programmed to come out, it will be about $79 million.
Mr. Womack. Okay. And then finally, my last question, I am
going to--you know, I am a Guard guy, so I have to give these
guys a softball, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. They deserve at least one.

NGREA FUNDING

Mr. Womack. We have already talked about NGREA, so I am
just going to just throw it out on the table. This was a $1.2
billion I think, and the Reserves got a piece of it, the Air
and the Army split, I think, 415 apiece, whatever the number,
$415 million a piece. Think for a minute if that money was
gone, if that capability was not there. This is a pretty
important part of what you guys depend on, is it not?
General Lyons. Congressman, that is absolutely accurate. As
I stated earlier, the impact of NGREA funding on the Army
National Guard as an operational force can't be overstated. Had
we not had those funds to recapitalize and modernize our
equipment lines, we would not be as operational as we are
today.
So to put that in perspective, thanks to the committee's
support in what we call critical dual-use equipment, those
items of equipment that have a war fight mission, but also here
at home, thanks to NGREA, we have been able to modernize up to
92 percent of that equipment. But there are still requirements
that remain. So with additional NGREA funding, we are going to
continue to modernize our fleets, we are going to focus on our
domestic operations with construction engineer equipment, our
Humvee ambulance fleet that we talked about, our civil support
team equipment, as well as bridging equipment. So there is a
legitimate need to continue to modernize.
Mr. Womack. I know I am out of time. General Talley.
General Talley. Congressman--excuse me. Thank you. I know
you love the Army Reserve too, even though you are a Guard guy.
Mr. Womack. Oh, I do, I do. So let the record reflect.
General Talley. Let the record reflect.
$185 million for 2015 is what our scheduled NGREA is. That
is 30 percent of the total procurement fund for the Army
Reserve. So that pretty much answers your question on how
important it is.
On full-time manning, on 13 percent, the lowest of any
component or service, and I am as big as all the other Federal
Reserves combined. So 17 percent's not too big, but 13
percent's way too low.
Mr. Womack. But we are still asking these guys to do a lot
more than----
General Talley. Absolutely. So I need help on full-time
funding and keeping the NGREA coming. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Womack. General Clarke, NGREA?
General Clarke. Yes, sir. For us, you know, there are
multiple examples of how NGREA has made a difference. In fact,
if we didn't have it, combatant commanders wouldn't even allow
us in their area of operations. That is a fact.
Mr. Womack. I think that speaks volumes, Mr. Chairman. And
I yield back.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Womack. Well done.
Mr. Ruppersberger.

CYBER SECURITY

Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We have some severe threats, as we know: weapons of mass
destruction, terrorism, the Russia-China threat, but I think
one of the most serious threats is as dangerous as those other
threats is cyber and cyber attack, and it is going to be
warfare of the future, if it is not now, and not only in the
amount of money that is being stolen, billions of dollars, and
the attacks on everything that we do, whether it is our
business, our military, but I know that you are engaged in the
cyber issue too.
And could you explain what your mission is in cyber, and
address the fact what you are doing and to make sure that there
is not duplication of effort on what regular Army, Air Force,
Navy, Marines are doing also? And maybe you could refer--I
know, again, talk about my district, but I know the 175th is
involved with cyber, and if you could explain, you know, what
their mission is and what they are doing and why it is so
important we continue the funding in this cyber realm as it
relates to your role to protecting our homeland.
That is kind of a softball too.
General Grass. Congressman, if I could open it. As was said
earlier, we have a capability here within the Guard and Reserve
that the Nation needs more than ever. And we also have an
opportunity to be able to capture those men and women that we
invest in in the future that decide they want to go on a
different career path and they want to leave active duty, they
can come into the Guard and Reserve.
One of the things we have made very clear from day one
working with both the governors, the adjutants general, as well
as the Department of Homeland Security and CYBERCOM is that we
want to be trained, organized, and equipped the same way as the
active components of the Air Force and the Army, and so we are
training our cyber warriors right now to those same standards.
And actually we are going to have a facility which will be
certified here in the future, where we will actually train Army
cyber warriors at a Guard facility.
The intent is for distributing this capability across the
States where the States have civilian employment available that
can grow these warriors, and then also that can allow
opportunities for them to progress up through the ranks. We
don't want them to get to a certain rank and leave.
So we are looking at that. I have got General Clarke and
General Lyons both coming side by side. And as we look at
stationing Air Guard and Army Guard cyber structure of the
future, we do that together to make sure that one day we don't
wake up and we have it all sitting at one location. But again,
the governors, I am committed to them, to trying to put
something in each State.
Congressman, the big challenge here, and we are working on
this right now with inside the Pentagon, the Deputy Secretary
of Defense has tasked one of his Deputy Secretaries to take a
look at this, but it will take probably some change to law
somewhere down the road, but it deals with the authorities both
from State, Federal as well as private-public. And there are a
lot of things the Guard can do with various authorities. But
how do you know when you have left state boundaries in cyber
world? And how are we going to handle that both working with
FBI, Department of Homeland Security, state government?
So a lot of work to do, but we are putting a lot of
emphasis right now on going within the authorities within
Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security. And I
think I have been with Admiral Rogers now six times since he
has taken over at CYBERCOM.
Mr. Ruppersberger. One of my concerns is that there are so
many people involved in the military with the cyber issue, and
it looks like, well, why do we need the National Guard to do
it? So could you explain really what your mission would be from
a National Guard perspective versus the regular Army and Navy
and the Air Force?
General Grass. Yes, Congressman. In fact, I will ask
General Clarke to comment and General Lyons, because they are
really given two different missions from the Air Force and the
Army.
General Clarke. So directly, you are looking for, sir, the
competitive advantages of the National Guard here.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Yeah.
General Clarke. What we have found in our units is we have
people that do IT skills for corporations, State government,
and local government and Federal Government that are also
members of the National Guard that use those IT skills as they
play into the cyber units doing military tasking for--in our
case, for the United States Air Force and U.S. Cyber Command.
The relationships that they have with each other as they
come to drills and other times that they get together is a
network of people that share ideas on things like computer
network defense. They are getting that from their civilian
skills and their companies, industry and they are bringing that
to bear and using that within the military now.
Conversely, they are learning things about the military
side they might be able to use back with their State
government, if you will. That is just the skill part of it.
Then there is the relationship part of it. If you want to get
in the door at a place where people need assistance on things
like protecting a utility's infrastructure, you have got to
have a relationship or they might not let you in the door. And
we might be able to provide things as a part of the National
Guard that will let you in the door to assist them with that
further.
In the case of Maryland, Maryland was in--the Guard was
into cyber before cyber was even cool, and the relationships
that they have built, not just domestically with multiple
three-letter and four-letter agencies of the U.S. Government is
outstanding. They have now expanded that through the State
Partnership Program with Estonia. So now we have an
international piece of what we are doing with military members.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Okay.
General Lyons. Congressman, I would like to start out by
saying that our one full-time cyber protection team that I
mentioned earlier is, in fact, stationed in Laurel, Maryland,
there. But to answer your question about the mission sets, the
cyber protection teams that the Army Guard is standing up are
part of U.S. Army Cyber's mission set. So the missions that
Army Cyber will undertake, our Army National Guard teams
eventually will participate in those. But it is important to
put this in context. We have the one team full-time that is
stood up, they are undergoing training as we speak. We just
announced the three traditional Guard teams. It will take time
to get them stood up, plug them into schools for both basic
training and advanced training so they become what we call
fully operational capable.
Once they do that, though, they will participate in all of
the missions that Army Cyber is participating in in cyber
defense, vulnerability assessments, protect the network, those
types of missions.
Mr. Ruppersberger. Thank you.

EMPLOYER DISCRIMINATION

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Ruppersberger.
Both the private sector and the defense sector, the whole
government sector is subject to hacking, and goodness knows, we
are making some substantial investments, and I hope that, if
you will pardon the expression, we de-conflict all those
investments so we get the maximum advantage over the people
that are doing this, nation states or other groups.
As we move towards the top of the hour, I just want to
raise the question, all of your Reserve and Guard men and women
are bread winners for their families, and I think we recognize
that important contribution, that there is always the view in
some quarters, and I would like to have it either substantiated
or dismissed, that some employers sometimes discriminate or
have some sort of a bias. Of course, from our standpoint, that
sort of is unacceptable. What is--how would you describe--I
know we have some wonderful partners and wonderful employers,
but can you talk frankly just for a minute as to what you are
doing to sort of combat this issue where it arises?
General Lyons. Mr. Chairman, I will speak for the Army
National Guard specifically. The adjutants general in the 54
States, territories, and the District are continuing to engage
at the local level with employers. They do that on a daily
basis. So at the end of the day, we feel that this is all about
communication. And we stress this with our soldiers, our men
and women that serve with us, that should they be employed for
an overseas mission, that as soon as we know it, that they are
talking to their employer about it and giving them a heads-up.
We most recently saw this example in Minnesota with
Operation United Assistance when the 34th was postured to
undertake that mission. They immediately engaged with employers
to talk about that. And I think that communication is what
really bridges that gap and reduces those sources of friction
that do come up from time to time. There are points of
friction. But we have tremendous ombudsmen in the employer
support to the Guard and Reserve community that help us address
those issues when they do come up, and we think that is really
a recipe and a best practice to get at that. So we are very
well focused.
The last point, Mr. Chairman, is I will tell you, talking
to the TAGs, talking to commanders, this is part and parcel of
retaining an operational force is that continued engagement
either in combatant commander requirements, or here at home.
The men and women who want to be engaged, they expect to be
engaged, and they are willing to talk to their employers and
their family members about that and the importance of that, and
I think they will get that support.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Well, communication is one thing,
obeying the law is another thing, and it is the law. So where
you run into instances, I am sure you will bring them to our
attention.
General Talley, you wanted to get in or General Grass, jump
in just for a minute, and then we are going to go to Ms.
McCollum.
General Talley. Mr. Chairman, thanks for the question. The
Employers Partnership program actually started in the Army
Reserve by my predecessor, Jack Stultz, and became so
successful, it was replicated throughout all the services and
components, one of the few times plagiarism is a good thing. I
say that as a recovering academic.
We have taken that program and brought it to the next
level, our P3 or private-public partnership. We have over 6,000
agreements in place. We believe the Army Reserve is probably
the best connected of all services and components with the
private sector, and we utilize that to help our Army Reserve.
Those soldiers have to be the best employees, because what we
do see, and I will be very frank, and I saw it when I was a
traditional reservist, is, yes, you are disadvantaged in some
employment situations because they know even if you are not
deployed, you are still gone a lot doing Reserve stuff, and
they, even though it is against the law, do--it does cost you
partnerships, it does cost you promotions, and we still
struggle with that.

EMPLOYER RELATIONSHIP

Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Grass, briefly. General Clarke,
if you will, please. And then to Ms. McCollum.
General Grass. Congressman, I think most of the stress we
see are on the small employers, and we have to do things. I
know there has been some great work by the Congress, too, to
help them. But that is our focus right now.
The medium to large size, they are on board with us. If we
have someone--a soldier or an airman that has an issue out
there, we will work very closely with the Department of Labor
to bring it to closure quickly. And they have been very
supportive.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. General Clarke and then Ms. McCollum.
General Clarke. Yes, sir. Briefly, I parrot the same
comments. But post-deployment, when the members return home, I
think it is important to embrace the employers, too, not just
the members themselves and the families. But bring the
employers out to be a part of everything when they come home.
We mentioned how outstanding the SGR is. To date, I do not
have one single complaint from an ESGR ombudsman. Not one that
has come forward. So we are getting a lot of support out of the
employers out there across the Nation.
And the last one I say, we have recognition programs for
the outstanding employers. And that is largely a DoD-led
effort, but even the local units have their own recognition
programs. That is a big deal. People like being patted on the
back and their hand shaken and say, ``Thank you for supporting
our members.''
Mr. Frelinghuysen. They have a lot to be proud of. As you
represent all of that, we want to make sure that recognition is
given and, if there is any issues, you will bring them to our
attention.
Ms. McCollum, I believe, unless Mr. Visclosky has any
questions.
Ms. McCollum.

TURBULENCE

Ms. McCollum. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I know one of the stressors for the long deployment for our
volunteer departments is standing up to serve in the National
Guard--quite often are serving in their communities.
To my question, you talked about turbulence. And one of the
things that I think was very turbulent, self-inflicted wound,
was the budget shortfall that Mr. Visclosky started asking
about.
I heard it from General Nash, who was going to have to tell
people coming in for drill what was going to happen. I didn't
hear it from the committee. I didn't get a heads-up from our
folks here. And, you know, called back and we were finding out
at the same time. So obviously you knew you had a shortfall.
Obviously, you knew there were problems.
I am very disappointed in the way in which it was handled.
I have not been satisfied with any of the answers that have
been given as to the diagnostic of why it happened. Many of us
have either served in the private sector on boards or small
businesses or served in local government where we do routine
audits, and when there is something really wrong, the auditor
has nailed it down.
So I would very much like a detailed report as to what the
forensics were on finding out what this problem was, why it
happened in the first place, and what action you have taken so
it doesn't happen again.
Because that was a very stressful thing not only for you
here, finding out there was a shortfall, but for all the Guard
men and women and for those who were going to have to stand in
front of folks and say, ``Sorry. The drill has been cut'' or
``This that you have planned on has radically changed.'' There
is a lot of turbulence at a time when we are trying to, you
know, retain and recruit people in the Guard.
So I just want it on the record. I was dissatisfied in the
way it was handled in the beginning, and I am dissatisfied with
the way it has been handled even today with the answers.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Okay. Thank you, Ms. McCollum.
Mr. Visclosky.

OPERATIONAL ROLE

Mr. Visclosky. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
If I could ask about the operational role of the Guard,
there are currently some ongoing missions preserved by the
Reserve components and Guard that provide an opportunity to
help maintain an operational Reserve. The Sinai has been
alluded to a number of times this morning.
I have always thought about it, not being an expert on
military matters, operational preparedness. But I was struck
Mr. Womack, when he was addressing the Guard at the Sinai,
encouraged them not to talk to each other, but to get to know
their coalition partners and to get to know the people who live
in that area that they were serving in. And I thought it was a
great admonition and good piece of advice and additional
benefits to our country.
What, if I could--and if you want to for the record--types
of mission looking forward will make effective use for the
Reserve component skills and that would help the Reserve
component maintain operational status?
And is it DoD policy to make use of the Reserve components
in this manner? And, if not, if you think more could be done in
this regard, if you could provide that, if you have a short
comment. I have a couple more questions, too, though. And if
you want to do it for the record, that will be fine or----
General Lyons. Well, Congressman, just a couple of quick
examples of some of those missions that we talk about being
able to engage our men and women who have grown up in 13 years
of operational tempo. These are missions that we consider to be
foundational missions for the Army National Guard, in
particular.
The Sinai mission, that was an example. Kosovo forces is a
mission that we have routinely engaged in over a number of
years. We also have the Horn of Africa, which has traditionally
been a National Guard mission.
Virtually anything that a combatant command is doing, we
think the Army National Guard has equity in that because of our
force structure, our equipment, and our training. So these are
all examples of missions.
Combat training center rotations are another key event for
leader development engagement that we would like to see
continue that helps posture us as an operational force, along
with joint and multinational exercises.

AUDITABILITY

Mr. Visclosky. Okay. I am very drawn to the idea that the
Department meet its goal as far as auditable financial
statements by 2017. The Marine Corps has been certified at
least as far as making progress on part of that.
If you could describe--and, again, I think, for the
record--your component's progress toward establishing auditable
financial statements by 2017, I would appreciate it.
And, also, do you believe you are on schedule to meet that
goal or will there be a shortfall? If so, for what reasons that
we should be concerned about?
The last question I have, if you would care to comment, is:
If Congress determines that the A-10 should be retained during
the consideration of the fiscal 2016 budget, what would the
effects of the delay of divestiture be on your forces?
General Lyons. Congressman, I think for the Army National
Guard I will take the auditability question for the record and
we will come back on how we are progressing toward fiscal year
2017.
[The information follows:]

The Army National Guard continues to improve our financial
processes as we prepare for a full financial audit by 2017. We have a
team working closely with the 50 states, three territories and the
District of Columbia, with a firm commitment to achieve and sustain
audit readiness. The Army relies on this team to assist and advise on
financial processes. Our Army National Guard finance officer works
side-by-side with the Army to ensure the Army National Guard is
auditable by 2017. The Army National Guard issued that objective to all
adjutants general in our 2015 Strategic Planning Guidance.
The results of our monthly testing, conducted by the Army, reflect
how well the Army National Guard is performing as we prepare for a full
financial audit. With regards to general equipment, the Army National
Guard pass rate is currently 83 percent; the Army-wide pass rate is 76
percent. For real property, tracking all the assets at 2,386 readiness
centers and 102 Army National Guard installations, the Army National
Guard pass rate is 93 percent; the Army-wide pass rate is 96 percent.
For Operational Materials and Supply, tracking of ammunition assets at
48 ammunition supply points, the Army National Guard pass rate is 90
percent; the Army-wide pass rate is also 90 percent. For budgetary
activities, tracking financial statements and financial transactions,
the Army National Guard pass rate is 95 percent; the Army-wide pass
rate is 90 percent. For military pay, tracking of military pay
transactions, the Army National Guard pass rate is 77 percent; the
Army-wide pass rate is 69 percent. The Army Reserve recently requested
training from the Army National Guard audit team, and is currently
using several of our training tools to improve its testing results.
One of our major challenges is the reduction of full-time manning,
military technicians or Active Guard and Reserve personnel. These are
the people who deliver Army programs We must sustain our full-time
workforce in order to ensure we have sufficient personnel to maintain
audit readiness. Additional reductions could cause separation of duties
conflicts within our financial processes and weaken financial controls.
Additionally, the demand of the audit to provide appropriate supporting
documentation for financial transactions requires the immediate
attention of full-time personnel. Reductions in personnel will
negatively affect our ability to support the audit with timely
responses.
Currently, the Army National Guard is on track to achieve auditable
financial statements by 2017.

Mr. Visclosky. I don't make light of my concern by saying
``the record'' because I just want to make sure--you know, I
think it is a very important issue. But go ahead on the A-10.
General Clarke. Sir, the same for us on audit goal. Is that
the one you want to address first?
Yeah. We are in lockstep with the United States Air Force
on audit responsibilities to be compliant by 20--I think we are
on track for that.
And then I also worked that on the National Guard side to
make sure that we are fully meeting anything that they request
in order to push forward and meet that goal by 2017. To my
knowledge, we are on track.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay.
General Talley. Sir, I will answer that question directly.
The Army Reserve is doing pretty well, actually, in
auditability. Looking at three areas in support of the Army's
auditing program, one, general equipment, which is the tracking
of all the Army Reserve equipment, we are at 100 percent pass
rate right now. Army-wide rate right now is 91 percent. Army
Reserve, 100 percent.
Real property, tracking all the assets we have at Army
Reserve centers, which is over 2100 and 6 installations, Army
Reserve rate right now, pass rate, 100 percent. Army-wide rate,
94 percent.
Budgetary activities, the Army Reserve, that is, tracking
financial statements and financial transactions, you know,
handled by CFO, the Army Reserve currently, according to the
Army, 100 percent. Army-wide rate, 84 percent.
And then to try and--but not so good area, military pay, we
are currently tracking our auditability at 56 percent. Army-
wide is 63 percent.
One of the challenges I have there--and we are trying to
work on it--is that is that full-time manning, those MILTECHs.
I need my MILTECHs and my full-time manning to pay those
troops. But, overall, we are doing pretty well.
That is it, sir.
Mr. Visclosky. Okay. Thank you very much.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Gentlemen, on behalf--oh, yes. General
Grass. Excuse me.
General Grass. Congressman, I just wanted to share with you
that, in each State, there is a colonel that works directly for
me, and I hold them accountable for, you know, the FIRREA
legislation. And we are making significant progress. We will
submit that to you for both working with the Army and Air and
show you the progress we are making.
But I also have, of course, my head comptroller and my
audit team that provides me regular updates on this. But the
key for us is to work it through the State, and that is why we
do have those colonels out there that work directly for me.

A-10

Mr. Visclosky. Okay. And on the A-10, if we don't divest?
General Clarke. Sir, directly on A-10 divestment, could you
restate your question so--I am going to get----
Mr. Visclosky. As you know, last year Congress decided to
continue, if you would, with the A-10 program.
Assuming that is Congress's decision for the 2016 bill,
what types of situations, problems, benefits does that cause
you?
General Clarke. Right now, none. As you know, the unit from
Indiana is in current combat operations with the A-10. So no
slowdown in what they have done in their capabilities.
The future holds for continued mobilization of A-10 units
to actually support combat operations. In order to be there,
they have got to have the full-up training kit, the equipment,
and the opportunities to train. That is there. So they will be
fully trained and capable when they show up in theater to do
these combat operations.
Beyond that, then there is going to be a degradation of
that unit's capability because they are going to convert to a
different platform. At some point, when we divest the A-10s,
whether it is today, tomorrow, or 20 years from now, sometime
that A-10 is going to leave and they will be converting over.
So that would be a difference in their readiness at that time.
Mr. Visclosky. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky.
On behalf of the committee, gentlemen, thank you for your
testimony and thank you for the great work you do representing
the best of America. Thank you.
We stand adjourned.

Wednesday, March 18, 2015.

UNITED STATES PACIFIC COMMAND AND UNITED STATES FORCES KOREA

WITNESSES

ADMIRAL SAMUEL J. LOCKLEAR III, U.S. NAVY, COMMANDER, UNITED STATES
PACIFIC COMMAND
GENERAL CURTIS M. SCAPARROTTI, U.S. ARMY, COMMANDER, UNITED NATIONS
COMMAND; COMMANDER, UNITED STATES-REPUBLIC OF KOREA COMBINED FORCES
COMMAND; AND COMMANDER, UNITED STATES FORCES KOREA

Opening Statement of Chairman Frelinghuysen

Mr. Frelinghuysen. Committee will come to order.
Mr. Visclosky, I recognize you.
Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, I move that those portions of
the hearing today which involve classified material be held in
executive session because of the classification of the material
to be discussed.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. So ordered. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky.
This morning the committee conducts a closed--I remind
everybody--closed hearing on the posture of the United States
Pacific Command and the United States Forces Korea.We are
pleased to welcome Admiral Samuel J. Locklear, U.S. Navy
Commander, United States Pacific Command, and General Curtis M.
Scaparrotti, Commander, United NationsCommand, Commander,
United States-Republic of Korea Combined Forces Command, and
Commander, United States Forces Korea. Three hats.
Admiral, welcome back, and thank you for your many years of
distinguished service. The committee notes that you assumed
command of PACOM in March of 2012, and this is your fourth time
testifying before this committee.
Today we look forward to your update on a broad variety of
topics in the Pacific AOR.
General Scaparrotti, welcome back, and thank you as well
for your service.
General Scaparrotti assumed command of U.S. Forces Korea in
August of 2013. Two years into your command you have amassed a
wealth of experience in working with our allies in Korea. We
look forward to your candid assessment of what is going on, on
the Korean Peninsula and that environment.
Gentlemen, we are pleased to have you both here today. We
are constantly reminded that the situation in Korea is, to say
the least, fluid. In fact, we can never be completely sure what
will happen next in Korea, or for that matter in the Taiwan
Straits, in the South China Sea, or the Sea of Japan. China
continues to modernize its Armed Forces and adds to its fleet
in both numbers and quality, including more subs, and is
working on a second aircraft carrier. Longstanding disputes
over territory can surface with little or no warning. Frankly,
many people wonder if the recent Russian annexation of Crimea
may encourage similar actions by other nations in the Pacific
AOR. And we can't forget that the Russians have contacts and
interests there as well.
We are aware that the ongoing pivot or rebalance to the
Pacific will involve shifting as much as 10 percent of our
Navy's war ships into the Pacific. The buildup of assets on
Guam continues. However, some of the Army's increases in
military assets will rotate forward into the Pacific to train,
but will actually remain based in the continental United
States.
Of course, the committee will continue to ensure that our
Armed Forces have the resources they need to be well maintained
and trained. We are reminded that our naval air and land forces
cannot be in two places at once. A force that is smaller but
more agile is still smaller. And of course we always are
reminded of the tyranny of distance.
We look forward to a robust question-and-answer session
this morning. It is important for this committee to have a
clear picture of operations in the Pacific in general and on
the Korean Peninsula specifically. We are particularly
interested in the readiness of forces that are assigned which
rotate through Pacific deployments and the many potential hot
spots you monitor. We want to hear about your ISR requirements
and efforts by our adversaries to deny sea and air access and
our ISR, and the cyber component of all of that.
Before we hear from our witnesses, I would like to ask my
distinguished ranking member, Mr. Visclosky, for any opening
comments he may wish to make.

Remarks of Mr. Visclosky

Mr. Visclosky. Mr. Chairman, just to thank you for holding
the hearing, gentlemen, for your service, and look forward to
your testimony. Thank you.
Mr. Frelinghuysen. Thank you, Mr. Visclosky.
Admiral Locklear. Good morning. Thank you. Your full
statement will be in the record.
[The written statement of Admiral Locklear follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[The written statement of General Scaparrotti follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Clerk's note.--The complete transcript of the hearing
could not be printed due to the classification of the material
discussed.]

[all]
