- EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: EXAMINING WAYS TO. REDUCE AI BIAS IN FINANCIAL SERVICES

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: EXAMINING WAYS TO.
REDUCE AI BIAS IN FINANCIAL SERVICES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 12, 2020

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Financial Services

Serial No. 116-87

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
42-821 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2021

HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES

MAXINE WATERS, California, Chairwoman

CAROLYN B. MALONEY, New York         PATRICK McHENRY, North Carolina,
NYDIA M. VELAZQUEZ, New York             Ranking Member
BRAD SHERMAN, California             ANN WAGNER, Missouri
GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York           FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma
WM. LACY CLAY, Missouri              BILL POSEY, Florida
DAVID SCOTT, Georgia                 BLAINE LUETKEMEYER, Missouri
AL GREEN, Texas                      BILL HUIZENGA, Michigan
EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            SEAN P. DUFFY, Wisconsin
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              STEVE STIVERS, Ohio
JIM A. HIMES, Connecticut            ANDY BARR, Kentucky
BILL FOSTER, Illinois                SCOTT TIPTON, Colorado
JOYCE BEATTY, Ohio                   ROGER WILLIAMS, Texas
DENNY HECK, Washington               FRENCH HILL, Arkansas
JUAN VARGAS, California              TOM EMMER, Minnesota
JOSH GOTTHEIMER, New Jersey          LEE M. ZELDIN, New York
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas              BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia
AL LAWSON, Florida                   ALEXANDER X. MOONEY, West Virginia
MICHAEL SAN NICOLAS, Guam            WARREN DAVIDSON, Ohio
RASHIDA TLAIB, Michigan              TED BUDD, North Carolina
KATIE PORTER, California             DAVID KUSTOFF, Tennessee
CINDY AXNE, Iowa                     TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
AYANNA PRESSLEY, Massachusetts       JOHN ROSE, Tennessee
BEN McADAMS, Utah                    BRYAN STEIL, Wisconsin
ALEXANDRIA OCASIO-CORTEZ, New York   LANCE GOODEN, Texas
JENNIFER WEXTON, Virginia            DENVER RIGGLEMAN, Virginia
STEPHEN F. LYNCH, Massachusetts      WILLIAM TIMMONS, South Carolina
TULSI GABBARD, Hawaii                VAN TAYLOR, Texas
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina
MADELEINE DEAN, Pennsylvania
JESUS ``CHUY'' GARCIA, Illinois
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota

Charla Ouertatani, Staff Director
TASK FORCE ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

BILL FOSTER, Illinois, Chairman

EMANUEL CLEAVER, Missouri            BARRY LOUDERMILK, Georgia, Ranking
KATIE PORTER, California                 Member
SEAN CASTEN, Illinois                TED BUDD, North Carolina
ALMA ADAMS, North Carolina           TREY HOLLINGSWORTH, Indiana
SYLVIA GARCIA, Texas                 ANTHONY GONZALEZ, Ohio
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota             DENVER RIGGLEMAN, Virginia

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on:
February 12, 2020............................................     1
Appendix:
February 12, 2020............................................    33

WITNESSES
Wednesday, February 12, 2020

Ghani, Rayid, Distinguished Career Professor, Machine Learning
Department and the Heinz College of Information Systems and
Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University......................    12
Henry-Nickie, Makada, David M. Rubenstein Fellow, Governance
Studies, Race, Prosperity, and Inclusion Initiative, Brookings
Institution....................................................     6
Kearns, Michael, Professor and National Center Chair, Department
of Computer and Information Science, University of Pennsylvania     8
Thomas, Philip S., Assistant Professor and Co-Director of the
Autonomous Learning Lab, College of Information and Computer
Sciences, University of Massachusetts Amherst..................     4
Williams, Bari A., Attorney and Emerging Tech AI & Privacy
Advisor........................................................    10

APPENDIX

Prepared statements:
Ghani, Rayid.................................................    34
Henry-Nickie, Makada.........................................    43
Kearns, Michael..............................................    49
Thomas, Philip S.............................................    52
Williams, Bari A.............................................    55

Additional Material Submitted for the Record

Foster, Hon. Bill:
Written statement of BSA/The Software Alliance...............    62
Written statement of the Future of Privacy Forum.............    71
Written statement of ORCAA...................................    88
Student Borrower Protection Center report entitled,
``Educational Redlining,'' dated February 2020.............    90
Response from Upstart to the Student Borrower Protection
Center's February 2020 report..............................   120

EQUITABLE ALGORITHMS: EXAMINING

WAYS TO REDUCE AI BIAS

IN FINANCIAL SERVICES

----------

Wednesday, February 12, 2020

U.S. House of Representatives,
Task Force on Artificial Intelligence,
Committee on Financial Services,
Washington, D.C.
The task force met, pursuant to notice, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 2128, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Bill Foster
[chairman of the task force] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Foster, Cleaver, Porter,
Casten; Loudermilk, Budd, Hollingsworth, Gonzalez of Ohio, and
Riggleman.
Chairman Foster. The Task Force on Artificial Intelligence
will now come to order. It is my understanding that there is an
ongoing markup in the Judiciary Committee, which is competing
for Members' attention, and I suspect they will be coming in
and out over the course of this hearing.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the task force at any time. Also, without objection,
members of the full Financial Services Committee who are not
members of this task force are authorized to participate in
today's hearing, consistent with the committee's practice.
Today's hearing is entitled, ``Equitable Algorithms:
Examining Ways to Reduce AI Bias in Financial Services.''
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes for an opening
statement. First, thank you, everyone, for joining us today for
what should be a very interesting hearing of the task force.
Today, we are looking to explore what it means to design
ethical algorithms that are transparent and fair. In short, how
do we program fairness into our AI models and make sure that
they can explain their decisions to us? This is an especially
timely topic. It seems as though every week, we are hearing
stories and questions about biased algorithms in the lending
space, from credit cards that discriminate against women, to
loans that discriminate based on where you went to school.
I think many of these issues can be a lot more complicated
and nuanced than how they are portrayed in the media, but it is
clear that the use of AI is hitting a nerve with a lot of
folks.
For us as consumers to understand what is happening, we
need to take a deeper look under the hood. First off, there are
literally dozens of definitions of fairness to look at. As
policymakers, we need to be able to explicitly state what kinds
of fairness we are looking for, and how you balance multiple
definitions of fairness against each other. Because, while we
have fair lending laws in the form of the Equal Credit
Opportunity Act and the the Fair Housing Act, translating these
into analog laws into machine learning models is easier said
than done. It is incumbent upon us to clearly state what our
goals are, and to try to quantify the tradeoffs that we are
willing to accept between accuracy and fairness.
Equally important to designing ethical algorithms, however,
is finding ways to ensure that they are working as they are
intended to work. AI models present novel issues for resource-
strapped regulators that aren't necessarily present in
traditional lending models. For example, AI models continuously
train and learn from new data, which means that the models
themselves must adapt and change.
Another challenge is in this biased data, and I am reminded
at this point of the saying from the great sage, Tom Lehrer,
who said that life is like a sewer, what you get out of it
depends on what you put into it, and AI algorithms are very
similar, where the algorithms are like sewers, and sewage in
will generate sewage out. Maybe our job on this committee is to
define the correct primary, secondary, and tertiary sewage
treatment systems to make sure that what comes out of the
algorithms is of higher quality than what goes into them.
And because AI models often train on historical data that
reflects historical biases, which we hope will disappear over
time, that means the models must correct for them as we wish
today, and hopefully, those corrections will become less
important in the future.
But as more alternative data points are added to the
underwriting models, the risk that a model will use such data
as a proxy for prohibited characteristics, like race or age,
only increase. One potential solution that we keep hearing
about is the idea that these algorithms or their outputs should
be audited by expert third parties.
As an analogy, we have all subscribed to the idea that
companies' financial statements should be audited by qualified
accountants to ensure that they are in compliance with
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP).
Another idea is to require companies to regularly self-test
and perform benchmarking analyses that are submitted to
regulators for review. This recognizes that model development
is an iterative process, and we need agile ways to review and
respond to changing models.
These are just a few of the many good ideas that have been
discussed. I am excited to have this conversation, to see how
we can make AI be the best version of itself, and how to design
algorithmic models that best capture the ideals of fairness and
transparency that are reflected in our fair lending laws.
We want to make sure that the biases of the analog world
are not repeated in the AI and machine learning world. And with
that, I now recognize the ranking member of the task force, my
friend from Georgia, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I thank all of
you for being here today as we discuss this very important
subject. We are going to discuss ways to identify and reduce
bias in artificial intelligence in financial services. We have
talked about this issue in concept numerous times, but we have
not yet gotten deep into what algorithm explainability really
means. So, I appreciate the chairman holding this hearing.
Analytical models of AI and machine learning are best
understood, at least to me, when they are broken into three
basic models: descriptive analytics, which analyzes past data;
predictive analytics, which predicts future outcomes based on
past data; and prescribing analytics, where the algorithm
recommends a course of action based on past data.
There is also a fourth emerging model, which I refer to as
the ``execution model,'' which automatically takes action based
on other AI systems' outputs. I believe the execution model
deserves the most attention from policymakers because it can
remove the human element in decision-making.
There are a number of noteworthy recent developments in
artificial intelligence that I hope we can discuss today.
First, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy
recently released principles for how Federal agencies can
regulate the development of AI in the private sector. The
intent of the principles is to govern AI with the direction on
the technical and ethical aspects without stifling innovation.
The principles recommended providing opportunities for
public feedback during the rulemaking process, considering
fairness and nondiscrimination regarding the decisions made by
AI applications, and basing the regulatory approach on
scientific data.
The U.S. Chief Technology Officer said the principles are
designed to ensure public engagement, limit regulatory
overreach, and promote trustworthy technology. Some private-
sector organizations recommend principles for companies using
AI, which include designating a lead AI ethics official, making
sure the customer knows when they are interacting with AI,
explaining how the AI arrived at its result, and testing AI for
bias. I believe the latter two, explaining results and testing
for bias, are important to ensure appropriate use of AI by
private sector businesses.
A basic but central part of explainability is making sure
businesses and their regulators are able to know the building
blocks of what went into an algorithm when it was being
constructed. In other words, coders should maintain full
records of what is going into the model when it is being
trained, ranked by order of importance. This is also known as
``logging,'' and can help isolate sources of bias.
A similar concept is present in credit scoring. Credit
scores are generated by algorithms to create a number that
predicts a person's ability to repay a loan.
Importantly, it is easy to figure out what is bringing
someone's score up or down, because the factors that go into
the score are transparent. Having a long credit history brings
the score up, while the use of available credit brings it down.
Additionally, on-time payments are weighted higher than the
number of inquiries.
With that said, recordkeeping is a starting point, and
certainly is not a silver bullet solution to the explainability
problem, especially with more complex algorithms.
With explainability, we also need to define what fairness
is. There needs to be a benchmark to compare algorithm results
and evaluate the fairness of an algorithm's decisions. These
kinds of paper trails can help get to the bottom of suspected
bias in loan underwriting decisions. It is also important to be
able to test algorithms to see if there is any bias present.
If there is suspected bias, companies can take a subset of
the data based on sensitive features like gender and race to
see if there is disparate impact on a particular group. Aside
from testing for bias, testing can also help companies verify
if the algorithm is arriving at its expected results.
It is also important for companies and regulators to verify
the input data for accuracy, completeness, and appropriateness.
Flawed data likely results in flawed algorithm outcomes.
I look forward to the discussion on this issue, and I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
Today, we welcome the testimony of Dr. Philip Thomas,
assistant professor and co-director of the Autonomous Learning
Lab, College of Information and Computer Sciences at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst; Dr. Makada Henry-Nickie,
the David M. Rubenstein Fellow for the Governance Studies,
Race, Prosperity, and Inclusion Initiative at the Brookings
Institution; Dr. Michael Kearns, professor and national center
chair, the Department of Computer and Information Science at
the University of Pennsylvania; Ms. Bari A. Williams, attorney
and emerging tech AI and privacy adviser; and Mr. Rayid Ghani,
the distinguished career professor in the machine learning
department at Heinz College of Information Systems and Public
Policy at Carnegie Mellon University.
Witnesses are reminded that your oral testimony will be
limited to 5 minutes. And without objection, your written
statements will be made a part of the record.
Dr. Thomas, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF PHILIP S. THOMAS, ASSISTANT PROFESSOR AND CO-
DIRECTOR OF THE AUTONOMOUS LEARNING LAB, COLLEGE OF INFORMATION
AND COMPUTER SCIENCES, UNIVERSITY OF MASSACHUSETTS AMHERST

Mr. Thomas. Thank you. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Loudermilk, and members of the task force, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today.
I am Philip Thomas, an assistant professor at the
University of Massachusetts Amherst.
My goal as a machine learning researcher is to ensure that
systems that use machine learning algorithms are safe and fair,
properties that may be critical to the responsible use of AI in
finance.
Towards this goal, in a recent science paper, my co-authors
and I proposed a new type of machine learning algorithm which
we call a Seldonian algorithm. Seldonian algorithms make it
easier for the people using AI to ensure that the systems they
create are safe and fair. We have shown how Seldonian
algorithms can avoid unfair behavior when applied to a variety
of applications, including optimizing online tutorials to
improve student performance, influencing criminal sentencing,
and deciding which loan applications should be approved.
While our work with loan application data may appear most
relevant to this task force, that work was in a subfield of
machine learning called contextual bandits. The added
complexity of the contextual bandit setting would not benefit
this discussion, and so I will instead focus on an example in a
more common and straightforward setting called regression.
In this example, we used entrance exam scores to predict
what the GPAs of new university applicants would be if they
were accepted. The GPA prediction problem resembles many
problems in finance, for example, rating applications for a job
or a loan. The fairness issues that I will discuss are the same
across these applications.
In the GPA prediction study, we found that three standard
machine learning algorithms overpredicted the GPAs of male
applicants on average and underpredicted the GPAs of female
applicants on average, with a total bias of around 0.3 GPA
points in favor of male applicants. The Seldonian algorithm
successfully limited this bias to below 0.05 GPA points, with
only a small reduction in predictive accuracy.
The rapidly growing community of machine learning
researchers studying issues related to fairness has produced
many similar AI systems that can effectively preclude a variety
of types of unfair behavior across a variety of applications.
With the development of these fair algorithms, machine learning
is reaching the point where it can be applied responsibly to
financial applications, including influencing hiring and loan
approval decisions.
I will now discuss technical issues related to ensuring the
fairness of algorithms which might inform future regulations
aimed at ensuring the responsible use of AI in finance.
First, there are many definitions of fairness. Consider our
GPA prediction example. One definition of fairness requires the
average predictions to be the same for each gender. Under this
definition, a system that tends to predict a lower GPA if you
are of a particular gender would be deemed unfair.
Another definition requires the average error of
predictions to be the same for each gender. Under this
definition, a system that tends to overpredict the GPAs of one
gender and underpredict for another would be deemed unfair.
Although both of these might appear to be desirable
requirements for a fair system, for this problem, it is not
possible to satisfy both simultaneously. Any system, human or
machine, that produces the same average prediction for each
gender necessarily over-predicts more for one gender and vice
versa. The machine learning community has generated more than
20 possible definitions of fairness, many of which are known to
be conflicting in this way.
In any effort to regulate the use of machine learning to
ensure fairness, a critical first step is to define precisely
what fairness means. This may require recognizing that certain
behaviors that appear to be unfair may necessarily be
permissible in order to enable the enforcement of a conflicting
and more appropriate notion of fairness.
Although the task of selecting the appropriate definition
of fairness should likely fall to regulators and social
scientists, machine learning researchers can inform this
decision by providing guidance with regard to which definitions
are possible to enforce simultaneously, what unexpected
behavior might result from a particular definition of fairness,
and how much or how little different definitions of fairness
might impact profitability.
Regulations could also protect companies. Fintech companies
that make every attempt to be fair using AI systems that
satisfy a reasonable definition of fairness may still be
accused of racist or sexist behavior for failing to enforce a
conflicting definition of fairness. Regulation could protect
these companies by providing an agreed-upon, appropriate, and
satisfiable definition of what it means for their systems to be
fair.
Once a definition of fairness has been selected, machine
learning researchers can work on developing algorithms that
will enforce the chosen definition. For example, our latest
Seldonian algorithms are already compatible with an extremely
broad class of fairness definitions and might be immediately
applicable.
Still, there is no silver bullet algorithm for remedying
bias and discrimination in AI. The creation of fair AI systems
may require use-specific considerations across the entire AI
pipeline, from the initial collection of data, through
monitoring the final deployed system.
Several other questions must be answered for regulations to
be effective and fair. For example, will fairness requirements
that appear reasonable for the short term have the long-term
effect of reinforcing existing social inequalities? How should
fairness requirements account for the fact that changing
demographics can result in a system that was fair last month
not being fair today? And when unfair behavior occurs, how can
regulators determine whether this is due to the improper use of
machine learning? Thank you again for the opportunity to
testify today. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Thomas can be found on page
52 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
Dr. Henry-Nickie, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MAKADA HENRY-NICKIE, DAVID M. RUBENSTEIN FELLOW,
GOVERNANCE STUDIES, RACE, PROSPERITY, AND INCLUSION INITIATIVE,
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION

Ms. Henry-Nickie. Chairman Foster, Ranking Member
Loudermilk, and distinguished members of the task force, thank
you for the opportunity to testify today. I am Makada Henry-
Nickie, a fellow at the Brookings Institution, where my
research covers issues of consumer financial protection.
I am pleased to share my perspective on both the
opportunities and challenges of integrating AI into financial
services. As this committee knows, market interest in AI is
soaring. AI technologies have permanently reshaped the
financial marketplace and altered consumer preferences and
expectations of banks. I want to point out a few key trends
that underscore this premise.
First, layering AI onto the financial value chain is
unlocking enormous opportunities for banks. Consider that J.P.
Morgan, for example, just installed a contract software that
takes mere seconds to review the same number of documents that
previously required about 360,000 manpower hours to complete.
Second, AI is creating new surface areas for banks to
cross-sell products to customers, and this means more revenue.
Finally, consumers are increasingly open to embracing AI in
banking. According to Adobe Analytics, 44 percent of Gen Z and
31 percent of millennials have interacted with a chat bot. And
they prefer, overwhelmingly, to interact with a chat bot as
opposed to a human representative. Taken together, these trends
suggest that AI is undoubtedly shaping the future of banking.
The story of AI in financial services is not all bad, and
innovative fintechs have made salient contributions that make
financial services more inclusive and more accessible for
consumers. Micro savings apps, for example, have empowered
millions of consumers to save more and to do so automatically.
Digit has used machine learning to help its clients save
over $2.5 billion; that is an average of $2,000 annually. In
credit markets, a combination of machine learning and
alternative data is slowly showing some early promise. When I
say, ``alternative data,'' I am not referring to the format of
your email address. I am talking about practical, alternative
factors such as rental payment and utility payment histories,
among others. A 2019 FINRA study showed that these variables
can reliably predict a consumer's ability to repay.
Furthermore, the results of CFPB's No Action Letter review
also supports this idea of early promise. According to CFPB,
Upstart, through its use of machine learning and alternative
data, was able to increase loan approval by nearly 30 percent
and lower APRs by as much as 17 percent. Crucially, the CFPB
reported that the fintech's data showed no evidence of fair
lending disparities.
Meanwhile, a UC Berkeley study found that algorithmic
lending substantially decreased pricing disparities and
eliminated underwriting discrimination for Black and Hispanic
borrowers.
Both research and market evidence show that, despite the
risks, algorithmic models have potential to provide benefits to
consumers. However, it is important not to overstate this
promise. We have all had a front row seat to the movie.
Algorithms propagate bias. This is not an attempt to
exaggerate. Numerous cases from various scenes support this
claim, from Amazon's hiring algorithm shown to be biased
against women, to Google's insulting association between
African Americans, like myself, and gorillas.
And the same Berkeley study I mentioned earlier found that
algorithmic lenders systematically charged Black and Hispanic
borrowers higher interest rates. According to the study,
minorities paid 5.3 basis points more than their white peers.
In the final analysis, machine learning was not
sophisticated enough to break the systematic correlation
between race and credit risk. In the end, these borrowers pay
an estimated ongoing $765 million in excess interest payments,
instead of saving or paying down student loan debt.
Machine bias is not inevitable, nor is it final. This bias,
though, is not benign. AI has enormous consequences for racial,
gender, and sexual minorities. This should not be trivialized.
Technical solutions alone, though, will not reduce algorithmic
bias or ameliorate its effects.
Congress should focus on strengthening the resiliency of
the Federal consumer financial protection framework so that
consumers are protected. Thank you for your time, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Henry-Nickie can be found on
page 43 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
Dr. Kearns, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give an
oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL KEARNS, PROFESSOR AND NATIONAL CENTER
CHAIR, DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER AND INFORMATION SCIENCE,
UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Kearns. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Michael Kearns, and I am a professor in the Computer
and Information Science Department at the University of
Pennsylvania. For more than 3 decades, my research has focused
on machine learning and related topics. I have consulted
extensively in the finance and technology sectors, including on
legal and regulatory matters. I discussed the topics and these
remarks at greater length in my recent book, ``The Ethical
Algorithm: The Science of Socially Aware Algorithm Design.''
The use of machine learning for algorithmic decision-making
has become ubiquitous in the finance industry and beyond. It is
applied in consequential decisions for individual consumers
such as lending and credit scoring, in the optimization of
electronic trading algorithms at large brokerages, and in
making forecasts of directional movement of volatility in
markets and individual assets.
With major exchanges now being almost entirely electronic
and with the speed and convenience of the consumer internet,
the benefits of being able to leverage large-scale, fine-grain,
historical data sets by machine learning have become apparent.
The dangers and harms of machine learning have also
recently alarmed both scientists and the general public. These
include violations of fairness, such as racial or gender
discrimination in lending or credit decisions, and privacy,
such as leaks of sensitive personal information.
It is important to realize that these harms are generally
not the result of human malfeasance, such as racist or
incompetent software developers. Rather, they are the
unintended consequences of the very scientific principles
behind machine learning.
Machine learning proceeds by fitting a statistical model to
a training data set. In a consumer lending application, such a
data set might contain demographic and financial information
derived from past loan applicants, along with the outcomes of
granted loans.
Machine learning is applied to find a model that can
predict loan default probabilities and to make lending
decisions accordingly. Because the usual goal or objective is
exclusively the accuracy of the model, discriminatory behavior
can be inadvertently introduced. For example, if the most
accurate model overall has a significantly higher false
rejection rate on Black applicants than on white applicants,
the standard methodology of machine learning will, indeed,
incorporate this bias.
Minority groups often bear the brunt of such discrimination
since, by definition, they are less represented in the training
data. Note that such biases routinely occur even if the
training data itself is collected in an unbiased fashion, which
is rarely the case.
Truly unbiased data collection requires a period of what is
known as exploration in machine learning, which is rarely
applied in practice because it involves, for instance, granting
loans randomly, without regard for the properties of
applicants.
When the training data is already biased and the basic
principles of machine learning can amplify such biases or
introduce new ones, we should expect discriminatory behavior of
various kinds to be the norm and not the exception.
Fortunately, there is help on the horizon. There is now a
large community of machine learning researchers who explicitly
seek to modify the classical principles of machine learning in
a way that avoids or reduces sources of discriminatory
behavior. For instance, rather than simply finding the model
that maximizes predictive accuracy, we could add the
constraints that different--that the model must not have
significantly different false rejection rates across different
racial groups.
This constraint can be seen as forcing a balance between
accuracy and a particular definition of algorithmic fairness.
The modified methodology generally requires us to specify what
groups or attributes we wish to protect and what harms do we
wish to protect them from. These choices will always be
specific to the context and should be made by key stakeholders.
There are some important caveats to this agenda. First of
all, there are bad definitions of fairness that should be
avoided. One example is forbidding the use of race in lending
decisions in the hope that it will prevent racial
discrimination. It doesn't, largely because there are so many
other variables strongly correlated with race that machine
learning can discover as proxies.
Even worse, one can show simple examples where such
restrictions will, in fact, harm the very group we sought to
protect. Unfortunately, to the extent the consumer finance law
incorporates fairness considerations, they are usually of this
flawed form that restricts model inputs. It is usually far
better to explicitly constrain the model's output behavior, as
in the example of equalizing false rejection rates in lending.
I note in closing, though all my remarks have focused on
the potential for designing algorithms that are better-behaved,
they also point the way to regulatory reform, since most
notions of algorithmic fairness can be algorithmically audited.
If we are concerned over false rejection rates, or disparities
by race, we can systematically test models for such behaviors
and measure the violations.
I believe that the consideration of such algorithmic
regulatory mechanisms is both timely and necessary, and I have
elaborated on this in other recent writings. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Kearns can be found on page
49 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
Ms. Williams, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to give
an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF BARI A. WILLIAMS, ATTORNEY AND EMERGING TECH AI &
PRIVACY ADVISOR

Ms. Williams. Chairman Foster, thank you. Members of the
task force, thank you for allowing me to be here. My name is
Bari A. Williams, and I am an attorney and start-up adviser
based in Oakland, California. I have a B.A. from UC Berkeley,
an MBA from St. Mary's College of California, an M.A. in
African-American studies from UCLA, and a J.D. from UC Hastings
College of the Law.
Primarily, I work in technology transactions, and that also
includes writing all of the terms of service, which are what I
like to call the things that you scroll, scroll, scroll
through, and then accept. I write all of the things that people
typically tend not to read. I also focus on privacy and a
specialization in AI, and my previous employer, All Turtles, is
akin to an AI incubator, and they are concentrated not just on
legal and policy, but also help with product production and
inclusiveness.
So, in my work in the tech sector, I have been exposed to
many different use cases for AI. And the things that you tend
to see for now, and a lot of the panelists have also referred
to them--criminal justice, lending, understanding predictive
behavior--are also responsible for all of the ads that you tend
to see, to influence consumer behavior.
So I would say that there are five main issues with AI in
financial services, in particular. One, what data sets are
being used? And to me, I distill that down to, who fact-checks
the fact-checkers? What does it mean to use this particular
data set, and why are you choosing to use it?
Two, what hypotheses are set out to be proven by using this
data? Meaning, is there a narrative that is already being
written and you are looking for examples in which to prove it
and to bake that into your code?
Three, how inclusive is the team that is building and
helping you test this product? I think that is one thing that
has yet to be mentioned on the panel, is, also, how inclusive
is the team that is actually creating this product? So who are
you building the products with?
Four, what conclusions are drawn from the pattern
recognition in the data that the AI provides? That is, who are
you building the products for? And then, who is harmed and who
stands to benefit?
And, five, how do we ensure bias neutrality, and are there
even good reasons to ensure that there is bias neutrality
because not all biases are bad?
Data sets in financial services are used to determine your
home ownership, your mortgage, and your savings and student
loan rates, all of the things that the prior panelists also
noted.
I also cited the same study that Dr. Henry-Nickie did as
well from UC Berkeley by noting that, yes, she is correct; in
that 2017 study, it showed that 19 percent of Black borrowers
and almost 14 percent of Latinx borrowers were turned down for
a conventional loan, and additionally, the bias was not removed
whether it was a face-to-face interaction or it was done using
the algorithm. So, in fact, it just seems that the AI
technology actually made the efficiency better, to deny people
loans and to increase their interest rates.
So there are two mechanisms in which you can drive for fair
outcomes. Again, you can pick your favorite definition of
``fair.'' I think you will see that there are many to choose
from. One is to leverage statistical techniques to resample or
reweigh a data sample to reduce the bias. I would give you a
visual of, essentially, it is someone standing on a box.
Imagine someone may be shorter, and you give them a box to
stand on so that they are the same height as the person next to
them. That is essentially reweighing the data.
And the second technique is a fairness regulator, which is
essentially a mathematical constraint to ensure fairness in the
model to existing algorithms.
So what are other emerging methods or ways that you can use
AI for good? Some emerging methods--there is one in particular,
that is seen with Zest AI, which is a tech company, and it has
created a product called ZAML Fair, which reduces bias in
credit assessment by ranking an algorithm's credit variables by
how much they lead to biased outcomes. And then, they muffle
the influence of those variables to produce a better model with
less biased outcomes.
So if more banks, or even consumer-facing retailers, credit
reporting bureaus, used something like this, you may get a
better outcome that shows better parity.
What ways can existing laws and regulations help us? It is
the same as I tell my kids, and what I tell my clients: A rule
is only as good as its enforcement. So, if you act as if the
rule doesn't exist, it might as well not exist.
For example, if a lending model finds that older
individuals have a higher default rate on their loans, and then
they decide to reduce lending to those individuals based on
their age, that can constitute a claim for housing
discrimination. That is where you could apply the Fair Housing
Act.
Additionally, the U.S. Equal Credit Opportunity Act of
1974, if you show greater disparate impact on the basis of any
protected class, you could also use that as a lever as well.
And I don't abide by the idea that, oh, well, the model did
it. There are people who are actually creating the models, and
so that means that there is regulation that could be used to
actually ensure that the people creating the models are
inclusive and diverse as well. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Williams can be found on
page 55 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And, Mr. Ghani, you are now recognized for 5 minutes to
give an oral presentation of your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RAYID GHANI, DISTINGUISHED CAREER PROFESSOR,
MACHINE LEARNING DEPARTMENT AND THE HEINZ COLLEGE OF
INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND PUBLIC POLICY, CARNEGIE MELLON
UNIVERSITY

Mr. Ghani. Thank you. Chairman Foster, members of the task
force, thanks for giving me the opportunity, and for holding
this hearing. My name is Rayid Ghani, and I am a professor in
the machine learning department in the Heinz College of
Information Systems and Public Policy at Carnegie Mellon
University.
I have worked in the private sector, in academia, and
extensively with governments and nonprofits in the U.S. and
globally on developing and using machine learning and AI
systems for public policy problems across health, criminal
justice, education, public safety, human services, and
workforce development in a fair and equitable manner.
AI has a lot of potential in helping tackle critical
problems we face today, from improving the health and education
of our children, to reducing recidivism, to improving police-
community relations, to improving health and safety outcomes
and conditions in workplaces and housing.
AI systems can help improve outcomes for everyone and
result in a better and more equitable society. At the same
time, any AI system affecting people's lives should be
explicitly built to increase equity and not just optimize for
efficiency.
An AI system designed to explicitly optimize for efficiency
has the potential to leave more difficult or costly people to
help behind, resulting in increased inequities. It is critical
for government agencies and policymakers to ensure that AI
systems are developed in a responsible, ethical, and
collaborative manner with stakeholders that include, yes,
developers who build these systems, and decision-makers who use
these systems, but critically including the communities that
are being impacted by them.
Since today's hearing is entitled, ``Equitable
Algorithms,'' I do want to mention that, contrary to a lot of
thinking in this space today, simply developing AI algorithms
that are equitable is not sufficient to achieve equitable
outcomes. Rather, the goal should be to make entire systems and
their outcomes equitable.
Since algorithms are typically not--and shouldn't be--
making autonomous decisions in critical situations, we want
equity across the entire decision-making process, which
includes the AI algorithm but also the decisions made by humans
using inputs from those algorithms and the impact of those
decisions.
In some recent preliminary work we did with the Los Angeles
City attorney's office, we found that we can mitigate the
disparities that a potentially biased algorithm may create to
potentially result in equitable criminal justice outcomes
across racial groups.
Because an AI system requires us to define exactly what we
want it to optimize, and which mistakes we think are costlier,
financially or socially, than others, and by exactly how much,
it forces us to make some of these ethical and societal values
explicit. For example, in a system recommending lending
decisions, we may have to specify the differential costs of
different areas. Flagging somebody as unlikely to pay back a
loan and being wrong about it versus predicting someone will
pay and not pay back a loan and being wrong about it, and
specify those costs explicitly for--in the case of people who
may be from different gender, race, income, and education
backgrounds.
While that may have happened implicitly in the past, and
with high levels of variation across different decision-makers,
loan officers in this case, or banks, with AI-assisted
decision-making processes, we are forced to define them
explicitly and, ideally, consistently.
In my written testimony, I outline a series of steps to
create AI systems that are likely to lead to equitable outcomes
that range from coming up with the outcomes to building these
systems to validating whether they achieve those outcomes, but
it is important to note that these steps are not purely
technical but involve understanding the existing social and
decision-making processes, as well as require solutions that
are collaborative in nature.
I think it is critical and urgent for policymakers to act
and provide guidelines and regulations for both the public and
private sector organizations, using AI-assisted decision-making
processes in order to ensure that these systems are built in a
transparent and accountable manner and result in fair and
equitable outcomes for society.
As initial steps, we recommend, one, expanding the already
existing regulatory frameworks in different policy areas to
account for AI-assisted decision-making. A lot of these bodies
already exist--SEC, FINRA, CFPB, FDA, FEC, you know, pick your
favorite three-letter acronym. But these bodies typically
regulate inputs that go into the process--race or gender may
not be allowed--and sometimes the process, but rarely focus on
the outcomes produced by these processes.
We recommend expanding these regulatory bodies to update
their regulations to ensure they apply to AI-assisted decision-
making.
We also recommend creating training programs, processes,
and tools to support these regulatory agencies in their
expanded responsibilities and roles. It is important to
recognize that AI can have a massive positive social impact,
but we need to make sure that we can put guidelines and
regulations in place to maximize the chances of the positive
impact, while protecting people who have been traditionally
marginalized in society and may be affected negatively by these
new AI systems. Thank you for this opportunity, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Ghani can be found on page
34 of the appendix.]
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Dr. Thomas, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, also known as
ECOA, prohibits discrimination in lending based on the standard
factors: race or color, religion, national origin, sex, marital
status, age, and the applicant's receipt of income from any
public assistance program. Today, is it technically possible to
program these explicit constraints? If Congress gives exact
guidance as to what we think is fair, are there still remaining
technical problems? I would be interested in--yes, proceed.
Mr. Thomas. Yes. We could program those into algorithms.
For example, the Seldonian algorithms we have created, for most
definitions of fairness, we could encode them now. The
remaining technical challenge is just to recognize that often
fairness guarantees are only with high probability, not
certainty. So it may not be possible to create an algorithm
that guarantees with certainty it will be fair with respect to
the chosen definition of fairness, but we can create ones that
will be fair with high probability, yes.
Chairman Foster. Any other comments on that general
problem? Is it just a definitional question we are wrestling
with, or are there technical issues that are--Dr. Kearns?
Mr. Kearns. If I understood you correctly, as per my
remarks, I think all of these definitions that try to get to
fairness by restricting inputs to models are ill-formed. You
should specify what behavior you want at the output. So, when
you forbid the use of race, you forget the fact that
unfortunately, in the United States, ZIP code is already a very
good statistical proxy for race. So what you should just do is
say, ``Don't have racial discrimination in the output behavior
of this model,'' and let the model use any inputs it wants.
Ms. Henry-Nickie. I would just add that in optimizing for
one definition of fairness, sometimes we are actually creating
a disparate treatment effect within the protected class group.
One study showed that when they optimized for statistical
parity, meaning the same outcome for both groups, no
differences, they actually hurt qualified members of a
protected class. And so, there is a very costly decision
involved in constraining for one definition, and hurting people
in the real world.
Chairman Foster. Mr. Ghani?
Mr. Ghani. To that point, you can always achieve some--
whatever definition of fairness in terms of the outcomes you
care about. The question is, at what cost? There are a lot of
ways you can make fairly random decisions, and a lot of random
decisions will be somewhat fair, but the cost will be, in terms
of effectiveness of outcomes, you are not going to get to
people who need the support, who need the help, who need the
loans, who need the services.
So, the question is not whether the algorithms can achieve
fairness. Yes, they can. But is the cost that comes with it
acceptable to society and to the values that we care about?
Chairman Foster. Yes, Ms. Williams?
Ms. Williams. I would also add that this goes back to the
point that I made about a narrative looking for facts. We want
to be careful that, to Dr. Kearns' point, I think solving for
the outcome is actually probably most effective. The inputs are
very important, yes, but also you are typically picking those
inputs because there is a desired outcome that you want, and
that is why you are choosing the data sets that you are
choosing.
There also needs to be an element of making sure that you
are examining and auditing the human behavior that is
responsible for the decision-making based off of that output as
well. It isn't enough to simply look at just the model and the
inputs, but it is looking at the output, choosing to solve for
the desired output, and then looking at the human decision-
making behind how that comes to be.
Chairman Foster. And the issue with black box testing, that
you can look at the details of the algorithms, is that an
appropriate stance for us to take in regulating this? This is
something that we run into in things like regulating high
frequency trading, where they are very protective of the source
code for their trading, and they say: Just look at the trading
tapes, and look at our behavior, and don't ask us how we come
to that behavior.
Is that going to end up being sufficient here, or would the
regulators have to look at the guts of the algorithm? Dr.
Thomas?
Mr. Thomas. That will depend on the chosen definition of
fairness. If the definition of fairness is that you don't look
at a feature like race, which is the kind that Professor Kearns
is arguing against, if it was that kind of definition, you may
need to look at the algorithm, because it could be looking at
some other features that make it act as though it was looking
at that protected attribute.
But if you are looking at a definition of fairness, like
the ones Professor Kearns is promoting, things like equalized
odds or demographic parity, which are requiring false positive
and false negative rates to be bounded, those you could test in
the black box way, looking at the behavior of the system and
then determine if it is being fair or not, without looking at
the code for the algorithm.
Chairman Foster. Yes, Dr. Kearns?
Mr. Kearns. I think one could go a long way with black box
testing. It is always better to be able to see source code. I
think it is also important to remember that sometimes when we
talk about algorithms or models, we are oversimplifying.
A good example is advertising results on Google. Underneath
advertising results on Google is, indeed, a machine learning
model that tries to predict the likelihood that you would click
on an ad, and that goes into the process of placing ads. But
there is also an auction being held for people's eyeballs and
impressions, and these two things interact.
For instance, there have been studies showing that
sometimes gender discrimination in the display of STEM
advertising in Google is not due to the underlying machine
learning models of Google but rather to the fact that there is
a group of advertisers willing to outbid STEM advertisers for
female impressions.
Chairman Foster. I will now have to bring the gavel down on
myself for exceeding my time, and recognize the distinguished
ranking member, Mr. Loudermilk, for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you all for your incredible testimony. Spending
30 years in the information technology sector, I have learned
one thing, which is, if you are going to take a scientific
approach to anything, you can't use your own bias, but you have
to suspect bias. Many times I have gone to dealing with
cybersecurity issues, programming security on physical
networks, and it doesn't work it the way I thought it was
supposed to work.
Several times, I went in to check myself, and found out
that what I suspected was supposed to happen isn't what was
happening. In other words, my own bias of, I program it for
this outcome, but the machine was actually giving me the proper
outcome.
The only reason I say that is, if you are going to take a
scientific approach, you have to check your own bias as well.
So, when I ask some questions here, don't interpret what I am
trying to say. I just have--we have to understand that we all
have bias. And we also have to look in--are there occasions
when the output isn't what we expected, but it is the right
output? And the only reason I am going down that because I want
to ask some questions just to try to help us get to, where are
we seeing the bias?
And I am not going into questioning--or making a statement
that, yes, AI is perfect, and it is working the way it should
be, that there is anything wrong with the testimonies. I think
as a community, we have to come together and we realize that
this is the future we are going to and we have to get things
right. And so I just wanted to say that, that if I ask
questions, don't take it that I am trying to question the
validity of what you are telling me. I just need to dig a
little deeper into some of this.
Ms. Henry-Nickie, as we are all concerned about potential
bias in algorithms, we know from a scientific approach that
humans have much more potential for bias than machines, if
properly utilized and programmed. And I think that is what we
are getting.
Ms. Williams said something in her testimony that just
highlighted--I just kind of want to step through some things to
see if we can really drive in to where the issue exists. In her
testimony, she was talking about home mortgage disclosures, and
it showed that--and I believe, if I am right, Ms. Williams,
this was AI approving home mortgages, is that correct--and I
think it was like only 81 percent of Blacks were approved, and
76 percent of Hispanics were approved.
So my question, Dr. Henry-Nickie, is, how do we know that
those numbers weren't correct? In other words, was a 19 percent
disapproval of Black borrowers and 24 percent of Latinos
outside of what would normally we see if it wasn't through an
algorithm?
Ms. Henry-Nickie. It is difficult to answer that question
without looking at the algorithms, but I will tell you that it
is not fair to assess what a proper outcome should be. The
context matters.
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Ms. Henry-Nickie. And so, if the market bears an average
denial rate of 19 percent, then that is the market. And if all
groups--Hispanics, African Americans, and white borrowers--are
being denied at systematically similar rates, then that is an
outcome that I don't think we can argue with. What is
troublesome or concerning in that kind of example would be a
model that is systematically denying minority borrowers, and
having that be based on their race or predicted by their race.
Mr. Loudermilk. Right.
Ms. Henry-Nickie. So I think it is--and we have all said it
on the panel--looking squarely for computational technical
solutions is part of the answer but it is not the complete
answer. We need a systematic approach to making sure that we
can understand what is going on in these algorithmic
applications and also from there to monitor effects and most
importantly processes.
Mr. Loudermilk. And so, when it comes to testing AI
platforms, it is not just the algorithm. There is a whole lot
of emphasis on the algorithm, which is a mathematical equation.
That is one part of a four-part testing that we need to do. The
appropriateness of the data, the quality of the data, the
availability of the data--you also have cognitive input systems
that have to be considered if it is using facial identification
for something. Is that actually operating?
The reason I am asking the questions is to say, are we
focused on an algorithm when the problem may actually be in the
data or the appropriateness of the data if there is--and we
just will make the assumption for this argument--that the
output of the AI system is wrong? But I also think we do have
to have empirical data to prove that the output is wrong, and
it is not in our own bias. And I am not suggesting that that is
what it is, but from a scientific approach, we have to do that.
In a forensic way, if we are going to find out where the
problem is, we have to consider all of that.
If we have a second round, I will have more questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. I anticipate that we will. The gentleman
from Missouri, Mr. Cleaver, who is also the Chair of our
Subcommittee on National Security, International Development
and Monetary Policy, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cleaver. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
holding this hearing. Dr. Thomas, what is AI? Can you, as
quickly, as short a definition as you--
Mr. Thomas. Unfortunately, it is a poor definition, but AI,
I view as just a research field that contains a lot of
different directions towards making machines more intelligent
so that they can solve problems that we might associate with
intelligent behavior.
Mr. Cleaver. Machine intelligence?
Mr. Thomas. Yes.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. So, if Netflix begins to have showings
for certain viewers, customers, and they know what movies and
shows that I would most likely enjoy, what determined that? How
did they get that information? Is that AI?
Mr. Thomas. Yes. Typically, that would be machine learning,
which is a subfield of AI, that uses data collected from
people, for example, to make decisions or predictions about
what those people will like in the future.
Mr. Cleaver. Okay. Thank you. For any of our witnesses, I
was on the committee when we had the economic collapse in 2008,
and witness after witness testified clearly, unambiguously,
that there was great intentionality in the discrimination in
mortgages with Black and Brown people. They admitted it. Can
AI, Ms. Williams, eliminate that or confuse it even more?
Ms. Williams. It has the potential to do both. I'm sorry; I
am giving you a very lawyerly answer, right? It depends. It
literally can do both. My concern--the ranking member made a
comment in regard to his question around, how do we know that
this isn't the right answer based on the data that is received?
Well, the answer to that, I would say, which is also analogous
to your question, is if you are using historical data, the
historical data already is biased.
So, if we are talking about something that is based on
redlining or something that is based on income of women or
income of Black people in particular, we know that we are
historically underpaid, even if we have the same credentials
and qualifications and experience.
So, if you are using bad inputs, you are going to get bad
outputs. It is very akin to what Congressman Foster said:
Garbage in, garbage out. So it has the potential to solve for
it if you are also being cognizant of the fact that not all
biases are bad. There may be some ways to solve for it,
particularly the human decision-making element at the end, of--
when you get the output. But the inputs also need to be
completely vetted and understood as well. So, again, if you are
using something that is based off of old redlining data, that
is already going to skew your results.
Mr. Cleaver. And to any of you, one of the most dangerous
things, I contend, having grown up in the deep South, is
unconscious bias. There would be people who would, without any
hesitation or reservation, declare that, I have designed this
machine and the algorithms are completely unbiased. Is that
even possible? Anybody? Yes, sir, Mr. Ghani?
Mr. Ghani. No. I don't think anybody is trained or
certified today to the level where they can guarantee that an
algorithm is unbiased. And I think, again, the focus on the
algorithm is misleading. I think it is important to remember
the algorithm doesn't do anything by itself.
Mr. Cleaver. Yes.
Mr. Ghani. You tell it what to do. So, if you tell it to
replicate the past, that is exactly what it will do. You can
take bad data, but tell it, ``Don't replicate the past, make it
fair, here is what I mean by fair,'' even if that doesn't work,
and as my fellow panelists were saying, the decisions we make
based on the algorithm's recommendation, we don't have to do
exactly what the algorithm says. We can override in certain
cases when the algorithm gives us the right explanation, which
we need that, and override it and/or reinforce what it is doing
based on what our societal outcomes are.
So we need training for regulators to understand these
nuances, because today we don't have that capacity inside
agencies to understand this, implement it, and enforce these
types of regulations that should exist regardless of AI. What
we are talking about is not about AI. It is about societal
values that should exist in every human decision-making
process.
We are just talking about it today because the scale and
the risks might be higher, but it is the same conversation that
should have been happening continuously.
Mr. Cleaver. My time has run out, but we had someone before
this committee once who declared that he had never seen any
discrimination and didn't know anything about it--and he was
60-years-old--but he said he knew some people who had. Thank
you.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Riggleman, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Riggleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, everybody, for being here. I had a whole list of
questions, but now that I have heard you all, I am just going
to just ask some cool things.
Dr. Thomas, I was really impressed by your thoughtful words
about contextual bandits. When I did this, I had to worry about
technical or assumed bandits because we actually tried to
template human behavior for node linking or information sharing
and how they actually put that data together, and we had two or
three people. And, by the way, when we templated each other's
behavior, it was completely different. It was fantastic. But
that is the algorithm we tried to do.
So, I have a question for you on these contextual bandits
because, as soon as you said that, I thought, oh, goodness, I
have never heard that term, specifically. We always just called
them screw-ups.
Is there a list of contextual bandits that might be
overlooked or not seen as egregious, and is there a prioritized
set of rule set errors that you and your team or others have
identified that we can point to and go look at, because, for
instance, we had our huge list of errors that we had in our
algorithmic rule sets that we were building through machine
learning, but is there any--have you identified this list, or
is there a list that we can see as far as those contextual
bandits you are talking about?
Mr. Thomas. I think we may have a miscommunication on the
term, ``contextual bandits.'' By contextual bandit, I mean the
machine learning paradigm where you make a decision based on a
feature vector and then get a reward in return for it, and you
optimize.
Is that the same usage of the phrase that you are using?
Mr. Riggleman. A little different, nope. You are right,
because when you said, ``contextual bandit,'' I'm thinking
about a bandit where you had a faulty piece of data put into
your rule set, and that faulty piece of data came from
somebody's context and what that piece of data should do.
So, let me reframe the question. Is there any way to
identify or is there a playbook or a technical order on how to
remove some of those contextual bandits that, say, we as a
committee can see or we can refer to?
Mr. Thomas. Unfortunately, I am not particularly familiar
with the specific definition of contextual bandit that you are
using, so I apologize. ``Bandits'' in our setting refers to
kind of like slot machines being called a one-armed bandit.
Mr. Riggleman. Oh, okay. I thought you were talking about
pieces of data within it. I am sorry about that because I am
using ``contextual bandits'' from now on. That is the greatest
term I have heard in a long time.
And then, Dr. Kearns, I was listening to what you were
saying. Where have improvements been in removing bias been most
noticeable when you are looking at building these rule sets?
Where have you seen that we have done the most improvement
right now, and, again, is there something that I can go see,
because I know our issues that we had in the DOD? Where can I
go see where the most improvements are in removing bias and a
way forward for us as we do this?
Mr. Kearns. Yes. I guess, in my opinion, there is quite a
bit of science on algorithmic fairness, and we sort of broadly
know how to make things better right now, but it is, in my
view, early days in terms of actual adoption, and I think one
of the problems with adoption is that, for instance, even
though many of the large tech companies have small armies of
Ph.D.'s who think specifically about fairness and privacy
issues in machine learning, there have been relatively few
actual deployments into kind of critical products at those
companies, and I think that is because of the aforementioned
costs that I and my fellow panelists have made, right?
If you impose a fairness constraint on Google advertising
or in lending, that will inevitably come at a cost to overall
accuracy. And so, in lending, a reduction in overall accuracy
is either going to be more defaults or fewer loans granted to
creditworthy people that would have given revenue.
I think the next important step is to sort of explain to
companies, either by coercion or encouragement, that they need
to think carefully about these tradeoffs, and that we need to
start talking about making these tradeoffs quantitative and
kind of acceptable to both the industry and to society.
Mr. Riggleman. And I think, Dr. Henry-Nickie, when you were
talking about this, now that we went to tradeoffs, do you feel
that--can it go the other way? Can we have too many tradeoffs
when it comes to bias? And can we insert things in there that
might not be real based on a political decision? I think that
is the thing that everybody here wants to keep out of this, is
that where is that line between making sure--do we have an
algorithm writing on an algorithm for fairness, which is what
we try to do, to write an algorithm to crosscheck our
algorithms, or do we have to be very careful about what we
identify as bias or fairness when we are making these rule
sets, and where is that tradeoff, as far as can we go too
political where it doesn't become fair based on the fact that
we are too worried about what fairness looks like?
Ms. Henry-Nickie. I think it can become too political. When
the CFPB tried to implement its BISG to make auto lending fair,
it went extremely political and ended up screwing consumers.
Mr. Riggleman. Yes.
Ms. Henry-Nickie. And so, I think we have to step back
collectively as regulators, on the scientific community,
consumer advocates, technologists, and public policy scholars,
and try to think about, how do we create collective gradations
of fairness that we can all agree with? It is not a hard-and-
fast issue, and, as Dr. Thomas said and Dr. Kearns, more
fairness, but you hurt some groups in protected classes who we
wanted better off anyway, before the algorithms were imposed.
Mr. Riggleman. I thank all of you for your thoughtfulness.
I'm sorry. I know my time is almost up, but a little bit of
time? I think it is up, right?
Chairman Foster. There is an unofficial 40 seconds of slot
time. So--
Mr. Riggleman. Thank you.
Chairman Foster. --you now have 18 seconds.
Mr. Riggleman. You are a gracious man. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Kearns. To just make one brief comment to make the
political realities clear here: Pick your favorite specific
mathematical definition of fairness and consider two different
groups that we might want to protect by gender and by race. It
really might be the case that it is inevitable that, when you
ask for more fairness by race, you must have less fairness by
gender, and this is a mathematical truth that we need to get
used to.
Mr. Riggleman. Thank you for that clarification. And thank
you for your thoughtful answers. I appreciate it. And I yield
back.
Chairman Foster. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Casten,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Casten. Thank you, Mr. Foster. I am just fascinated by
this panel, and I find myself thinking that there is--I have
deep philosophical and ethical questions right now that are
really best answered in the context of a 5-minute congressional
hearing, as all of our philosophers have taught us.
I do, though, think there are some seriously philosophical
questions here, and so I would like you just to think as big
picture as you can, and hopefully as briefly as you can.
First, Dr. Kearns, I was intrigued by your comment to Mr.
Foster that we shouldn't define bias on the basis of inputs. I
am just interested: Do any of the panelists disagree with that
as a proposition?
Okay. So, then, Dr. Kearns, help me out with the second
layer. Is it more useful to define the bias in terms of outputs
or in terms of how the outputs are used? Because I can imagine
an algorithm that predicts where that crime is likely to occur
at point X. I can imagine using that for good to prevent the
crime. I can imagine using that to trade against in advance of
the crime and make money off of it.
How would you define the point of regulation or internal
control where we should define that bias?
Mr. Kearns. That is a great question. But it is not an easy
one.
First of all, it can't possibly hurt to get the outputs
right in the first place. Second, there are many situations in
which the output is the decision. So, criminal sentencing is an
example where, fortunately, still, the output of predictive
models is given to human judges as an input to their decision-
making process, but lots of things in lending and other parts
of consumer finance are entirely automated now. So there is no
human who is overseeing that the algorithm actually makes the
lending decision. There, you need to get the outputs right
because there is no second point of enforcement.
In general, I think, as per comments that people have made
here already, it is true that we shouldn't become too
myopically focused on algorithms and models only because there
is generally a pipeline, right? There is a process to collect
data from before, early in the pipeline, and there might be
many steps that involve human reasoning down the line as well.
But, to the extent that we can get the outputs fair and
correct, that is better for the downstream process than not.
Mr. Casten. So then the point about these--hold on a
second, because I have two more meaty questions, and, like I
said, all of these are like Ph.D. theses questions.
Ms. Williams, you said in your comments that not all biases
are bad. Do you have any really easy definition of how we would
define good versus bad bias if we are going to go in and
regulate this?
Ms. Williams. That is a good question. It is giving me a
college throwback idea.
I guess it would be, if you have certain outputs that show
disparity impact among groups or, let's say, certain housing
decisions over the course of, let's say, three generations, if
you somehow put that into your inputs or if you use that, if
you are a human decision-maker who receives an output, and you
decide that is something that you are going to try to correct
for or solve for, then perhaps that is an example of bias for
good.
Mr. Casten. Okay. So my last really meaty one--I am going
to give you the really hard one, Dr. Henry-Nickie.
Let us assume, stipulate that people will make decisions
based on bias, they will make money off of the decisions based
on bias, because they already have. We already know that is
going to happen.
From a regulatory perspective, what do you think is the
appropriate thing to do after that has happened? Are they
obligated to disclose? I know of cases where hedge funds have
found that they were actually trading on horrible things in the
world and the algorithm got out of control. Should they
disclose that? Should they return the gains that they have had
to that? Should they reveal the code?
If you are the philosopher king or queen, what is the right
way for us to respond to something, having agreed that it
should never have happened?
Ms. Henry-Nickie. Well, I think our current regulatory
framework allows for that situation, and it allows us to
revisit the issue, analyze, and understand who the population
was that was hurt, what they look like, how much disgorgement
we should go back and get in terms of redress for consumers. So
I think it is completely appropriate to go back and ask--not
ask, but right the harms for consumers who have been hurt.
Mr. Casten. But doesn't that assume that they have already
disclosed it? In my scenario, where my algorithm is predicting
a crime and I figure out how to short the crime--
Ms. Henry-Nickie. Disclosure does not absolve you of
liability.
Mr. Casten. But if you are not obligated to disclose, how
are we ever going to find out as regulators that it happened?
Ms. Henry-Nickie. I think that is a really good question.
If you are not obligated to disclose, then we are in a Catch-
22, and then how do we find and identify and detect, and how do
we hold them accountable? I think it is important for the CFPB,
the DOJ, the OCC, and the Federal Reserve to have their
enforcement powers intact and strengthened to be able to hold
bad actors, regardless of intent, accountable for their
decisions.
Mr. Casten. Well, I am out of time. I yield back.
And I am sorry, Mr. Ghani. I know your hand was up. Feel
free to submit comments. And, if any of you have thoughts on
that, feel free to submit them. Thank you so much.
Chairman Foster. I believe it is likely that, if we don't
have votes called, we will have a second round of questions.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Budd, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Budd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is a fascinating
conversation. Professor Ghani, was there something that you
were--I think your hand was raised earlier. I have other
questions for you, but if you wanted to clarify?
Mr. Ghani. Yes, I wanted to go back to the first Ph.D.
thesis that was talked about: Is it enough to get the outputs
right, or is it important how those outputs are going to be
used? And I think that that is probably the most critical
question that has been asked today, because it doesn't matter
what your outputs are if you don't act on them appropriately,
right?
Here is an example. If you are going to take the example
of, you are not going to get all the outputs right, period. AI
will never be good enough to get everything perfectly right. It
is going to make mistakes. What mistakes are more important to
guard against really depends on how those outputs are going to
be used.
If we predict somebody might commit a crime and the
intervention we have is going and arresting them, that is a
punitive intervention. False positives are back, like
disproportionate false positives; much, much, much worse than
missing people.
If we predict that somebody is going to commit a crime, but
they have a mental health need, and we are going to send out a
mental health outreach team to help them, give them the support
services they need, then missing people disproportionately,
false negatives, are much, much, much worse than false
positives.
And so the intervention is what really decides how we
design these algorithms, and it is not the output; it is--we
can have the same output. Different interventions will require
different notions of what to optimize for and the impact of the
bias in society. So, I want to make that distinction clear--
Mr. Budd. Thank you.
Mr. Ghani. --because it does matter quite a bit.
Mr. Budd. Thank you.
And, in terms of using this AI for giving people credit, I
think we can agree that giving consumers access to credit can
fundamentally change their lives, and this is one tool that we
are using that can help them do so. It allows consumers to buy
a home, a car, pay for college, or start a small business.
Using alternative data such as education level, employment,
status, rent, or utility payments has the potential to expand
access to credit for all consumers, especially those on the
fringes of the credit score range.
A recent national online survey shows that 61 percent of
consumers believe that incorporating access to their payment
history and their credit files will ultimately improve their
scores. The same survey also found that more than half of
consumers felt empowered when able to add their payment history
into the credit files, and they cited the ability to access
more favorable credit terms as one of the biggest benefits of
sharing their financial information.
So can you further elaborate, Mr. Ghani, on how the use of
alternative data expands access to credit for low- to moderate-
income consumers who would otherwise be unable to access that
same credit?
Mr. Ghani. Yes. I would go back to what Dr. Kearns was
saying, that it is really not about the inputs, right? The
sandbox we need to create is to enter those things in and then
measure the outputs and then look at disparities in the rates
at which you are going to offer loans or credits to people that
you wouldn't have before.
So, imagine our societal goal is that the lending decisions
we want to make should serve to reduce or eliminate disparities
in home ownership rates across, let's say, Black and white
individuals, or minorities and white individuals. If that is
the societal goal we want to have, then these inputs may or may
not help us achieve that, and what we want to be able to do is
to test that out, have a framework for testing it, validating
it, certifying that it is actually doing that, and then put
this into place after we have done trials, just like other
regulatory agencies do.
Starting with, if we put in these inputs, would it help? We
don't know, but I think putting the right outcomes in place
that you want to achieve and then testing it is the right
approach to take.
Ms. Henry-Nickie. I would add to that.
Mr. Budd. I want to add an open question here, and if you
can comment on the same thing, but then answer the open
question, and that is ways that we can be more encouraging to
use tools like alternative data and AI to raise access to
credit and lower the overall costs for consumers, if there are
ways that we can encourage that here, so please?
Ms. Henry-Nickie. I will take that question first.
I think we have to be careful about experimenting with
people's--consumers' financial lives. I think a healthy way to
discover what our new products are out there might be through
pilots, might be through continued active observation, and also
vigilant oversight, as in the Upstart case.
To your question before, how do rental payments help to
expand access to credit on alternative data? For example, in
some markets, rental payments are as high as a mortgage or even
higher, and, if you, as a first-time home buyer about to enter
into this process have only had a rental payment history that
is consistent, stable, not late, then taking that feature,
substituting it for what a mortgage payment and standing in for
mortgage payment--excuse me--could then push you above the
margin to have the model predict that you were a good credit
risk.
Mr. Budd. Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Hollingsworth, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Good afternoon. I appreciate everybody
being here. Certainly, were my wife here, she would tell you
that I am far outside my circle of competence. So, I am going
to ask a lot of really stupid questions and let you all give me
really intelligent answers to those stupid questions.
Can you clarify--the word ``fairness'' has been thrown
around a lot. Can you clarify what you mean by fairness, the
five of you? Have at it. Dr. Kearns, Ms. Williams, Dr. Thomas,
everybody, anybody?
Ms. Williams. Okay. I will go first.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Okay.
Ms. Williams. For me, I look at fairness as ensuring that
all groups have equal probability of being assigned favorable
outcomes.
Mr. Hollingsworth. All groups have equal probability of
being assigned outcomes irrespective of their current
situations, or all individuals similarly situated are assigned
the same outcome--the same probability of outcomes?
Ms. Williams. The latter.
Mr. Hollingsworth. The latter. Okay.
Dr. Kearns?
Mr. Kearns. There are too many definitions of fairness, as
we have already alluded to, but the vast majority of them begin
with, the user has to identify what group or groups they wanted
to protect and what would constitute harm to those groups. So,
it is maybe a racial minority, and the harm is a false loan
rejection, rejection for a loan that they would have repaid.
Mr. Hollingsworth. You have clearly short-circuited to what
I was getting at, which is, we have a lot of senses of fairness
and a lot of senses of what we want done, but the requirement
in AI and algorithms is that we make explicit that which is
right now implicit, right, and you have to be very good at
making that explicit because the algorithm itself is going to
optimize for what you tell it to optimize for, right? And so,
you are going to have to make very clear what you were trying
to optimize for in order to get that outcome, and then, to your
point, what side you were unwilling to live with, right? I am
unwilling to live with the extra risk on this side or perhaps
that side depending on what situation you are in.
So, not only do you have to have a lot of awareness about
exactly what you want to optimize for, but also a lot of
awareness about, in the context, what you are really worried
about and what you are concerned about, the false positives or
the other side of it.
Dr. Thomas?
Mr. Thomas. I absolutely agree. I missed what the precise
question--
Mr. Hollingsworth. No. I saw you nodding your head and I
didn't know if you had a comment to the previous question about
fairness.
Mr. Thomas. I am generally just in agreement that you are
hitting on very good points, and--
Mr. Hollingsworth. I shall take that back to my wife. Maybe
my circle of competence is bigger than I thought it was.
Mr. Thomas. You are hitting on the point that there are
many different definitions of fairness. The question of which
one is right and nailing it down is very important.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes.
Mr. Thomas. And something that I think you might be kind of
dancing around is this idea that the negative outcomes that are
consistent with different definitions of fairness can often all
seem bad. There can be two different definitions of fairness,
and, if we pick one, it means we are saying that the
undesirable, unfair behavior of the other is necessarily okay.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. And I think Dr. Kearns talked a
little bit about this earlier, and it is something that puzzles
me a lot because I think, in some places, the tradeoff in
fairness for one group may mean less fairness in the other. Did
you say that, Dr. Kearns?
Mr. Kearns. I did.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. And this is something that others
have hit on as well, that we are going to have to grow
comfortable saying to ourselves that we are going to trade
fairness here for fairness there--and not just more fairness
for perhaps less accuracy in the model itself, which is
something we have had more comfort in. But trading fairness and
risk to a certain group is something we have been really
uncomfortable with because we want fairness for everybody in
every dimension, which seems--I don't want to say impractical,
but it seems challenging inside an AI algorithm in
optimization.
Mr. Kearns. I would say--
Mr. Hollingsworth. Do you agree with this?
Mr. Kearns. --that is, in fact, impractical. And let me
just, while we are in the department of bad news, also point
out that all of these definitions we are discussing are
basically only aggregate definitions and only provide
protections at the group level.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Right.
Mr. Kearns. So, for instance, you can be fair, let's say,
by race in lending. And if you are a Black person who was
falsely rejected for a loan, your consolation is supposed to be
the knowledge that white people are also being falsely rejected
for loans at the same rates. There is literature on individual
notions of fairness, definitions of fairness that try to make
promises to particular people that are basically impractical
and feasible. It is sort of a theoretical curiosity, but no
more.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. I appreciate that.
Each of you have talked a little bit about the pipeline
that AI algorithms aren't birthed in the ether, right, that
they rely on data, A; and, B, individuals craft these. I wonder
if you might talk a little bit about the biases that we are
talking about, are they more likely to arise from the algorithm
itself, or are they likely to arise from the coder or the
drafter of said algorithm, or are they likely to arise from the
data that is being input into them? Where should we look first
if we are going to look through that pipeline? Ms. Williams?
Ms. Williams. I would say look on the human level first,
because a human is going to discern what is the narrative that
they are actually solving for, and then therefore, what is the
data that they are going to use, and they discern the quality
of data that is used, and they then discern the training set
that is created and how that is functional. I also want to be
clear that I don't think that there are a bunch of mad coders
sitting in a basement somewhere.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. The fair expectations of society.
Ms. Williams. I don't think that is it. It is very--you
don't know what you don't know.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. I agree.
Ms. Williams. And I think, oftentimes, if people pick data
that is available to them, they may not do a ton of due
diligence to find additional data or data that may even offset
some of the data that they already have. But I would say, start
at the human level first, because that is where everything else
sort of begins in terms of picking the data, the quality of
data, and then actually doing the coding.
Mr. Hollingsworth. Yes. Thank you.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
And now, I guess we have time for a quick second round of
questions. Votes are at 3:30, and we have nerves of steel here,
I'm learning, so we will give it a try here.
So, I will recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I would like to talk about the competitive situation that
would happen when you have multiple companies, each running
their own AI and, say, offering credit to groups of people.
If you just tell them, ``Okay, maximize profits, that is a
mathematically well-defined way to program your AI,'' and they
would all do it identically, and the competition would work out
in an understandable way.
Now, if you impose a fairness constraint on these, first
off, that will reduce the profitability of any firm that you
impose the fairness constraint on, so they are not simply
maximizing profits, and then, if a new competitor may come in
and, say, and say, oh, there is a profitable opportunity to
cherry pick customers that you have--that your fairness
constraint has caused you to exclude, and is that a
mathematically stable competition? Has that been thought about?
Do you understand the problem I am talking about?
Mr. Kearns. If I understand you correctly, there is
literature in economics on whether, for instance, racial
discrimination in hiring can actually be a formal equilibrium
of the Nash variety.
Chairman Foster. Maybe that is a good description.
Mr. Kearns. Gary Becker was a very famous economist who did
a lot of work in the 1960s and 1970s on exactly this topic, and
it is complicated, but the top-level summary of his work is
that the argument that you can't have discrimination in hiring
at equilibrium because you wouldn't be competitive, because you
are irrationally excluding some qualified sectors of the job
market. He actually shows that, in fact, you can have
discrimination even at equilibrium.
Chairman Foster. So, one of the questions would be whether
you are better off actually having multiple players here. So,
if someone is erroneously excluded because of some quirk in
some model, then it would be to the advantage of society
overall to have multiple players, so that person could go to a
second credit provider?
Mr. Kearns. You are asking kind of the reverse of Becker's
question, which is, if you don't have sort of regulatory
conditions on antidiscrimination, for instance, might there be
arbitrage opportunities for new entrants? I don't know that
that question has specifically been considered, but it is a
good question.
Chairman Foster. Yes, Mr. Ghani?
Mr. Ghani. I think one thing I would point out is the
premise that, if you put those constraints there, the profits
will go down; that is not a guarantee. We don't know that, and
here is why, right? I think it was Dr. Kearns who was talking
about how there are a lot of people who just--we don't know
what happens in somebody who was never--the type of person was
never given loans before. What happens when you give them a
loan, right?
So it could be that, when you start adding these fairness
constraints, it turns out that you don't actually lose profits,
and, in fact, you might increase profits. These are things
called counterfactuals, where, because you have never given
loans to people like this, you don't know what the outcomes
are. You might have just--the human decision-making process
that existed before was only giving loans to people they
thought were going to pay back loans.
Chairman Foster. That has to do with the exploratory phase
of programming your neural--
Mr. Ghani. That is correct.
Chairman Foster. --to actually do random, crazy stuff
because you may discover a pocket of consumers--
Mr. Ghani. Hopefully better than random, crazy stuff, but
some smarter version of that, yes.
Chairman Foster. Yes. And so, this question of similarly
situated people, that depends on the scope of the data that you
are looking at, because two people can look similarly situated
if you only look at their family and their personal history,
and then, if you look at a wider set of things--I think this is
what came up with Apple and Goldman where, if you just looked
at one-half of a couple's credit information, you would give a
different credit limit on a credit card, I think it was,
whereas, if you look holistically at both halves of a couple,
you get a different answer. And there is no obvious right
answer to how wide you should spread your field of view here.
Is that an unresolvable problem that you are going to need
Congress to weigh in on? Yes?
Mr. Ghani. I think this is exactly why these systems need
people in the middle, but, also, these systems need
collaborative processes upfront, including the people who are
going to be impacted by them. If you start including those
communities, they will tell you that there is actually really
good work. There is a group in New Zealand who has been doing,
how do we incorporate community input into designing these
types of algorithms? What input attributes do we use that best
represent the differences and similarities across these?
So it is inherently--it is going to be hard to automate
that today, but I think that is the process we need, which is
to include the community that is being impacted and humans in
the loop, in the system, coming up with some of these things,
and collaborating with the machines.
Chairman Foster. Well, okay. That sounds ambitious. I am
just trying to think of assembling groups that are sufficiently
knowledgeable about the nuts and bolts of this and to have--and
where you are balancing the people who wind up winning and
losing according to the tradeoffs you are going to be making.
Mr. Ghani. The challenge is some of the--the amount of data
you have on people is also a function of who they are. Some
people are less reluctant or more reluctant to give data about
themselves. They may have less of a history. Immigrants are
coming in who don't have a background, and credit history, so
missing information. It is not just that you have the data, you
can just get it and compare those. You might not have that
data, and that is also biased in the data collection process.
Chairman Foster. Okay. I will gavel myself down and
recognize the ranking member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Unfortunately, we only have a few more minutes. I think we
could all be here all day discussing this.
Something Ms. Williams and Dr. Kearns said earlier has
really been resonating: Not all bias is bad. We agree. In fact,
if we take kind of the model we have been talking about, loan
applications, whether there is a mortgage or not, the whole
purpose of the AI platform is to be biased, right? That is the
actual purpose, is to be biased, but what is the bias that we
want? We want those who are likely to pay a loan back, really
is what we are getting at. So I think I see what you are
saying. There is some bias that you want in there.
What is the bias we want to eliminate, is really the
question, and that goes to something Dr. Kearns said, well, if
we reprogram it to make sure more of one racial group gets more
approval, then you may see a gender impacted. And so, this is
kind of a conundrum we are in until we figure out or define
what bias do we want in a particular system, but, more
importantly, what do we not want?
When I look at it as what do we not want, if Mr. Budd and
myself are identical--I know that we are identical in income
because I know what he does for a living, and that the law
doesn't allow him to take any other income, right? But if he is
Hispanic, I am white, and the chairman is Black, and we all
have the same income, we all have the same assets, we all have
basically the same biographical data, do we all get the same
result, whether it is approval or disapproval? That is really
what I think we are trying to get to.
It isn't that we weren't happy with the result that came
out, but we have to go back and find out why. And that is what
we are getting at.
Mr. Ghani, if it exists, and since algorithms are my
mathematical equation, really, I think part of the problem is,
when you get into the machine learning and the algorithm begins
to rewrite itself, how do we track it?
We verify the data is good. I think most of the problems we
have are probably in the data and the appropriateness of the
data. Let me say not just in the raw data, but the
appropriateness of the data.
But if we do want to check the algorithms, is there a way
of running what I would call in the network world an audit
trail in the development of the algorithm, throughout the
operation of the algorithm, and each phase of decision it is
making, and the actual coding, and is there a way to go back
and do a forensic audit trail on these algorithms?
Mr. Ghani. Yes, absolutely, and I think that is the right
approach, is you can audit the data, and that is great. But
then you are going to--I think the starting point is you want
to tell it what you want the system to achieve. Then, you want
to turn those into technical requirements for the system to see
what to tell it to do, and then you want to confirm that it did
what you told it to do, and then you want to test it and see,
does it continue to do what you--what it did yesterday, right?
When you answer, what should we ask a company to disclose,
it is not the algorithm. It is not the code. It is not the
data. It is this entire audit trail, and that is what we need
to look at to figure out where it is happening.
Mr. Loudermilk. Well, that's an interesting aspect, and
take it a step further. The difference between software and
artificial intelligence is we expect software to give us the
same result every time, right? That is not the case with
artificial intelligence, correct, because artificial
intelligence is always looking for other data, and it may give
us a different outcome the next day based on something that
changed the day before, and it may rewrite itself to learn new
things.
I think that is some of the challenge going forward is, if
you tell the machine that is not the right answer, it is going
to look for a different answer in the future. This is stuff we
wrote science fiction about just 10 years ago, right? So, when
we code the algorithms themselves, can we actually program in
the artificial intelligence platform to do systematic reports
throughout the process?
Mr. Ghani. Absolutely.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
Mr. Ghani. That should be standard. That should be part of
our training programs for people who are building these
systems. It should be part of training for auditors who are
doing compliance. Absolutely, that is the right approach.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. And the last part is probably more a
statement than a question. In my opening statement, I talked
about different analytical models. I think the one that
concerns us the most is what I call the execution model. We
have presentation of data. We have predictive analysis. We have
prescriptive analysis that prescribes, okay, approve or don't
approve. And we can do that, but, yet, there is a human element
making the same decision.
It is like the backup warning on my car that beeps and it
says something is behind me. It doesn't stop the car. I still
make the decision. But if you watch the Super Bowl, the Smart
Park, right, it is actually making the decisions. In this case,
it is the machine making the decision of go/no-go on the loan.
It is executing on that, and I think, until we get this fixed,
we may need to look at, is there an appeal process for that go/
no-go that a human element can go in and work?
So, thank you, Mr. Chairman. It sounds like our warning
bell is going off, and my time has expired.
Chairman Foster. Thank you.
I would like to also thank our witnesses for their
testimony today.
Without objection, the following letters will be submitted
for the record: the Student Borrower Protection Center; Cathy
O'Neil of O'Neil Risk Consulting & Algorithmic Auditing; the
BSA Software Alliance; The Upstart Network, Incorporated; and
Zest AI.
The Chair notes that some Members may have additional
questions for this panel, which they may wish to submit in
writing. Without objection, the hearing record will remain open
for 5 legislative days for Members to submit written questions
to these witnesses and to place their responses in the record.
Also, without objection, Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit extraneous materials to the Chair for inclusion in
the record.
This hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:33 p.m., the hearing was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

February 12, 2020

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
