- PRIOR USER RIGHTS: STRENGTHENING U.S. MANUFACTURING AND INNOVATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PRIOR USER RIGHTS: STRENGTHENING

U.S. MANUFACTURING AND INNOVATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON

INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,

COMPETITION, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 1, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-78

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
72-690                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JARED POLIS, Colorado
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman

BEN QUAYLE, Arizona, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
Wisconsin                            JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JUDY CHU, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          TED DEUTCH, Florida
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     JERROLD NADLER, New York
TED POE, Texas                       ZOE LOFGREN, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                MAXINE WATERS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                   Georgia
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Blaine Merritt, Chief Counsel

Stephanie Moore, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

FEBRUARY 1, 2012

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet...........     1
The Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet........     3
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet..................................     4

WITNESSES

David J. Kappos, Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual
Property, and Director, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
(USPTO)
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Robert A. Armitage, Senior Vice President and General Counsel,
Eli Lilly and Company
Oral Testimony.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    25
Dan Lang, Vice President, Intellectual Property, Cisco Systems
Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    48
Prepared Statement.............................................    50
John C. Vaughn, Executive Vice President, Association of American
Universities
Oral Testimony.................................................    56
Prepared Statement.............................................    59
Dennis Crouch, Associate Professor of Law, University of Missouri
School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    65
Prepared Statement.............................................    67

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary, and Member,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the
Internet.......................................................     4

PRIOR USER RIGHTS: STRENGTHENING
U.S. MANUFACTURING AND INNOVATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:08 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Bob Goodlatte
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Quayle, Sensenbrenner,
Coble, Chabot, Issa, Jordan, Adams, Watt, Conyers, Chu,
Sanchez, Lofgren, Waters, and Johnson.
Staff present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Counsel; Olivia Lee,
Clerk; and (Minority) Stephanie Moore, Subcommittee Chief
Counsel.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good morning. This hearing of the
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the
Internet, and on the subject of Prior User Rights:
Strengthening U.S. Manufacturing and Innovation will come to
order, and I have an opening statement.
Today we are holding a hearing on the prior user defense.
This provision was included as an integral part of the Leahy-
Smith America Invents Act, and the move to a first inventor to
file system.
The AIA was the first patent reform bill in over 60 years,
and the most substantial reform of U.S. patent law since the
1836 Patent Act. This legislation brought together individuals
and businesses that represent the full spectrum of the American
economy--from individual inventors to businesses and job
creators of all sizes from the technology, pharmaceutical,
manufacturing, biotech, consumer goods, finance, defense and
retail sectors.
The prior user rights provision was developed to ensure
that it created a strong right for those who first commercially
use inventions, protecting the rights of early inventors, and
giving manufacturers a powerful incentive to build new
factories in the United States to keep and bring jobs back
home. The provision helps to ensure that factories are able to
continue using manufacturing processes without the fear of
costly litigation. This ensures that the first inventor of a
new process or product used in manufacturing can continue to do
so.
The AIA's prior user defense protects American
manufacturers from having to patent the hundreds of thousands
of processes they use in their facilities. Further, prior user
rights are an important part of the switch to a first inventor
to file system. For many manufacturers, the patent system
presents a Catch-22. If they patent a process, they disclose it
to the world, foreign manufacturers will learn of it, and in
many cases use it in secret without paying licensing fees. The
patents issued on manufacturing processes are very difficult to
police and oftentimes patenting the idea simply means giving
the invention away to foreign competitors. On the other hand,
if the U.S. manufacturer does not patent the process, then
under the pre-AIA patent system, a later party can get a patent
and force the manufacturer to stop using a process that they
independently invented and used. Due to this litigation threat,
it has been easier for a factory owner to idle or shut down
parts of a plant and move operations and jobs overseas rather
than risk their livelihood through an interference proceeding
before the USPTO.
It is important to note that under the AIA, interference
proceedings have been eliminated for patents that will be
issued under the first inventor to file system. A less costly
derivation proceeding will be used to settle such disputes
within the USPTO.
Post-AIA, the factory owner who has been commercially
utilizing an innovation can continue doing so even if a
subsequent patent is issued. The AIA's prior user rights
provision results in an equitable outcome whereby a factory
stays open, jobs stay here, and the subsequent patent owner
gets to keep their patent albeit within a limited carve-out to
the prior user.
Currently, nearly every foreign country that has adopted a
first inventor to file system recognizes prior user rights. We
are here today to look at the recently issued AIA report on
prior user rights, and also to examine whether we need to
improve the prior user defense going forward.
In particular, two key areas have stood out for further
discussion.
This includes reducing the 1-year trigger for the prior
user defense that requires that action be taken 1 year prior to
the earlier of either the effective filing date of the claimed
invention or the date of public disclosure to qualify.
And second, modifying the prior user defense to account for
the situation where a company has taken substantial steps
toward commercialization.
As part of the AIA, an interagency report on prior user
rights was mandated. When we were first drafting the bill, we
slotted the report to take 1 year to finish, but after talking
with Director Kappos, he was confident that it could be done in
a quarter of the time.
So we wrote in a 4-month deadline for the report starting
the day H.R. 1249 was signed into law. I am pleased to see that
the report has arrived on time and under budget.
Well, at least I can confirm that the report arrived on
time, though I am sure that Director Kappos will be able to
confirm that it came in under budget. I look forward to hearing
from all of our witnesses on the findings of the report, and
also engage in a discussion on how we can improve the prior
user rights defense going forward to promote U.S. manufacturing
technology and innovation.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, the gentlemen from North Carolina, Mr. Watt.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If I can get my
microphone to cooperate I will make an opening statement also.
I thank the Chairman for convening this hearing. American
intellectual property whether in the form of patents,
copyrights, trademarks or trade secrets should be shielded from
theft, piracy and infringement. Constructing an effective
shield is vital to the U.S. economy and consumers, and is the
challenge of policymakers and the law.
For that reason, I supported the inclusion of a robust
prior user rights defense in the America Invents Act with a
carefully crafted consensus carve-out for universities. Prior
user rights appropriately recognize and reward commercial
ingenuity by allowing manufacturers to continue using
innovations that benefit the public, that were created before a
patent application was filed by another party.
It is not always feasible or desirable for every true
invention to receive patent protection. Such a requirement
could stymie progress and delay marketing and manufacturing of
products that improve the quality of life for our citizens.
Moreover, because the patent system is premised upon
disclosure--a policy that incentivizes businesses to reveal all
new technologies in order to avoid legal liability would have
the perverse effect of allowing foreign markets to capitalize
on American intellectual investments.
By affording cover for a restricted category of undisclosed
innovations, however, the prior user rights provision
represents a fair balance between trade secrets and patented
inventions within the marketplace. It protects all businesses,
big and small, and levels the playing field for U.S. industries
against foreign competitors who enjoy prior user rights in
their home country.
The conversion to a first to file system also mandated by
the America Invents Act could not effectively promote and
reward American innovation without the fundamental prior user
rights defense. Absent an effective prior user rights defense
the race to the Patent Office under the first to file system
would likely have led to lower quality defensive patent
applications covering trade secrets from multiple industries.
Moreover, a robust prior user rights defense was essential
to harmonize U.S. adoption of the first to file system with
similar systems throughout the rest of the world. The U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office report on the prior user right
defense concludes that the provisions in the America Invents
Act, ``need not be altered at this time'', and ``should be
maintained with no change''.
However, some have raised concerns both about the amount of
progress toward commercialization and about the 1-year
durational requirement necessary to trigger the defense. They
maintain that the current standard is not on par with what is
practiced in other countries, and consequently puts our private
sector industries at a disadvantage from foreign competition.
I am anxious to hear the views of our witnesses about these
concerns. There is clearly unfinished business for our Nation
to secure the intellectual property rights of our inventors and
creative communities from threats of infringement and deceptive
practices, especially from abroad.
But I am also mindful of the painstaking process that led
to the compromises embodied in the America Invents Act.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about whether
additional legislative action is necessary or desirable to
reinforce the global competitiveness of American companies and
whether that action can be undertaken without betraying the
good faith concessions made by our Nation's university
associations on the prior user rights defense.
It seems to me that the conclusion of the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office that Congress should make no changes at this
time sets a high bar to demonstrate otherwise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair is pleased to recognize the Ranking Member of the
full Committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thanks, Chairman Goodlatte and Mr. Watt.
I don't want to take the time to all of us say the same
thing three times, so I will put my statement in the record
with this recommendation.
I think that we might want to find a way to resolve these
differences before 2015. And so all I am doing is suggesting
that in a year from now, we look at what has actually been
happening. The President signed the bill a few months ago so I
think about a year from now we will be able to look at this
more critically. I think we are moving in the right direction.
I supported the major bill signed September 16, and I think
that our leader here of the intellectual property trademark
office--and by the way, I am glad that there is one coming to
Detroit, which we are looking forward to help develop and I
hope that it will be useful. But I commend the Under Secretary
Kappos, and also join in welcoming him to the hearing and I
will put the rest of my statement in the record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan, Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet
Today's hearing focuses on the prior user rights defense provision
included in the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act (AIA), which President
Obama signed on September 16, 2011.
I recognize the sensitivities that surrounded the prior user rights
debate and do not believe we should wait until 2015 to reevaluate the
economic impacts of the prior user rights defense as the United States
Patent and Trademark Office report recommends. That is too long to
wait.
We want to be fair and contemplate all of the concerns that are
raised by technology companies as well as consider concerns raised by
the higher education community with respect to prior user rights.
Nonetheless, I recognize that the bill was enacted last September,
so I recommend that a year from now we come back and look at this issue
to see what has developed. At that point, we should have additional
evidence about whether this issue warrants more hearings or more
reports.
There are several critical issues that we should consider during
this hearing. First, there is the fundamental inquiry as to whether
this provision can be modified to boost innovation and aid the
manufacturing sector.
The prior user rights defense permits someone who had been making
or using an invention to continue to do so after the invention has been
patented by another.
Before enactment of the AIA, the prior user defense was applicable
only to business method patents, which made it a limited defense. This
defense was created in response to the 1998 Federal Circuit decision in
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group.
In the State Street decision, the Federal Circuit explicitly held
that business method patents were patentable.
The AIA enlarged the prior user rights defense to patent
infringement to safeguard third parties who can establish that they
were commercially using an invention at least one year before the
filing date of a patent application in regard to such invention. The
AIA extends the prior user rights defense to all patents, not simply
business method patents.
The prior user rights provision in the AIA was drafted to establish
a powerful defense for those who first commercially use inventions, and
to provide manufacturers an incentive to build new factories in the
United States.
A prior user right defense has been used by many countries and is
used as a counterpart in many first-to-file systems.
Another concern is whether the prior user rights provision
adequately protects universities. As many of you will recall,
university associations and their memberships raised serious concerns
about this provision during the debate on AIA.
Over the six years that we debated patent reform, the higher
education community voiced substantial concerns about the increase of
prior user rights to be used as a defense against infringement for all
patents.
At the same time, numerous organizations in the private sector
argued that there was a need for broad prior use defense, especially if
the U.S. moved from a first-to-invent to a first-to-file system for
determining patent priority.
AIA included a prior user rights provision to address the concerns
of the higher education community.
The Act's defense provision has been drafted to maintain a high
burden of proof and shield universities and technology transfer
organizations from its enforcement.
Supporters of the prior user language in the Act argue that
university concerns have been addressed because all university patents
are exempt from the assertion of a prior use defense, except those that
result from research that could not have been conducted with federal
funds.
In apparent response to all of these concerns, section 3 of the AIA
required the United States Patent and Trademark Office to study and
report to Congress on prior user rights.
In light of the fact that this report was just issued last month,
today's hearing provides a timely opportunity to consider the results
and recommendations of this report.
The report was developed in consultation with the office of the
United States Trade Representative, the Justice Department, and the
State Department.
It reflects critical input that the USPTO received from a public
hearing that it conducted and from interested parties who shared their
opinions about this provision.
The study compares the operation of prior user rights in other
industrialized countries with the law in the United States.
Specifically, the report examines the effects of prior user rights on
innovation, startups, and venture capital. The report also looks at the
legal issues that arise with trade secret law and the impact of
switching to a first-to-file patent system.
According to the USPTO report, the ``prior user right defense under
the AIA should be maintained with no change at the present time because
there is no substantial evidence that it will have a negative impact on
innovation, venture funding, small businesses, universities, or
independent inventors.''
Additionally, the report suggests that the ``USPTO should
reevaluate the economic impacts of prior user rights as part of its
2015 report to Congress on the implementation of the AIA, when better
evidence as to these impacts might be available.''
The report concludes that the AIA strikes the right balance by
limiting the prior user rights defense to those parties that can prove
commercial use at least one year prior to the filing date of the patent
application by clear and convincing evidence.
We heard many arguments against expanding prior user rights that
included the need for public disclosure in the patent system. There was
also an argument that the patentee receive a limited monopoly in return
for disclosing new knowledge to the public.
Supporters of broader prior user rights argue that in complex
products and manufacturing processes, which contain hundreds or
thousands of patented components, it may not make sense to patent every
component or process.
Supporters also argued that prior user rights are essential to
ensure that those who have invented and used a technology but choose
not to disclose that technology are provided a defense against someone
who later patents the technology.
I expect to hear that some of the changes that can be made to the
prior user language can include changing the requirement of commercial
use one year before filing of the patent application or publication of
the invention.
In addition, there are those who argue that ``commercial use''
should be modified to explicitly include substantial preparation for
the actual internal commercial use or arms length commercial transfer
of a useful end result.
While we consider if the language of prior user rights should be
improved, I would like to note one thing about the AIA that I am
particularly pleased was included. The AIA requires the USPTO to
establish 3 satellite offices within 3 years of the Act's enactment,
which is September, 2014.
I am particularly pleased that the very first PTO satellite office
will be in Detroit this summer as the Elijah J. McCoy United States
Patent and Trademark Office, located on 300 River Drive.
The USPTO estimates that this satellite office will create more
than 100 high technology jobs.
This is a positive development and I look forward to working with
the USPTO and the Commerce Department to make sure the office opening
is successful.
We all invested a significant amount of effort over the years in
working on patent reform legislation.
Our patent system has been immensely successful at promoting the
advancement of the useful arts and sciences. Our Nation's economic
future is dependent on our ability to innovate and efficiently and
effectively protect the products of that innovation.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses whether there are
particular ways that the prior user rights defense language can be
improved.
__________

Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
Without objection, all their opening statements will be
made a part of the record.
And we have two very distinguished panels of witnesses
today. Each of the witnesses' written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety, and I ask each witness
to summarize their testimony in 5 minutes or less.
To help you stay in that time, there is a timing light on
your table. When the light switches from green to yellow, you
have 1 minute to conclude your testimony. When the light turns
red, it signals that the witness' 5 minutes have expired.
Before I introduce our witnesses, I would like them to
stand and be sworn. We will do this one panel at a time. We
don't need to wait for the next panel, to swear them.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much and welcome.
Our first witness is the Honorable David Kappos, Under
Secretary and Director of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Director Kappos served in this role since August 2009, advising
the President, the Secretary of Commerce and the administration
on intellectual property matters.
Before joining the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,
Director Kappos served as Vice President and Assistant General
Counsel for Intellectual Property at IBM, where he managed
worldwide intellectual property operations.
Director Kappos received his Bachelor of Science degree in
electrical and computer engineering from the University of
California, Davis, and his law degree from the University of
California, Berkeley. Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID J. KAPPOS, UNDER SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, AND DIRECTOR, U.S. PATENT AND TRADEMARK
OFFICE (USPTO)

Mr. Kappos. Well, good morning, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Watt and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for this
opportunity to discuss the issue of prior user rights, and the
prior user rights defense and the report the USPTO prepared
pursuant to the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act.
As you are well aware, the AIA represents the most
significant and necessary modernization of our Patent laws in
many decades. Mr. Chairman, you and the Members of the
Judiciary Committee deserve special praise and our special
thanks for your tireless and successful efforts over multiple
Congresses toward enactment of the AIA.
We at the USPTO are in your debt, and we have already taken
a number of steps necessary to implement the new law including
issuing proposed rules and completing two of the seven studies
required by the AIA to evaluate specific provisions of the
legislation.
Among the many important components of the AIA is the
expansion of the prior user rights defense to infringement to
apply to all classes of patents. The prior user defense
protects third parties who can demonstrate that they
commercially used an invention for at least a year prior to the
filing date of the patent application relative to that
invention.
As I have said in previous testimony before this
Subcommittee, I believe that expanding the prior user defense
is pro-manufacturer, pro-small business and, on balance, good
policy.
Section 3(m) of the AIA directed the USPTO to prepare a
report on specific issues regarding the defense including the
operation of the prior user rights in industrialized countries,
impact on innovation in small business, impact on trade secret
law, and the relationship with the first inventor to file
patent system. In preparing the report, we conducted our own
research, we held a public hearing, and solicited comments from
stakeholders. We also obtained input from USTR, the Department
of Justice, and the Department of State.
Most of the comments we received supported the AIA's prior
user rights defense provision, though several did express
concerns.
While a few comments took a view that prior user rights may
have the consequence of promoting secrecy over disclosure, the
vast majority of comments noted that the ability to maintain
trade secrets is vital to American competitiveness and job
growth, and that a limited prior user rights defense is an
appropriate complement to a first to file system.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, we found that the AIA strikes the
right balance by limiting the prior user rights defense to
those parties who can prove by clear and convincing evidence
commercial use at least 1 year prior to the filing date of the
patent application. We believe that patent owners' rights will
not be unjustly impaired and that the defense will not have a
negative impact on small business or independent inventors.
Further, we believe that the defense is constitutional and
can legally coexist with trade secret law.
Lastly, the defense is a proper fit with a first inventor
to file system and represents a significant step toward patent
law harmonization with our trading partners.
Based on our findings, Mr. Chairman, we made a number of
recommendations including the need of the USPTO to reevaluate
the economic impacts of prior user rights as part of our report
on AIA implementation in 2015, although we would be happy to do
it even sooner if that is requested by the Committee.
While our recent report recommends that no legislative
alteration of the provisions is necessary at this time, we
believe that stakeholder concerns should be carefully and
continuously reviewed and possibly addressed in future
legislation. Such changes could indeed strengthen the defense
for U.S. manufacturers while still protecting the vital
interests of our university community.
Mr. Chairman, again thank you for this opportunity to share
our views on this important issue. And thank you for your
continued strong support of the employees and operations of the
USPTO.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kappos follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Director, and I will start the
questioning.
Say a U.S. company is taking substantial steps toward
commercializing a product and shares an unpatented trade secret
with a subcontractor in a foreign country who is involved in
that process. For example, that subcontractor might be in
China.
Now what if the subcontractor then shares that information
with a third company who then files for patent protection in
China, establishing a priority date, and later files in the
United States. What type of protection would the U.S. company
have apart from a derivation proceeding at the PTO?
Mr. Kappos. Well, that is a good question--a bit of a law
school hypothetical there. If I follow everything, the
derivation proceedings would be the first line of defense. It
could be a challenging situation for the U.S. manufacturer.
Another line of defense could be, of course, prior user
rights as the obvious tool, and this hypothetical is an example
of why prior user rights can be very effective to protect U.S.
manufacturing.
The other possible defense I can think of is the claim that
the Chinese party wasn't an inventor because they copied the
invention from the U.S. provider, but that defense would
probably be raised in a derivation proceeding.
Mr. Goodlatte. In fast moving sectors like the technology
and pharmaceutical industries, would it make sense for the
prior user rights defense to take into account the issue of
substantial commercial preparation?
Mr. Kappos. Well, that is a great question. It has been
raised already, I think, in some of the floor statements.
Other countries do uniformly take substantial preparations
into account. In fact, one of the things we pointed out in our
report was that the U.S. approach in AIA is unique in not
taking substantial preparations into account. That being said,
as I think Ranking Member Watt commented, there was a very
delicate balance that was struck, and we need to be cognizant
of the needs of the university community in this regard, and
make sure we are protecting that important channel for
breakthrough inventions to enter the manufacturing marketplace.
And it was that sense of balance that caused us to say,
look, we certainly recognize that substantial preparation is a
good rubric to use, and would be beneficial to many U.S.
industries, probably including pharmaceutical and others.
But a balance was struck, and it was indeed a delicate one.
Mr. Goodlatte. So you are not prepared to tell us to take
that next step yet? Is that what your answer is?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. I wouldn't be confident saying that it is
clearly necessary at this point.
Mr. Goodlatte. In your testimony you mention that the 1-
year threshold for using the prior user defense in the AIA is
significantly more restrictive than the approach used in any
other country. Do you think that the threshold should be
reduced or eliminated altogether?
Mr. Kappos. Well, that question goes hand in hand with the
substantial preparation question. The approach that is used in
every other country is no 1-year trigger, but a substantial
preparation test.
If a change were to be made, probably those two changes
would go together. It certainly would be harmonizing, but then
again it could have a deleterious effect on the university
community, and we are cognizant of the issues there.
Mr. Goodlatte. Now, to the point that was raised by the
Ranking Member of the full Committee, Mr. Conyers, and you
mentioned it in your testimony as well, regarding the 2015
report. The USPTO's report on prior user rights concluded that
the prior user defense under the AIA should be maintained with
no changes and the USPTO should reevaluate the economic impacts
of prior user rights when it submits another AIA required
report due in 2015 on implementation of the AIA.
Would the 2015 report reflect on more and better evidence
than we have currently about the impact of the prior user
rights included in the just passed AIA?
I think this is sort of a balancing argument that the
sooner you do it, the happier some people might be, but the
longer you wait, maybe you will be basing it on better
information. What is your comment on that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, that is exactly right, Mr. Chairman. We
could do a report in another year. The challenge will be that
it is going to take some time to build up data. We really need
to get data on the impact that the new U.S. system has on the
U.S. intellectual property marketplace and on our manufacturing
sector.
And it will really only be a few years into the legislation
that we will be able to say with some confidence that we have
that data.
Now, we can certainly go out and start collecting data more
quickly, come in with an interim report if that is helpful, and
still do reporting in 2015 as another option.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Watt?
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kappos, I think the Chair has asked in at least one of
the questions, and that is on the timing of this. Whether this
report may have been required too early in the process before
there was really any evidence built up to base a reliable
conclusion on.
And, I suppose the real answer, you will continue to study
this until 2015--that is what I--and give another report at
that time?
Mr. Kappos. Yes.
Mr. Watt. Okay.
The second question that one of the witnesses on the next
panel has raised is whether the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office is really the appropriate body to be answering this
question.
He says that the problem is that under U.S. law the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office has no role in patent infringement
analysis, patent litigation or regulation of start-up ventures.
The agency has no expertise in this area and yet is being asked
to determine the general impact of the law.
A superior body may be the Federal Trade Commission, the
courts and the community of U.S. innovators. How do you respond
to that?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I would respectfully disagree with that
point of view. I think, first of all, the United States Patent
and Trademark Office is the Administration's advisor on
intellectual property issues, intellectual property policy
issues.
We of course did, as I mentioned, consult with USTR, the
Department of Justice, the Department of State. We conducted a
hearing. We took public comments. We got several dozen public
comments.
So the USPTO is acting in large measure as a channel, as a
collector and aggregator, and an ``analyzer'', if you will, of
exactly the kind of evidence that the comment calls for.
We also do have expertise in the area that enables us to
prepare the kind of report we did, including reaching out
overseas, accumulating information going back many years from
what other jurisdictions are doing, and putting together views
of the entire Administration.
Mr. Watt. So, how consistent are we with the rest of the
world? It seems to me that, the more I thought about this after
we passed the law and reflecting on the sharing, is that we
could be more aggressive in--than we were in the statute on
prior user rights to take into account a shorter period,
possibly a whole series of things that one of the witnesses has
raised on the second panel.
What would it take to get us consistent with the rest of
the world?
Mr. Kappos. Well, okay. A couple of points. One, we are
generally consistent with the new approach that is in the AIA.
So, at a high level, we are much more harmonized than we were
before.
The places where we are now not harmonized include the 1-
year provision that has been mentioned already. The defense has
the 1-year look back. The fact that we are not using a
substantial preparation kind of a test, and the language in the
provision that at one point seems to relate to processes, but
then goes back and articulates articles of manufacture and
products, compositions as well, which in my view is somewhat
confusing language and could frankly on a technical level stand
to be cleaned up.
Mr. Watt. All right. I think that addresses the concerns or
questions I have. I am not sure that necessarily answers all of
them, but this is--we don't have hearings to get answers to all
the questions, just to get different perspectives on them.
And I will be anxious to hear the witnesses on the second
panel give their perspectives on some of the same issues. So,
thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Quayle, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Kappos, how has switching from the first to invent
system to the first inventor to file system with the inclusion
of prior user rights helped to decrease the backlog at the PTO?
Mr. Kappos. Well, the switch from first to invent to first
inventor to file I believe will be quite helpful relative to
the backlog--not really an issue that intersects with prior
user rights which come about after patents are issued,
generally years down the line.
But just to briefly respond to the core of the question.
The switch to the first inventor to file system enables our
examiners to have a much more objective view of prior art. In
other words, pick up a document and know by looking at the face
of the document whether it can be used in examination under the
new system.
As opposed to the current system where they really don't
know if many documents can be used in examining a patent
application, which hampers them and causes us to be less
efficient than we otherwise could be. Having to impose
rejections that then later are not sustainable in view of the
fact that the date on a prior art document frequently does not
determine whether it can be used as prior art currently.
And that is what gets fixed. Under first inventor to file
will enable us to move through the examination process more
effectively.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. And we have all heard about the issue of
over-patenting, and the ongoing tension between the volume of
patents that are being granted and their quality. Though the
AIA was designed to help go a long way toward improving this
situation, how do you envision the prior rights defense being
used in litigation to defend against weak or overly broad
``paper patents''--you know, those types of patents that were
basically invented in a law firm rather than in a lab?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I think the prior user rights will be
very helpful relative to that kind of scenario without
commenting on over-patenting or under-patenting. Prior user
rights are all about manufacturing and incenting innovators to
manufacture here in the U.S., enabling them to go on and
manufacture without having a cloud brought on later by a late
filed patent right.
So, prior user rights relative to areas that are heavily
affected by patents, where there is a large quantity of patents
over a specific technology, will help manufacturers to be able
to make rational decisions about what inventions they file
patent applications on and where they stop filing patent
applications with the assurance that they will still be able to
manufacture their products and won't have someone coming in
with a paper patent or any other kind of patent later on and
shutting them down.
Mr. Quayle. Okay, thanks.
I want to go back to what the Chairman was talking about in
terms of the 1-year approach and the possible switch to the
substantial preparation test that you were mentioning. And I
was just wondering if that actually leads to more subjective
rulings on this?
Because the 1-year is very hard and fast whereas the
substantial preparation leads to more subjectivity and could
possibly lead to more uncertainty or at least less certainty.
How do you envision the substantial preparation test
alleviating those concerns?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I would say you are making a fair point
that there is some subjectivity in a substantial preparation
test. It would have to be defined and then ultimately there
would be some litigation, no doubt, over what level of
preparation is substantial.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, thank you for
having a hearing today.
I raised the issue of prior user rights during two of our
hearings last year, and I am glad that there is some interest
on the part of the Committee on examining the issue further.
Many commentators in the patent community have interpreted the
PTO's report as supporting expansion of prior user rights.
Would you agree with this characterization? And, if so, how
should such an expansion be pursued?
Mr. Kappos. Well, thanks for the question. So, our report
supports the expansion that Congress made in the AIA. We state,
I think it is fair to say quite clearly, that the law does not
need to be expanded further at the present time.
Ms. Chu. Do you see any need for the future? In the long
term?
Mr. Kappos. Well, we do see a few issues that have been
raised that need to be followed carefully.
As I mentioned, the fact that substantial preparation is
not included, the 1-year look back period, and since some
language that is less than clear defining or distinguishing
between processes and products and articles of manufacture--
those three items certainly should be watched closely, and
could be the subject of appropriate legislation in the future.
Ms. Chu. Okay. I would also like to ask about your
statements regarding the impact of prior user rights on
manufacturing jobs. In your testimony, you stated that a prior
user rights defense is pro-manufacturing and pro-jobs as it
rewards businesses that put new technology promptly into
commercial use.
Could you further explain the statement, and discuss the
role that that prior user's rights defense plays in preserving
manufacturing jobs.
Mr. Kappos. Well, sure. I would be happy to. I will give
two scenarios, if that is okay.
The first one is simply a U.S. innovator that puts a new
product on the marketplace, goes through the work of
establishing a manufacturing line, all of the effort and
investment associated with that, and then is years later
accused of infringing a patent based on a patent application
that was filed much later than that manufacturer went into
production. It is an inequity, I believe, in the system for an
early inventor to be presented with a later patent, and very
economically inefficient to take the risk of having to shut
down a manufacturing line and potentially put out of work all
of the Americans who are working on that line.
And that leads to the second example--our trading partners
have prior user rights, which means that their nationals in
their countries are protected against third parties, including
Americans, coming in and accusing their nationals of patent
infringement for manufacturing in their countries.
So the system that we had before AIA was, in my view,
substantially inequitable to our country and quite risky
because it presented the situation where an inventor, an
innovator, including an American one, was incentivized to
establish their manufacturing line overseas where they would
get the benefit of prior user protection and not in the U.S.
because they would have the risk here of having to shut down a
manufacturing line later on. Fortunately, that has been
substantially corrected by the AIA.
Ms. Chu. And I would like to also ask about the impact of
prior user rights on innovation. Your report indicated on page
31 that the public commented the Federal Register was not
consistent concerning the innovation impacts of allowing a
prior user defense.
What were some of the factors that the PTO considered when
trying to ascertain the impact of the prior user defense on
innovation rates?
Mr. Kappos. Well, we were looking for comments from the
public including examples, if there were any. And the U.S., of
course, had a prior user right from 1836 until 1952. We weren't
able to find any evidence during that period of time including
during expansions like the advent of electricity and the
pharmaceutical industry as well as many other breakthrough
innovations in U.S. industries that were created, some of which
rely more on trade secrets, some of which rely more on patents,
all of which seemed to thrive during that period of
unprecedented growth.
So you take that economic history, you take the fact that
we received quite a few comments and testimony with no evidence
submitted that would indicate that there was a negative effect
on innovation, so we are just simply not able to say that there
is any evidence of any problem in prior user rights.
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Issa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. I thank the Chairman.
Good to see you again. I think you are bringing us a very
good point that ultimately all of us who supported patent
reform have been concerned about. We were asked to work on
essentially harmonization. If I hear you correctly, and review
the record correctly, we missed harmonization in this one area,
didn't we, by having a disparity in prior user rights between
much of the world and ourselves?
Mr. Kappos. Well, I would say we made a lot of progress
toward harmonization, but in the ways we have discussed here
this morning, we didn't completely harmonize prior user rights.
If it is okay, Mr. Issa----
Mr. Issa. Of course.
Mr. Kappos. One other comment I would make in that regard
is that the exception of universities and tech transfer offices
associated with universities is another area in which we did
not harmonize our prior user rights provision.
I believe we did exactly the right thing, and I would
recommend we not try to harmonize with any other country in
that regard.
I believe that the excepting of universities and their
breakthrough innovations is 21st century practice--21st century
best practice--and I think the U.S. has leapfrogged the rest of
the world in that regard.
So, yes we want to harmonize, but only on best practices,
and that particular one is one where I would not advise
harmonizing.
Mr. Issa. So, as we consider legislation that might, if you
will, correct or bring about a small change here--substantial
but still technical change.
I wanted to follow up with one area--trade secrets.
Ultimately, how do we, in your opinion, take someone who has
reduced to practice something, has not gone to the Patent
Office, but is keeping it secret versus--or choosing not to
bring it to market--versus somebody who is reducing to practice
and simply doesn't run to the Patent Office?
How do we make sure that we get it right, that we are not
encouraging, if you will, public disclosure to be withheld
because they are going to maintain their prior rights.
If somebody today figures out how to make the Coca-Cola
secret recipe, it is not patentable. If somebody were to, if
you will, know that they had something but not want the world
to know, not want the clock to tick, but then as soon as there
is a patent granted says, ``Hey, I have been doing this for 5
years.'' How do we balance that act if we bring new
legislation?
Mr. Kappos. Right. So that is a great question. That is
really the question at the crux of the balance between a trade
secret regime and a patent regime, and prior user rights are
designed to relieve some of that tension.
Mr. Issa. And if someone patents out from underneath me, it
wasn't a trade secret, I was just about to disclose it, I am
sure.
Mr. Kappos. Well, there is that. That is right.
I would also say, though, that there are so many incentives
to file patent applications that the USPTO has discovered well
over a half a million times last year--a 5-percent growth rate
in patent filings.
So, folks know how to file patent applications. There are
lots of great incentives to file them, and there are lots of
risks built into the system for those who retain trade secrets
and don't disclose their inventions.
As you point out, Mr. Issa, the challenge for the folks at
Coke is if someone is able to reverse-engineer their trade
secret, they are out of luck forever, right? And if you get a
patent, on the other hand, you have at least got some ability
to have----
Mr. Issa. But they have enjoyed a century by keeping it a
secret. How do we make sure that no one enjoys the ability to
deny somebody else exclusivity when in fact they did discover
it?
Let's just say two entities discover it, roughly the same
time. A year later, a patent is filed by one. The other has
taken no action. We would generally say that is a prior use,
depending upon how far along they were.
But let's say it is 3 years or 4 years, where do we divine
the difference of somebody simply not intending to give we the
public what the patent law was intended to. You know, we
reimburse them, but we reimburse them with this exclusivity for
a reason. And that reason is we get the benefit in those twenty
or so years down the road.
How do we make sure we get that balance because I want to
see the legislation tweaked, but I want to make sure that we
don't induce people to have it both ways.
Mr. Kappos. Right. Well, key to that balance is ensuring
that there is a manufacturing requirement. This gets back to
the question of substantial preparations.
What you certainly don't want is to incent people to create
inventions, retain them indefinitely as trade secrets, do
nothing with them, and then later still have lots of options
open including a prior user kind of option.
And the way you do that is to have some time limit. Right
now, the AIA has the 1-year time limit. Could it be a little
bit shorter? Well, we have discussed that. You know, it could,
but that is a very close question relative to the needs of the
universities.
I certainly would not recommend making it any longer. I
think then you do tend to shift the balance in a direction that
incentivizes people to sit on their rights, hold secrets, not
disclose them, not enrich the corpus of knowledge, and then
knowing that they can later still in effect have their cake and
eat it too.
Mr. Issa. I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
indulgence of the time. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Sanchez, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Kappos, in your written testimony you stated that
a prior use right defense is good for small business, and you
just detailed earlier how it might be beneficial to
manufacturing, but I am wondering if you can go into more
detail about why, for example, small businesses, small
businessman in my district, should be happy that this was
included in AIA, and does that particularly, or I should say,
specifically apply to manufacturing or other areas as well?
Mr. Kappos. Right. Well, that is a great question.
And I think it does. So for small businesses in my home
state of California, where my entire family still lives, and
all other states in the U.S.--one thing about small businesses
is they all want to get bigger. They all share that in common.
And the way you do that is--the way you grow as a small
business is you have to put product or service out in the
marketplace. You either do that through licensing someone to
manufacture for you or you do it by developing manufacturing
capability yourself.
We want to promote both of those kinds of activities. For a
small business, which has hard decisions to make about patent
filings, typically will be able to afford some level of patent
protection, but will have to decide at some point, do I file a
patent on that next incremental innovation? Or do I just stop
it, and spend my incremental resources going out into the
marketplace and manufacturing?
Those are the firms that are the most vulnerable to the
situation where someone later comes in with a patent and stops
them from growing, stops them from hiring more people, stops
them from manufacturing. They don't have the resources to file
for potentially the hundreds or thousands of patents that cover
the entire manufacturing process, but they are totally
dependent on the entire process step to step, or step by step
to the end, to get their product into the marketplace.
So, the prior user right, while I believe beneficial to
manufacturers generally, is extremely helpful to growing small
businesses that are trying to put product into the marketplace.
Ms. Sanchez. Great. Thank you for that answer.
The only other question I have for you is, how do you
expect--or how often would you expect or can you even predict
that the prior use defense might be invoked prospectively?
Mr. Kappos. Yes. So, that is another great question. And we
point out in our study that it is not heavily used in other
countries that have it. We surveyed quite a few countries in
Europe, Asia, you know, further north in North America here, in
Canada. It is a lightly used defense.
That being said, I believe that the prior user rights
defense remains an important defense. The fact that it is
lightly used does not mean it is unimportant, first of all. And
the reason I say that is because where it is used, it is in
those critical situations where you have Americans' jobs at
stake on a manufacturing line that otherwise could get shut
down. You want a fail-safe defense like that for those
situations.
The second point I would make is that the prior user
defense is also used in a pre-litigation context, and it is
harder to study those situations because they don't frequently
get reported.
But it comes up, my experience, I would say regularly,
perhaps not frequently, but regularly in contexts of licensing
patents in patent portfolios between companies of various sizes
where you will find either as a manufacturer or as a patentee
that someone else has a piece of property out there or has a
manufacturing line, a product in the marketplace such that the
prior user right will cause you as the manufacturer to
correspond with the patentee saying, ``Look, you know, you
shouldn't bother with me because I had this thing in the
marketplace.''
And that winds up being a litigation that never happened.
Therefore, a report that never occurred, wasted resources that
never had to be wasted, and all upside for our economy. Happens
on both sides of the equations. Patentees benefit from that and
manufacturers do, too, all without going into a litigation
context.
And I believe that it is that part of the iceberg, if you
will, the consensual negotiations in an effort that is not
wasted, that is an important part of prior user rights.
Ms. Sanchez. Great. Thank you for being so thorough with
your answers, and I appreciate your testimony today.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, Director Kappos, I think that
concludes our questions, and this has been very helpful. We
appreciate your taking the time to come be with us and share
your thoughts on where we stand on this issue.
And we also appreciate your ongoing hard work to implement
the new patent reform laws and to improve our patent system.
Mr. Kappos. Chairman Goodlatte and Ranking Member Watt,
thank you very much.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
We will now move to our second distinguished panel of
witnesses. Each of the witnesses' written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety, and I ask that each
witness summarize their testimony in 5 minutes or less.
To help you stay within that time, there is a timing light
on your table. When the light switches from green to yellow,
you will have 1 minute to conclude your testimony. When the
light turns red, it signals that the witness' 5 minutes have
expired.
As is the custom of this Committee, before I introduce the
witnesses I would like them to stand and be sworn.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much, and please be seated.
Our first witness is Mr. Robert Armitage. Mr. Armitage
serves as the Senior Vice President and General Counsel of Eli
Lilly and Company.
Prior to this, he served as Chief Intellectual Property
Counsel of the Upjohn Company, and was a partner in the
Washington, D.C. office of Vinson and Elkins, LLP.
Mr. Armitage served as a past president of the Intellectual
Property Law Association, and the Association of Corporate
Patent Counsel.
Mr. Armitage received his bachelor's degree in physics and
mathematics from Albion College, and his master's degree and
law degree from the University of Michigan.
Our second witness is Mr. Dan Lang. Mr. Lang serves as Vice
President of Intellectual Property and Deputy General Counsel
at Cisco Systems.
Prior to this, he was a partner at the law firm of Ritter,
Lang and Kaplan, and an associate at Townsend, Townsend and
Crew.
Mr. Lang earned his master's degree in electrical
engineering from Stanford University, and his law degree from
the University of California at Berkeley.
Our third witness, Mr. John Vaughn. Dr. Vaughn serves as
Executive Vice President of the Association of American
Universities. He supervises all of the Association's policy and
analysis work, and is responsible for areas of intellectual
property, information technology, research libraries and
scholarly communication, and international education.
Dr. Vaughn received his BA in psychology from Eastern
Washington State College, and he received a Ph.D. in
experimental psychology from the University of Minnesota. He
was also awarded an NIH post-doctoral traineeship, and served
as a post-doctoral fellow at Duke University.
Our fourth and final witness is Dennis Crouch. Professor
Crouch is Associate Professor of Law at the University of
Missouri School of Law.
Prior to joining the MU Law faculty, he was a patent
attorney at McDonnell, Boehnen, Hulbert and Berghoff, LLP, and
taught at Boston University Law School. Prior to law school, he
worked as a research fellow at NASA's Glenn Research Center,
and as a Peace Corps volunteer in Ghana.
Professor Crouch is the founder of Patently-O, one of the
Nation's most widely read patent law blogs. Professor Crouch
received his B.Sc. in mechanical engineering from Princeton
University, and his J.D. from the University of Chicago Law
School.
Welcome to you all, and we will begin with Mr. Armitage.
You may want to turn on your microphone there.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT A. ARMITAGE, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT AND
GENERAL COUNSEL, ELI LILLY AND COMPANY

Mr. Armitage. Thank you. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt----
Mr. Goodlatte. Pull it closer to you as well.
Mr. Armitage. Okay.
Mr. Goodlatte. There you go.
Mr. Armitage. I appreciate the opportunity to appear before
the Subcommittee today to offer testimony on the provisions of
the America Invents Act that address the so-called prior user
defense.
The Subcommittee has before it already an excellent
analysis of all aspects of this issue in the report prepared by
the USPTO. My belief in a nutshell is that the Director's
testimony you have just heard and the USPTO's report says
almost everything that needs to be said about that issue.
That will not stop me, however, from using the remainder of
my 5 minutes. This is an issue where the Members of the
Subcommittee are well versed already given the work that led to
the enactment of the America Invents Act.
One point that at least in my view can't be underscored
enough is the magnificent bipartisan efforts by Members of this
Subcommittee that led H.R. 1249 to becoming our Nation's new
patent law.
Indeed, I would be remiss today if I didn't specifically
cite your work, Mr. Chairman, and the work of Ranking Member
Watt, and the work of your respective staffs in putting
together the provisions of this bill that made it the first
21st century patent law anywhere in the world, something we can
be proud of as a country.
Let me move on to the prior user right defense. My own
experience as a practicing patent attorney has taught me that a
strong patent system is one that carefully balances the scope
of protection afforded to worthy inventions, and also takes
account of the residual rights that ought to remain in the
public domain. An effective patent system both provides rights
to patent holders and limits the reach of those rights.
One of the balancing points in an effective patent system
is a prior user defense. It arises in the very rare
circumstance where someone has commercialized an invention
domestically without taking out a patent, and a competitor in
that very same field has created the very same technology
independently, and then subsequently sought a patent on the
already commercialized technology.
In that case, who should have superior rights under the
patent law? Should it be the prior domestic user, the
commercializer who has created the new technology being able to
trump the patent owner who subsequently then was able to share
a patent?
I think in those rare circumstances, Congress has provided
a clear-cut answer in almost every situation that arises under
the law. Someone who is a prior commercializer of new
technology almost always creates prior art that prevents a
subsequently sought patent from being secured or if it is
secured from being found valid in the court.
They are only, therefore, the rarest of circumstances where
prior commercialization in the United States does not
invalidate a subsequently sought patent. And that is when the
new technology that has been developed is maintained and used
as a trade secret.
And in this situation, Congress has said to the patent
owner, yes, you can have a valid patent, but there's a proviso.
Where the patented invention has been previously
commercialized, the person who invested in that prior
commercialization in this country, who created manufacturing
facilities in this country, who hired workers in this country,
is given the ability to continue to undertake those commercial
activities.
In other words, it is that balance that is always needed in
an effective patent system if it is an effective one between
patent owner rights and the rights of the public to continue to
practice an invention. And indeed, I suspect that most
Americans, if asked to examine these provisions in the America
Invents Act, would say Congress chose to tilt the balance in
favor of the patent owner to be able to bar any one of 300
million Americans from practicing the patented invention save
for one person who was already in prior commercial use of the
invention.
Moreover, I think that what Congress did in the America
Invents Act actually makes the trade secret system we have in
this country and the patent system both operate with optimal
effectiveness.
My written testimony suggests three areas where this
statute might be improved. I think you have already discussed
those in the panel you had earlier with Director Kappos. My
hope is that there can be a consensus developed on the
desirability of further improvements to the America Invents
Act, and in fact, it was the willingness to compromise and find
consensus that led to the enactment of the law after a 6-year
legislative effort.
We have at the table with me today, two individuals who
were right at the forefront of forging compromise and
consensus: Dave Lang and John Vaughn. And, frankly, without
them and the productive engagement of the American Association
of Universities and Cisco, the entities they represent here
today, there would have been no America Invents Act.
Thus I am eager to hear their views on how we might work
together to take this great achievement in reforming U.S.
patent law, and make it an even greater one.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Armitage follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Armitage.
Mr. Lang, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF DAN LANG, VICE PRESIDENT,
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, CISCO SYSTEMS INC.

Mr. Lang. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Watt, Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
today.
I am Dan Lang, and I am Vice President of Intellectual
Property, and Deputy General Counsel at Cisco Systems, where I
am responsible for Cisco's patent strategy. I am here on behalf
of not only Cisco, but also the Coalition for Patent Fairness,
which includes the technology companies that employ hundreds of
thousands of Americans, invest billions in U.S. research and
development, and own tens of thousands of U.S. patents and
patent applications.
I have come to testify today on an aspect of patent law
that is very important to U.S. competitiveness and jobs--the
prior user rights of inventors that develop technology that is
then later patented by someone else.
As I will explain, I am going to ask you to consider small,
but critical, changes to prior user rights law. Last year,
Congress passed the America Invents Act, the AIA. It was the
biggest change to our Nation's patent laws in the last 175
years.
One great indication of Congress' accomplishment in the AIA
and the leadership of Chairman Smith, Chairman Goodlatte and
Ranking Member Watt in bringing it to fruition, is that Mr.
Armitage and I are here together singing from the same hymnal
in supporting the same clarifications to the law.
One significant change in the AIA was a shift from a first
to invent system, which awards a patent to the first to invent,
to a first to file system which awards a patent to the first
inventor to file. This is a positive step, which simplifies the
patent system, and brings the U.S. into greater harmony with
our peers.
But with a first to file system comes the possibility that
an American company may develop technology and then be subject
to claims of patent infringement by a patent holder, quite
possibly a foreign competitor who filed for a patent on the
same technology even if the American company invented it first,
but had not yet patented it or otherwise publicized it.
A robust prior user rights system is therefore necessary to
protect American businesses who invent first, but do not file
patent applications and instead rely on trade secret
protection. Many of us, particularly manufacturers both in
traditional industries and new ones like Greentech, frequently
rely on trade secret protection because we do not want to rely
on patent enforcement in foreign countries to protect critical
innovations, and we do not want to directly tip-off competitors
as to technologies we are developing, which publication of
patents would do.
But also we may not file for certain patents because there
are numerous innovations in every product, and the money we
spend on filing for patents on every conceivable invention is
then not available to spend on research and development and
hiring employees.
Because we should not and cannot file for a patent on every
invention, we need prior user rights to protect us from the
opportunistic players, including foreign ones, who will spend
money to figure out which innovations we are already working
on, and file patents to harass us.
We know that these concerns are not theoretical. A recent
study showed that the prior user rights defense would have been
raised in 90 patent infringement cases between January 1, 2005
and October 15, 2011. Virtually all of our foreign competitors
enjoy prior user rights in their home jurisdictions.
The recent USPTO report on prior user rights very clearly
explains the need for them, as did Chairman Smith in the
discussions leading to the enactment of the AIA. I fully agree
with Chairman Smith and the USPTO, and give credit to this
Subcommittee for including broader prior user rights in the
AIA.
Today, I am asking you to consider three technical changes
to the prior user rights provisions of the AIA to ensure that
they both provide the needed protections to American companies
and to make them comparable to the provisions that our foreign
competitors enjoy abroad.
First, I want to make it very clear that prior user rights
protect all statutory subject matter, including both products
and processes. The PTO report on prior user rights explains
that commercial use of any subject matter can give rise to a
prior user right. I agree with the PTO's understanding of the
AIA here, and recommend that a modification be made to avoid
any unintentional confusion that might make the prior user
rights protection available to American companies narrower than
that available to our foreign competitors.
Second, I am asking you to consider that the prior user
rights language be modified to clarify the inclusion of
substantial preparation of technology as a form of commercial
use. This is especially important for those of us who spend
years and millions of dollars to develop products for market.
This protection is already available to our foreign
competitors. Modified language would be very useful to clarify
this important point.
Third, I am asking you to consider that the prior user
rights language be modified to eliminate the requirement in the
AIA that prior use take place at least a full year prior to the
patent application's filing. This limitation puts my company
and other American companies at a disadvantage compared to our
foreign competitors that are not subject to it. The PTO report
points out that this limitation is, ``significantly more
restrictive than that for any other prior user right system''.
Taking this restriction out will help put American businesses
on par with foreign ones.
To conclude, these three suggested modifications would help
assure an adequately robust system of prior user rights to
protect American industry and jobs.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today. I have also
provided a written statement that I ask be put into the record
of today's hearing, and I will of course be happy to take any
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lang follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Lang. Dr. Vaughn, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN C. VAUGHN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT,
ASSOCIATION OF AMERICAN UNIVERSITIES

Mr. Vaughn. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt and Members of the Subcommittee. I appreciate this
opportunity to present the views of the higher education
community on prior user rights and their impact on U.S.
manufacturing and innovation.
The proposed expansion of prior user rights defense was one
of the most contentious issues debated over the course of the
more than 6-year effort at patent reform of U.S. patent law.
The higher education community was strongly opposed to that
proposal. Private sector groups argued just as strongly for the
need for an expanded prior user defense. To explain the
concerns of the higher education community about prior user
rights, I would like to make a few brief comments about the
nature of university research.
Universities are the major performer of the Nation's basic
research--56 percent of it in 2008. The 1980 Bayh-Dole Act,
which allowed universities and small businesses to retain
patent and licensing rights to the results of federally funded
research, greatly enhanced the ability of universities to
contribute to the Nation's innovative capacity and economic
competitiveness by transferring their discoveries into the
commercial sector for development.
A couple of anchor points illustrated by those impacts--in
1985, 500 patents were granted to the top 200 research
institutions. In 2009, university research led to the issuance
of 3,147 patents, 596 new companies and 658 new commercial
products. Given the productivity and promise of university
research, both the Federal Government and universities are now
focusing on ways to increase the breadth and pace of university
research commercialization.
One of the key obstacles to increasing commercialization is
the so-called ``Valley of Death''--the gap between early-stage
university inventions and their successful commercial
development into products and processes that benefit the
Nation.
This has led to a growing recognition of the importance of
proof of concept programs that support the next stage of
concept development, market analysis and attendant activities
often needed to move promising but early-stage university
inventions into the commercial market.
The important point here is that the early-stage, high-risk
nature of university inventions that calls for developing proof
of concept programs to expand and accelerate commercialization
is the same aspect of university inventions that calls for
avoiding overly expansive prior user rights policies that could
move commercialization in the opposite direction by increasing
uncertainty and weakening patents, crippling the ability of
universities to license those patents for development.
We believe that the AIA prior user rights provisions have
struck an effective balance between the needs and interests of
the private sector for an expanded prior use defense, and the
necessity for universities to preserve an environment in which
they can license their inventions effectively into the
commercial sector.
The key provisions of the AIA prior user rights scheme for
universities are the following: most important is the exemption
of university patents from the assertion of a prior user rights
defense. This provision will free early-stage, high-risk
university patents from the added risk of prior user immunity
from patent rights, which would create a disincentive for
companies to license university patents.
The 1-year separation of commercial use from a later patent
filing or disclosure qualifying for the grace period reduces
the risk particularly that university licensees, most of which
are start-up companies and small businesses, will be developing
new technologies in a market that includes substantial trade
secret products or processes immune from the patent rights of
that company. Reducing that risk encourages investment in such
new technologies at a sensitive, early stage.
The USPTO's thorough, thoughtful report on prior user
rights defense recommends that the AIA prior user rights
defense should be maintained with no change at the present
time, but that USPTO should reevaluate the economic impacts of
prior user rights as part of its 2015 report to Congress. We
agree with those recommendations.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Vaughn follows:]

__________
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Vaughn. Professor Crouch,
welcome.

TESTIMONY OF DENNIS CROUCH, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF LAW,
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Crouch. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte and Ranking
Member Watt. Thank you for inviting me here today to testify.
I was here last year in the ramp up to the passage of the
AIA, and we have moved a great distance. I also want to take
just a moment to thank your Committee for all of your hard work
on intellectual property in general, and for both preserving
the rights of innovators as well as the rights of users.
At the same time, I think we should congratulate Director
Kappos and his entire staff for all of their efforts in putting
the AIA into place. I receive about two dozen emails each day
from patent attorneys around the country, and I continue to be
surprised and amazed at the good feeling that continues to be
exhibited toward Director Kappos because of his responsiveness
to the patent community.
Now the biggest change that has occurred at the Patent
Office in the past 6 months since the passage of AIA is that
the Patent Office now has more funding. And what they are doing
with that funding is addressing the tremendous backlog of cases
that continue to be pending at the Patent Office. And I know
this is the field of this hearing, but I just hope that you
will continue that funding as we move forward.
Now, I want to speak for a moment about prior user rights
as what we might call a protectionist measure. On balance,
prior user rights--what they do is take rights away from the
patent holder, and give them to manufacturers and
commercializers, right? And our rights go to U.S. manufacturers
and U.S. commercializers.
Because of the U.S. territorial limitation, the folks that
receive rights are typically in the U.S. while the patentees
losing rights could come from any country around the world.
Now, important in this analysis, and I think important in
the politics of why this was passed is the realization that now
for the first time in history, more U.S. patents are being
applied for by foreign entities than by American entities. And
this changes the calculus, and I believe this signals what is a
growing shift in our perspective on the balance between rights
of users and rights of innovators.
Now, Dr. Vaughn has spoken about a major caveat here of
universities, and universities sit in a unique position in our
system because they are typically not manufacturers, right? And
so, they are just patent holders in this system, and so this--
all right, so the law was created, and from this front I agree
with both Mr. Vaughn and Director Kappos that without the
particular exception for universities the law that was passed
would uniformly hurt universities more than most other U.S.
entities.
Now the main point of my testimony that is--the main point
of my written testimony parallels much of Mr. Armitage's
statements. And that is that prior user rights as drafted in
the AIA are in reality unlikely to have any substantial impact
on innovation.
And the way we know this comes directly from the USPTO
report where the USPTO looked through the decades of the
European experience and found no impact. They looked through
the first half of the century in our system, and found no
impact. They looked through the past decade where we had prior
user rights for business method patents, and found no impact.
Right?
And this leaves me to a nice conclusion that prior user
rights, as we have them now, right, are not creating a problem.
They are unlikely to shift our innovative environment, right,
and as Director Kappos mentioned and Mr. Armitage mentioned,
prior user rights have the benefit of, in those rare cases
where they come into play, having an important equitable result
that we see is fair. I think I will conclude my remarks.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crouch follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much, and we will now move to
our questions for the panel.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Ranking Member Mr. Watt,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the witnesses again for being here.
Let me see if I can clarify one thing between Mr. Lang and
Mr. Vaughn to see whether there is a difference or not. Mr.
Lang seems to suggest that we need to do three technical
modifications. I am not sure that they are necessarily
technical modifications.
One is clarifying that all innovations are covered under
prior user rights. I think that already exists. Do you agree
that that already exists, Dr. Vaughn?
Mr. Vaughn. Mr. Lang said that the language was somewhat
confusing, and that is probably why I wouldn't give a crisp
answer. I think it was intended to circumscribe subject matter
so that prior user rights would not cover all subject matter,
but focus on processes or products used in processes. I believe
that----
Mr. Watt. Do you agree that needs to be clarified, or do
you think we ought to leave it?
Mr. Vaughn. Universities would be comfortable with a
narrower definition, but I think this is something really that
ought to be discussed further.
Mr. Watt. But I think Mr. Lang is talking about a broader
definition. Am I misinterpreting what you are saying, Mr. Lang?
Mr. Lang. No, I don't believe so, Ranking Member Watt. In
fact, what we are seeking is a clarification that the language
does not indeed include all subject matter.
Mr. Watt. It includes all subject matter, and the
universities would have some concerns with that?
Mr. Vaughn. Our preference would be to have the focus on
process. This was one of the issues debated a great deal in the
compromise, and, I must confess, I think where we came out is
in a somewhat murky area, and clarifying that would be
worthwhile.
Mr. Watt. It would create war again, huh?
Mr. Vaughn. No, no. no. I don't think so. [Laughter.]
Mr. Watt. Substantial preparation, which is not obviously
included under the current prior user language in the AIA, and
the 1-year requirement, which is included, which Mr. Lang wants
shortened, I assume you would have some concerns about that?
Mr. Vaughn. I think that is an area where we would have
concern. The substantial preparation strikes us as a much more
open-ended standard. As Director Kappos said earlier this
morning, you likely would need litigation to try to clarify
that, and one of the major thrusts of AIA was to try to reduce
litigation.
So that, I think, would give us some concern, and we--
having the 1-year look back was a very important part of the
compromise for us.
Mr. Watt. Okay, then there is at least substantively some
disagreement on these two points between Mr. Lang and Mr.
Vaughn. Let me see if I might be able to narrow the
differences.
Mr. Lang, how soon do you think we should attempt to make
the suggested technical changes that you have suggested? Maybe
that would give us more comfort here.
Mr. Lang. My recommendation is that these changes be made
as soon as possible.
Mr. Watt. Which is before 2015? Or should we await the
report in 2015? Do you think we are doing ourselves a
substantial injustice by waiting until 2015 to reopen this
again?
Mr. Lang. Yes. I believe that we should not wait until
2015. And the reasons are that we see these changes as actually
part of the implementation of the AIA. In fact, the statutory
provision to have such a report, and the language in the
legislative history and also spoken by Chairman Smith that
already foresaw the need for carefully looking at the scope and
provisions of the prior user rights provisions, that this is
therefore something that was already contemplated to face now.
Mr. Watt. Mr. Armitage is smiling. It sounds like he has
been in the trenches between the two interests that are
debating this before, so let me get his opinion on this touchy
subject.
Mr. Armitage. If your desire is to split the difference, I
am probably the wrong person to ask that question. This is the
20th anniversary of my first appearance before this
Subcommittee testifying on the issue of prior user rights, and
frankly I thought in 1992 it was time to have the features of a
prior user right law in our patent law in the way Mr. Lang has
described them.
Mr. Watt. So you are biased here?
Mr. Armitage. I am quite biased, but I did give the same
testimony in 1995 and 2006 so I don't lack consistency on the
issue.
Mr. Watt. Okay. All right. Well, given the fact that it
took us 6 years to get to an agreement that got the AIA passed,
I guess my parting words should be to Mr. Lang and Dr. Vaughn--
it seems to me that if we are going to make any technical
modifications of the kind that you suggested, it might be
necessary for the two of you all to reach some kind of
agreement about this.
So, otherwise we will be stuck in place. The default,
generally for Congress I have found, is to do nothing, and I
have found that is even more true for the Senate, by the way,
than it is the House. But that is a subject of another day.
But, maybe I should suggest as my parting comment that
maybe the two of you ought to talk some more about this and see
if you can reach some kind of agreement about it. Otherwise, I
think we are stuck, kind of where we were leading to the
passage of what we now have in the law.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
I will recognize myself. Mr. Armitage, from a business
perspective, what is the greatest benefit of the prior user
rights defense?
Mr. Armitage. To be perfectly honest, I think the greatest
benefit of the prior user right defense is it helps guarantee
integrity in the patent system. I think, as I pointed out in my
testimony--written submission testimony, one of the issues that
you face in any competitive environment is not all competitors
at all times have the highest level of integrity.
Right now, almost every country who manufactures things in
the United States has a global workforce. We know that there
are some of our competitors who in fact hire our employees not
for the right reasons, but to do a bit of industrial espionage.
And one of the things that you need to worry about in a patent
system, particularly the one we will have under the AIA, is
that if we have built a plant around some key trade secret
technology, and by some nefarious means, one of our competitors
knows exactly what we are doing in our plant, and can start
out----
Mr. Goodlatte. By that you mean a plant here in the United
States?
Mr. Armitage. A plant here in the United States.
Mr. Goodlatte. So the provision makes it more likely that
your company in the future will be able to continue to
manufacture in the United States without the threat of
frivolous litigation?
Mr. Armitage. There is no way to defend ourselves
efficiently or effectively without a prior domestic commercial
use defense, such as in the AIA. And you are basically giving a
1-year grace period.
Mr. Goodlatte. Got you.
I got a bunch of other questions here.
Mr. Lang, Cisco is a company that operates around the
globe. You work with and sometimes share proprietary
information with subcontractors and local partners. Is there
still a fear of trade secrets finding their way into patents
sought by your foreign competitors?
Mr. Lang. Yes, absolutely. And that is a key reason why a
robust prior user rights system to us is important as a means
of competitiveness against foreign companies, of which we have
some very important ones.
And, under the previous first to invent system, we had the
notion in the law that if we were the first to invent, and we
brought a product to market without abandoning, suppressing or
concealing it that what we had done would serve as prior art.
Not only as the defense for us, but to invalidate the patent.
Whereas under a system that is first to file, which we have
moved to now, without prior user rights, the work that the--the
trade secrets that we give up can then be used as a basis for
other people's patents that will then be used to attack us.
Mr. Goodlatte. And, again, it makes it more likely that
your company in the future will continue to be able to
manufacture in the United States without the threat of
frivolous litigation?
Mr. Lang. Yes. And it extends even beyond manufacturing to
the fact that we are a very large U.S. innovator that invests
over five billion dollars in research and development.
Mr. Goodlatte. And continue to do that research and
development in the United States.
Mr. Lang. Yes.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay.
Mr. Lang. Some of it is spent in the U.S., and we have many
significant foreign competitors that we need this provision
for.
Mr. Goodlatte. And Dr. Vaughn, your organization represents
universities, which increasingly seek to commercialize their
discoveries through the creation of start-up companies. How
will the proposed changes affect the challenging and risky
environment that university-based start-up companies typically
face as they seek to translate university discoveries into
products, companies and jobs?
Mr. Vaughn. Well, I think that our concern about prior user
rights at the outset was a preference for the public disclosure
of patents and the possibly chilling effect of being able to
license those if there was a broad set of products developed by
trade secret that would be immune from the assertion of patent
rights.
But we think that the compromise that we reached, which we
pursued both because we wanted the bill passed and because we
came to realize the importance of trade secret protection
through prior user rights, sets the right balance.
The proposed changes that Mr. Lang has recommended, we are
concerned that those would then move this compromise back to
the area, bringing in certain factors in a prior user rights
scheme that would in fact make it more difficult for us to
license our patents.
They are early-stage, high-risk; they are going into often
undercapitalized start-up companies. If those companies trying
to raise additional capital have to deal with the specter of a
market that they may not be able to manage by the assertion of
patent rights, the ability to exclude by virtue of these immune
trade secret products, that is going to greatly complicate our
ability to license.
Mr. Goodlatte. I have another question for you. It is clear
the universities are a hotbed of invention and innovation in
America. When universities license their inventions, how do
they determine who to license to? Is it simply a business
decision, or do universities carefully look at who can best
help take the innovation to the next level?
Mr. Vaughn. It is very much the latter, Chairman Goodlatte.
The universities see as their mission taking the basic research
that taxpayers have funded, and moving that into the commercial
sector for the benefit of the Nation as a whole.
So, we have developed some very sophisticated technology
transfer offices. They are working constantly with industry,
seeking those companies that can develop the promise of this
basic research and turn it into useful products.
Mr. Goodlatte. And one more, for Mr. Armitage.
How would you compare U.S. prior user rights under the AIA
relative to our key trading partners? Is it superior, roughly
equivalent, inferior? What is your view?
Mr. Armitage. If we made the three changes that Mr. Lang
talked about in his testimony, we would be at a par with what I
think the best of the best of foreign country prior user right
provisions provide. Right now, I think as the PTO report
clearly lays out, we are behind where other countries are in
terms of, I believe, striking the right balance.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewomen from California, Ms.
Chu, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Lang, you argue pretty forcefully for the expansion of
the prior user rights defense to include substantial
preparation. Could you offer specific real world examples, and
why is it so important to your business?
Mr. Lang. Certainly. So, at Cisco we and our peer companies
in the CPF, we develop many complicated products, and they
begin with an idea, but between the idea and coming to the
marketplace, come many steps of the design, development,
building prototypes, testing them, and finally bringing them to
market.
We want to make it absolutely clear that all of these
steps, the substantial preparation for, are counted as part of
commercial use. And we seek this change to the language, and
the other changes we seek do not affect what we see as the
basic compromise inherent in the prior user rights legislation
that brought the universities on board, which was to actually
carve university-based inventions out of the prior user rights
language.
Ms. Chu. While some might argue that the lack of
substantial preparation standard would create a greater burden
on manufacturers because it might be their manufacturing
process itself that makes up their ``secret sauce'', at a time
when American manufacturers are struggling with the world
economy, it would seem to me that our patent system must give
them equal protections.
Do you believe the--that U.S. manufacturers are harmed vis-
?-vis their foreign competitors without the substantial
preparation standard?
Mr. Lang. I fully agree with that, and at Cisco we face
significant competition overseas. And, we see that going
through the PTO report and its excellent analysis of prior user
rights provisions around the globe in key industrial countries
that virtually all of those provisions contain substantial
preparation or something akin to it to protect the steps that I
outlined in design and development to make sure that that
activity counts as commercial use and is not then later
attacked by harassing patents.
Ms. Chu. Okay. Thank you.
And I wanted to pursue the questions that were previously
asked about the impact that any expansion of prior user rights
would have on the universities. I know this was a big issue
that last time this Committee had a hearing on intellectual
property, and I asked the witnesses whether there was any sort
of compromise that could be reached between those supporting
prior user rights and those with concerns, which was mainly the
universities.
And ultimately this Committee adopted the compromise that
gave the university carve-out.
So I would like the opinion of the panel on this,
particularly Mr. Lang, and then Dr. Vaughn.
Mr. Lang, would the expansion of prior user rights create
any new or additional risk for universities, specifically the
substantial preparation standard?
Mr. Lang. We do not see any additional risk or damage to
university interests from the modifications that we are asking
for, and that is in large part because the compromise that was
set carves out university inventions from the effect of prior
user rights. Nothing that we are asking for affects that carve-
out.
Ms. Chu. Dr. Vaughn, your organization did support this
compromise, the university carve-out, and given the broader
stakeholder ideas that the prior user right defense needs to be
expanded, do you think that this compromise carve-out will
continue to work for your community?
Mr. Vaughn. Well, Congresswoman Chu, I would describe the
compromise differently from Mr. Lang. There was an earlier
version of the provision, which had solely a university carve-
out, and as I indicated, that is the most important provision,
but it wasn't until several other factors were added that the
university community was comfortable making a change from a
total opposition to prior user expansion to a compromise that
included a year look back, commercial use instead of
substantial preparation--those were parts--they were heavily
discussed provisions, and were part of the compromise.
And, I do think if there is a need to reevaluate those,
that can be something that would be put in the 2015 report, but
the compromise that we agreed to had those provisions and those
were important parts of it.
Ms. Chu. And other panelists, Mr. Crouch and Mr. Armitage?
Mr. Crouch. You know, one thing we have been discussing
here, right, is this potential fraud where someone finds a
trade secret that a U.S. manufacturer has, takes it abroad and
then applies for a U.S. patent, and then comes back and goes
after the U.S. manufacturer, right?. And that is kind of the
fraud that Bob Armitage described.
If we add the language of substantial step, right? Or
something akin to that, I worry about fraud going the other way
in that we have someone that who is now claiming prior user
rights where they say, look, 10 years ago, I started down this
substantial step, and I kept it a trade secret this whole time,
and here, I will go back to my file room and discover it,
right?
And they produce papers to discover it, but I think there
is a real risk of fraud there, and certainly with the patent
system and any system where you have this ability to back-date
materials, we have experienced fraud.
And it is a struggle for the courts to deal with that, and
so I would hope that if we--any compromise that we come to,
that something that needs to be considered is the potential for
fraud in both directions.
Mr. Armitage. I think one of the difficulties this
Subcommittee will have is everyone on this panel is absolutely
correct. We need a patent system that if we make changes to it,
doesn't provide an opportunity, much less an incentive, for
fraud. We, in the America Invents Act, had a carefully crafted
compromise, and the provisions currently in the law and prior
user right reflect that compromise. We know from Dan Lang's
testimony that we don't have a prior user right provision that
is as effective as exists in foreign countries. That's a
competitive disadvantage, and at some point that needs to be
addressed.
So I guess the real question for the Committee is when.
Ms. Chu. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I am going to follow up on the question of
the Ranking Member and say, are you better off now than you
were before this bill, but you would like to still get to a
better place, or--I know you want more, and I know some people
were a little hesitant about that, so----
Mr. Armitage. If you own a patent today in the United
States, and you are in the business of getting more patents, it
is part of your business model, you are much better off with
the America Invents Act. It is a remarkable patent reform law.
Mr. Goodlatte. Including in the area of prior user rights
defense?
Mr. Armitage. Including in the area of prior user rights.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Sanchez, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Armitage, can you speak as to how the prior user rights
provision in AIA compares to that of our major trading
partners, and how do you think that might impact our trade with
them?
Mr. Armitage. You know, I had a chance to read the actual
prior user rights statutes in several countries--Korea,
Germany, Japan and China, maybe Mexico, one or two others. They
are very simple provisions.
Fundamentally, what they say is, if you have made
substantial preparations for commercialization, or you have
commercialized your invention, then nobody can touch those
operations if they seek their patents even a day after you have
completed those substantial preparations.
What we have done in our law are three things, and Dan has
explained them.
We have a subject matter limitation, and only some kinds of
patents are under the prior user right law.
Second, we have a 1-year holdback.
Three, we require actual commencement of commercial
operations.
Even if you spent a billion or two billion dollars building
a plant, and you can't operate it until Monday, if the patent's
filed on Friday, you get no benefit of our prior user rights
statute.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you for making that clarification.
I don't have any more questions. I will yield back to the
Chair.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
And the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for holding this very
important hearing.
I would ask Mr. Armitage, and also Mr. Lang--I will note
that in both your testimonies, you both suggest some changes to
the prior user rights defense to bring the U.S. in line with
other countries like Germany, Japan and South Korea. Mainly,
the three changes are relating to protecting all forms of
invention, providing the defense, not only to products that are
in commercial use, but also to protect substantial preparations
for commercial use, and eliminating the 1-year holdback
requirement.
How do you respond to the university community that has
concerns about these changes?
Mr. Lang. Well, I would go back to my earlier comment that
a part of the compromise--and you know, we just heard from Dr.
Vaughn on the other significant elements of the compromise--but
an important part of the compromise was carving the
universities out and university-based inventions out of prior
user rights, so we believe that their interests will be
unaffected.
Also, we see this as very important, the competitive
differentiation versus our peers around the globe, that these
American companies are affected by the disparate impact of U.S.
prior user rights law on U.S. companies as opposed to the prior
user rights statutes around the world, you know as we have
outlined and as we have catalogued and their impact on foreign
companies and the protections that foreign companies enjoy
under those statutes.
And I would also add that as far as small, innovative
businesses, I mean, the PTO report that is, you know, very
thoughtful in its economic analysis and did not find any
negative impact on innovation of prior user rights, and we
believe that the changes and the modifications that we are
proposing will not disturb that.
As a part of the PTO report process there were public
comments submitted by a range of companies including companies
that are small businesses and the Greentech industry--a company
that is a space exploration start-up, and they were very
consistent with and supportive of our view of prior user
rights, and how they should proceed.
So we believe that the changes that we are advocating are
very positive for American innovation over a range of
industries and businesses, and we believe that they will make
American industry and American manufacturing more competitive
with those around the world.
And we believe that that will be accomplished in a way that
encourages and does not discourage innovation.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Mr. Armitage, you have pretty forcefully made the case of
us modifying the law so as to include substantial preparation
as a protective vehicle for establishing prior use.
Is there anything else you would like to say about that?
Mr. Armitage. Just one comment, perhaps, about the ``valley
of death''. And this was the comment that there are small
venture start-up companies that may be hurt by the prior user
rights.
The way I look at it, companies like Cisco and Lilly
actually are the ones who acquire these companies, and invest
in these companies. And for us, those companies that are start-
up ventures--that even those companies that depend on a strong
patent system because we are really buying patent rights--prior
user rights actually make those investments more valuable to
us, make them more valuable to the small ventures themselves
because they eliminate the possibility that we may have someone
on the verge of commercialization where we want to buy the
technology, bring it to market.
We don't have to worry that some belatedly filed patent is
going to come in and sit on top of the actual way they have
tried to commercialize that technology, and require us to get
into patent litigation or engage in third-party licenses in
order to commercialize.
If you believe in a strong patent system, a good prior user
right is a good way of making that patent system work more
effectively with a trade secret system that's essential to I
think almost anybody who commercializes technology.
Mr. Johnson. Okay, thank you.
Professor Crouch, do you have anything you would like to
contribute?
Mr. Crouch. Dovetailing with what Mr. Armitage mentioned, I
think there is one minor area where the U.S. rights are broader
than many other countries and that is that we allow for an
increase in volume. That is, if the original prior
commercialization was at a small volume that entity can
continue to sell the same product, and increase the volume,
right? And I think, in my estimation that is also a good
provision for many start-up companies who have the idea of
starting off small, and eventually growing into a larger
company, right?
Or perhaps have the way out of getting bought out by Lilly
or Cisco where those companies want to rely on the prior use
defense, and can only do so if we have this volumetric
flexibility.
Mr. Johnson. Dr. Vaughn?
Mr. Vaughn. Bob discussed a circumstance where a small,
start-up company is acquired by a bigger company like Cisco or
Lilly, but there may be many circumstances where a start-up
company wants to launch an independent and self-sustained
venture, and we are concerned that an expansion of prior user
rights, which would be affected by the proposed changes that
are in discussion here, going from commercial use to
substantial preparation, eliminating the 1-year look back,
could run a risk of creating trade secrets that otherwise
wouldn't have been created--that are built in anticipation of a
forthcoming patent that is closer in temporal proximity,
creating a market situation where the start-up is now going to
have an inability to assert its patents and a situation that
wouldn't occur if commercial use had to be required a year
before.
Mr. Johnson. Would substantial preparation?
Mr. Vaughn. Substantial preparation--the problem there is
both that it is--it makes--it is a vaguer standard and as I
mentioned earlier, and Director Kappos had indicated, because
of that vagueness, you have a much higher likelihood of getting
into litigation, of the problems of discovery.
Professor Crouch mentioned the difficulty of back-dating
and opening up the possibility of fraud so we are concerned
that getting into vaguer circumstances, bringing the prospect
of prior user rights closer to a patenting activity can create
a climate where start-ups are going to have more difficulty
raising capital for independent development and as a matter of
process just to go back to the point that we went, I think, as
a community in good faith a long way from flat-out opposition
to prior user rights to having the substantial expanded
provisions we have.
If that needs to be reexamined, I think we should take the
time, get the evidence, and do it with care.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Lang?
Mr. Lang. If I might add, I mean, we see substantial
preparation as not some extra new defense that was never
previously available under the law, but rather in a sense a
partial restoration of protections that we enjoyed in the first
to invent regime, and that the development process that I
outlined previously, if it were followed, we would have been
entitled to a date of conception as a date of prior art that
would actually invalidate the patent.
And in seeking substantial preparation as a clear example
of commercial use that would entitle us to a prior user right
we are wishing to protect that work that we do as against a
patent that would be later filed on our own work, and would be
used to disrupt our activity.
A patent that would be generated by somebody who is out
there in the marketplace could be a foreign entity who is
looking at our--analyzing our external moves and guessing what
we might be working on internally, able to devote their
resources to filing patents and patent applications and then
able to harass us with those, even though it is our work that
started first, and that work needs to be counted in substantial
preparation.
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The gentlewomen from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank all of our panelists that are here
today.
Mr. Lang, are you speaking on behalf of the Coalition for
Patent Fairness?
Mr. Lang. Yes, I am.
Ms. Waters. And, that includes Adobe, Apple, Cisco, Dell,
Google, Intel, Intuit, Micron, Oracle and RIM--all of those
companies?
Mr. Lang. I do not--I believe that it includes all of those
companies with the exception of Apple as of today.
Ms. Waters. I see. I am sure you are aware of the article
that is causing so much discussion that appeared in the New
York Times entitled, ``How the U.S. Lost Out on the iPhone
Work''. In that conversation, the President--well, in a
conversation with some of the representatives of these
industries, and particularly to Apple, I think, the President
asked Steve Jobs about what it would take for Apple and
presumably other tech companies to repatriate manufacturing
jobs back in the U.S. And the answer was that those jobs are
not coming back to the United States.
As you know, most of the Members of Congress wish to have
our companies in a position of profitability. We want our
companies to make money, but we want our companies to hire the
people in this country. We know all of the arguments about how
it is not economically feasible to do that anymore, so as we
talk about the competition that you face and why it is
important for us to expand user rights, etc., you want us to
help make you more profitable, but what does that do in terms
of answering this question of whether or not you are going
invest more in job creation?
When I take a look at Cisco, Cisco will double its
manufacturing in China. That was what John Chambers said, the
CEO. The company will inject 350 million into start-up
investments and provide up to 400 million in customer
financing--the Cisco Systems Capital China. It will also open
another 300 of its networking academies to train 100,000
students on networking technology as part of an MOU--that is a
memorandum of understanding--with the Ministry of Education
under which will also donate 6 million in networking equipment.
Now, I can remember some years ago having this discussion
with Cisco about training, and simply, in South Central Los
Angeles, because when you were in the bubble a lot was going on
in Silicon Valley and those areas a lot of jobs were being
created, and we thought that perhaps it made good sense that if
our universities were not turning out the kind of people that
you needed to do the jobs, that perhaps Cisco and other
companies like Cisco, could have these academies, or right on
their own campuses to help train and develop young people to be
involved in this new technology--that was not thought of as
something that could or should be done.
But I see it has been done abroad. What can you say about
that? Do you think jobs have gone forever? What are you and
your cohorts willing to do about bringing jobs back to the
United States, and how can we help you to be more profitable
even though Apple was number one in the country--made more
money than anybody, including the core manufacturers, etc.?
So I kind of asked you a lot, but I would just like to hear
what you think about that, Mr. Lang.
Mr. Lang. Sure. Thank you, Congresswoman Waters. So, Cisco
is a vigorous U.S. competitor in a foreign marketplace, and I
am here as the patent expert, but Cisco, of course, has an
interest in a vigorous U.S. economy that is going to help bring
us to full employment.
The issue that we are talking about today is prior user
rights, which is one of many policies that affect employment in
the United States. And we--you touched on some of our
investments in China. We have a--obviously, like many of our
peers in the IT industry, we have a global----
Ms. Waters. Could you talk specifically about the training
that you do in China?
Mr. Lang. I am sorry?
Ms. Waters. The training that you do in China. The money
that you are investing in training Chinese to do the work that
you need.
Mr. Lang. Yes, I am not actually familiar with our specific
training investments in China. I know that we operate a program
of Cisco network academies, which exist in the United States,
as well as other countries of the world.
In the United States, I will say--well, globally, we spend
five billion dollars on R&D and 80 percent of that is in the
United States.
And also, we employ 30,000 people in the United States. The
United States is very significant, you know -
Ms. Waters. How many do you employ offshore?
Mr. Lang. Excuse me?
Ms. Waters. How many people do you employ offshore?
Mr. Lang. I don't know the exact number.
Ms. Waters. You know, domestically, it is about 30,000.
Mr. Lang. Yes.
Ms. Waters. You think it is more offshore, collective,
totally offshore?
Mr. Lang. I am not sure sitting here, no.
Ms. Waters. You are not sure of that number?
Mr. Lang. I do not have that number.
Ms. Waters. Do you think that as we talk about--let's go
back to the question the President asked. Do you think that--
what can be done to get these jobs back to this country?
Mr. Lang. Well, again, I have come to--as the patent
expert, to testify on prior user rights. However, I know that
our company has advocated a number of issues including prior
user rights, and changes to the patent law, but also issues
concerning taxation, education, etc. And, I think that there is
a variety of policies that could be followed to encourage
employment.
Ms. Waters. Do you think it is legitimate for us ask you
the question if you want us to help make you more competitive,
more profitable, is it not reasonable for us to ask when will
we see the results of that with more investment in this
country?
Mr. Lang. Yes, that is a reasonable question to ask. The
reason that we are here advocating for prior user rights or
under prior user rights is a part of that discussion--an
important part in our view in terms of strengthening and
balancing our patent laws to encourage innovation in the United
States.
Ms. Waters. Well, if I may say that many of us would love
to support you in expanding the user rights and other kinds of
things to make you more competitive, but there must be a direct
relationship to job expansion and creation in the United
States.
And, I suppose, if we are going to continue this discussion
that at some point if you can relate to that and you can
identify how what we do will help you to be more competitive
and more profitable, we certainly will jump over all kinds of
hurdles in order to be of assistance and supportive.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
I have an additional question for the panel and I know that
the Ranking Member does as well. We will see if anyone else
does after we do those.
And I will address this to all of you, starting with Mr.
Armitage. Could the university exemption provide an opportunity
for gamesmanship whereby companies could arrange in advance of
an invention an agreement to assign that invention to a
university, and take back an exclusive license right at a very
low cost and avoid applicability of the prior user right?
Mr. Armitage. You know, I think that is a theoretical
possibility someone could try doing that. I think in the real
world it has virtually no prospect of succeeding.
Mr. Goodlatte. Why do you say that?
Mr. Armitage. Well, first of all, understanding how
universities operate. They're really not in the business of
doing contract research to reverse-engineer somebody else's
trade secret so they can file patent applications so they can
license back the technology. We do this, and we want to be in a
business of manufacturing a product. We may have to engineer
everything that is needed to be known to how to manufacture.
We may be reverse-engineering somebody else's trade
secrets, but I doubt that any university in John's membership
wants to be used as that kind of reverse-engineering factory,
to be honest.
Mr. Goodlatte. What if the company comes to the university
without disclosing that as their objective, but says, hey, we
got a great idea. We want to make this arrangement with you?
Mr. Armitage. So, let me give you an example. We perform
the same reaction ten thousand times to figure out the optimal
temperature, number of reagents, type of reagents and create
trade secret technology about how best to do that. I know of no
one in a university who would want to take on that kind of
dull, mundane research to optimize the way we mix chemical A
and B at this temperature, this concentration, for this long
for the sole purpose of filing a patent application that they
could license back to us. That just isn't the innovative,
cutting edge thing that any professor I have ever been in
contact with would consider doing for money or otherwise.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Lang?
Mr. Lang. Yes. If I might just spend a few seconds
addressing one of Congresswoman Water's questions about
networking academies. We, in fact, operate over 100 networking
academies in California that include 13,000-plus students.
Now to get to the question of the potential for
gamesmanship in the university carve-out. I agree with Mr.
Armitage that the universities represented by Dr. Vaughn would
not willingly enter such arrangements to exploit the carve-out,
and we are not here to suggest changes to the carve-out which
we realize was an important part of the compromise that was
shaped last year in prior user rights.
That being said, I do not underestimate the creativity of
my colleagues in the legal profession to find loopholes and try
to exploit them, and it could be that if that problem arises we
will need to address that issue in due course.
Mr. Goodlatte. Or as a part of any changes that you are
recommending to us today to make sure that that doesn't happen
as a result moving forward?
Mr. Lang. Like if there is a--we are not proposing--we are
proposing three modifications to be done as soon as possible.
This other category I would suggest is something that may
need further exploration.
Mr. Goodlatte. We just have to take into account that as we
enhance prior user rights defense, we have to take these things
into account ahead of time rather than after the fact, and find
that somebody has been creative and therefore we have got to go
back and close. We need to know whether that's a likely problem
or not.
Dr. Vaughn?
Mr. Vaughn. I think it is an intriguing and disconcerting
issue that you raise. And as Bob said, it probably is a
technical possibility. It is so at variance with the mission of
universities that I can assure you that when we are in the
process of implementing this, and it goes to the earlier
question you asked about what kinds of industries do we want to
work with, we really have a public mission of paying back the
taxpayers that funded so much of our research to benefit the
Nation.
And I can just assure you that as a matter of policy and
procedure our institutions would assiduously avoid any kind of
arrangement like that which just goes--runs totally counter to
our public mission.
Mr. Goodlatte. So you would have to be fooled into doing
it, if it were to happen. It certainly wouldn't be an objective
of the university.
Mr. Vaughn. Absolutely not.
Mr. Goodlatte. It might be an objective of the----
Mr. Vaughn. And I think our technology transfer and general
counsels are smart enough. It would be very hard to fool them.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good.
Professor Crouch?
Mr. Crouch. I agree with all that is said, and I think that
we have--in the law as it now stands we have protections
against that in terms of first the good faith element and in
addition the restriction on deriving your inventions from
someone else that are already there in the prior use statute.
Now, what is true though, is that since universities aren't
subject to this prior use that does make them marginally more
attractive for people to invest in, right? Especially if you
are going to invest in the area of research where you think
somebody else might also be doing competitive research. And so,
if you bring a university on board, then you are at a
competitive edge especially when you have a patent race going
on.
And so that's not fraud, but it is--but it does shift the
landscape in favor of working with universities, and that is
really the point of why this was put in and that is why
universities wanted this provision in there.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Watt?
Mr. Watt. So, here is my situation. I am somewhat
sympathetic to the three suggestions that Mr. Lang has
suggested, but I also am politically aware that in order for
anything of that kind to move forward at least on any kind of
quick timeframe or modestly quick timeframe, there would have
to be a very broad agreement, and that agreement would have to
bring the universities along and be palatable to them.
So, let me ask this question, and I am just kind of talking
off the top of my head. I am looking for sources of compromise
here as I generally am to try to make something happen.
Substantial preparation is about substantial preparation for
commercialization, I am correct about that, am I not?
It seems to me that in a university context, substantial
preparation could be really advantageous to universities
because they are doing a bunch of substantial preparation not
necessarily initially in preparation for commercialization, but
they are putting a lot of time and effort and preparation into
whatever the venture is even before they get to thinking about
commercializing it, I presume.
So what would you think of a compromise that as far as
universities are concerned might define substantial preparation
as a little bit more generous than just substantial preparation
for commercialization. Would that be something that might be
the starting point of something that might lead to a
compromise?
Dr. Vaughn, Mr. Lang, Mr. Armitage, Professor Crouch? That
is the only question I have.
Mr. Vaughn. It is, I understand, your question, Congressman
Watt, that the substantial preparation might also include
activities by the university in the course of their
commercialization.
Mr. Watt. Or non-commercialization.
Mr. Vaughn. Yes, right. I think the concept of substantial
preparation for commercialization here provides, applies
strictly to the private sector, that is it would apply to
universities if we were manufacturing things, but we don't.
So, we create discoveries through taxpayer-funded basic
research. Our job is to move those early discoveries into the
commercial sector so that they can develop them and the
substantial preparation that prior user rights is being
discussed is all in the commercial sector.
But in the interest of, I think, your broader goal of can
we try to reach an agreement where we have a difference, I
would just say two things.
In terms of process, we did have a compromise that was very
difficult to achieve, that universities moved a long way to
support, which involved not only the exemption of university
research--university discoveries from the assertion of prior
user rights university patents, but also the 1-year look back
and commercial use, not substantial preparation.
But universities are--the members of AAU and beyond work so
closely with Cisco, with Lilly, with these companies, we are
allies in so many things. I think we cannot and should not
ignore their concerns.
I have stated that I think the right process is to leave
this compromise in place. Let the PTO examine with better
evidence in 2015 the impacts of this. If there is a need to do
something further, I do think we should move with caution. I
would assert that there is no country in the world that has a
more robust university industry, technology transfer,
commercialization process than this country.
The impact of Bayh-Dole has been enormous. Other countries
are trying to build that, but I think our universities are more
productive in commercialization than any other country, and
when I hear from our campus experts a concern about too broad
an expansion of prior user rights, we need to listen to them
carefully, but we also need to listen to our allies in the
commercial sector.
So I think if there are problems, we should be open to
discussing those, but doing it cautiously over time. But that
could move us to the compromise--to the agreement that you are
seeking.
Mr. Watt. Anybody else want to add to that, or should I
just go away and let you all work on it?
Mr. Armitage. Well, as Chairman Goodlatte knows, when we
were doing the AIA up until the last minute there were things
that needed further work. I think your work and the work of
your staff on supplemental examination was something that
looked like there was no way to bridge the gap.
At the eleventh hour we finally found a way to do that. We
have a compromise here, I think, that was a good, sound
compromise.
On the other hand, if someone asks this panel to come and
say is this the way the law should be for all time, in all good
conscience, I cannot say yes. My view is that we need to
continue to look at this and find ways to be competitive with
the rest of the world on this provision. I heard very clearly
that there may be a potential for fraud or abuse with a
substantial preparation standard that is too loose. It seems to
me that is a very productive area, where as on other issues, we
find the right concepts. We find the right words to make sure
it can't be abused by anyone.
I think it is much more difficult to compromise on the
issue of the 1 year. We already have built into the prior user
rights statute full protection for anybody who publishes on an
invention, not just files a patent application on it so that it
has protections that exist nowhere else in the world for the
patent owner.
So I don't know how to compromise on the 1 year, but I
think that maybe on the other aspect we could get our heads
together and do something quite constructive.
Mr. Watt. Go ahead.
Mr. Lang. Now, I will add that the--to reinforce Mr.
Armitage's point that the existing prior user rights statute
already incorporates many aspects of compromise that we are not
seeking to disturb the publication as being an effective date
of comparison against the prior commercial use, things like
restrictions on transfer of the right and the university carve
out itself.
That being said, I think that our intention here is clear
to be able to get to a prior user rights regime that is an
improvement over the present one in the bill in the sense it
leaves us at no competitive disadvantage compared to our
foreign peers, and if there are other ways of accomplishing
that on the specific three points I mentioned. Although the 1
year is difficult to understand how there would be an
alternative if there are other ways of accomplishing those and
leaving us in a position where we are in a similar position
protected by a prior user rights regime in the U.S. comparable
to that our foreign competitors enjoy, we are certainly willing
to explore those.
Mr. Crouch. Yes, I think the problem is the universities
have patents, but they are not benefitting from the prior use
exception because they are not commercializing.
And I think one way to shortcut through that is potentially
just to give them the right to transfer, or the ability to
transfer a prior user right to whoever the spinoff company that
they handover the technology to. So if they made steps in their
innovation, and steps toward commercialization, if then at that
point when they hand that off to a commercial venture that that
new commercial venture both gets the patent rights and gets
whatever prior user rights are available then I think that
potentially draws them back into a parallel scenario as other
manufacturing entities.
Mr. Watt. Well, I thought that might be close to what I was
suggesting, but okay, I am not going to ask anymore questions.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
Does this prompt any questions from Mr. Johnson or Ms.
Waters?
Mr. Johnson. Yes, I do. I am just sitting here thinking.
This university carve-out benefits universities and I was
thinking about how the private sector has come into our
universities or actually our institutions of higher education,
I believe, is how we referred to our universities--come in
endowed, various activities and placed requirements for the use
of the endowment, hiring decisions, editorial control as the
price, or is there compensation, if you will, for making the
endowment or the investment in an institution of higher
education?
And that would seem to offer a unique opportunity for say,
an energy-related business, to endow a professorship or a
school of X with funding to produce a certain process and then
they could perhaps benefit from not being subject to the prior
use defense.
And I am also thinking in terms of higher--institution of
higher education. When we think of that we think about Harvard,
Yale, Spelman, Morehouse, Howard, Clark Atlanta University, the
University of Pennsylvania, University of Connecticut, UCLA,
those kinds of institutions, but yet you have no other
institutions of higher learning. You have private, for-profit
institutions of higher learning--I wonder if they benefit also
from the prior use carve-out, and I wonder whether or not the
carve-out under those kinds of circumstances could be used to
perpetuate fraud, or some kind of an abuse of the patent
system.
It's very intriguing, this issue, as I sit and listen to
more of it. Anybody have any comments about what I said?
Mr. Vaughn. There is sort of a two-part question there,
and, first of all, the research universities that conduct both
education and research have an enormous number of very
productive relationships with industry. You mentioned
endowments. Universities love to try to build their endowments
from donors, sometimes from industry. They all have fairly
formal, circumscribed conditions under which they will accept
gifts. Universities would love to have open-ended donations.
There are often conditions put on, but----
Mr. Johnson. Let's say a gift is conditioned upon the
denial, the scientific denial of global warming.
Mr. Vaughn. Any respectable university would refuse that
gift flat-out.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I mean there are a lot of--I could name
names in terms of the funders of these endowments, and also the
universities that accept them and conform their actions
therewith. Private, non-profit standard type universities,
right here in Washington, D.C., in fact. I am thinking of one
with a name that is very--that brings back a--that has a
historic connotation to it. You know, you would never think
they would be corrupted intellectually, but it appears that
that they may. I am not going to call the name, but they have
fallen victim to this phenomenon.
Then also on top of that, you have the non-profit--I mean
for-profit--institutions of higher education, some of which
even advertise on TV, and they may not have the kind of
standards in terms of enrollment, education requirements,
prerequisites. They may just be a place that accepts federally
guaranteed student loans, and churns out people who are not
equipped to deal in our current marketplace. These are my
concerns.
Mr. Goodlatte. I am going to interrupt. The gentleman's
time has expired, and this is a discussion that we--could go on
for quite some time. But I am going to allow him to discuss
that with you at the conclusion----
Mr. Vaughn. Can I just make one quick comment on that?
Mr. Goodlatte. Very quickly.
Mr. Vaughn. With respect to the prior user rights and the
university exemption, the legislation as written clearly limits
it to not-for-profit. No for-profit institutions will qualify
for it.
Mr. Goodlatte. Ms. Waters? Did you have some questions you
would like to add?
Ms. Waters. Well, not really. I would just like to wrap
this up by saying that--to Mr. Lang, that U.S. innovation
policy includes patent law, antitrust, tax and immigration. I
don't see it separately. So, I, you know, in raising these
questions, I would raise it with representatives because I
think that representatives from any of these companies should
understand that when we talk about jobs and jobs creation and
our U.S. innovation policy, we are talking about all of these
things not just patent law. Not just antitrust, but tax and
immigration also.
And I am familiar with the academies in the United States,
and how they work in our elementary schools. And what I am
talking about in China is very different. It is the training of
people for jobs now, similar to what was described in the New
York article with the dormitories and the tea and biscuit and
hundreds of thousands of employees available around the clock.
I am really talking about that kind of atmosphere, and whether
or not the training that you do there is training for those
kinds of jobs.
And I will just leave that for the time being, but the
reason I mention it is because exportation of jobs offshore for
cheap labor is increasingly a highlighted issue in this
country, and it is going to become even more so.
And so I think it needs to be thought about always as you
enter into these discussions about how we are helpful or not
helpful in making our companies more competitive and why we are
doing that, and what are the results of that.
So, I would like you to just keep that on the radar screen,
and advise the company that this came up in the discussion as
with the universities.
When I talked about doing whatever is necessary to support
our companies, I certainly wasn't talking about that to the
exclusion of our universities. I think you have a very
important role to play, and I think that Congressman Mel Watt
got you to the point in the discussion where not only did you
talk about how well you know each other, and how you worked
together and how you helped to forge the compromise that is in
law now.
And you can continue to work, but when you raise,
Professor, the idea of the transfer of prior user rights onto
the companies I think that is very attractive so, I am hopeful
that whatever happens, it will not be to the exclusion
certainly of the university.
So I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the additional time, and
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
And I would like to thank the witnesses for their testimony
today.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit to the Chair additional written questions for the
witnesses, which we can forward and ask the witnesses to
respond as promptly as they can so that their answers may be
made a part of the record.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
And with that, I again thank the witnesses, and declare the
hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:26 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


