- DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 26, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-111

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

70-912 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

OCTOBER 26, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Janet Napolitano, Secretary, Department of Homeland
Security
Oral Testimony.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Judy Chu, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    53
Material submitted by the Honorable Henry C. ``Hank'' Johnson,
Jr., a Representative in Congress from the State of Georgia,
and Member, Committee on the Judiciary.........................    67

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Post-Hearing Questions from the Honorable Janet
Napolitano, Secretary, Department of Homeland Security.........    97

DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Lamar Smith
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Smith, Conyers, Nadler,
Sensenbrenner, Scott, Coble, Lofgren, Gohmert, Quigley, Poe,
Chu, Chaffetz, Griffin, Jackson Lee, Gowdy, Johnson, Adams,
Marino, Pierluisi, Quayle, Gallegly, Deutch, Issa, Sanchez,
King, and Forbes.
Mr. Smith. The Judiciary Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare recesses
of the Committee at any time.
This morning, we welcome Secretary Janet Napolitano to the
Committee for an oversight hearing on the Department of
Homeland Security. The Department of Homeland Security was
created to protect our country from terrorist attacks, enforce
Federal immigration laws and provide disaster response and
assistance.
DHS also performs important law enforcement functions
related to intellectual property and child pornography.
As we begin today's hearing, I'd like to pose two
questions. First, how effectively has DHS secured our borders?
The nonpartisan Government Accounting Office has found that
only 44 percent of the Southwest border is under the
operational control of the Border Patrol. Nearly 450,000
illegal immigrants enter the U.S. each year.
Meanwhile, Mexican drug cartels are out of control and the
violence threatens to spill over into the U.S.
The Administration needs to do more to secure the borders
and protect the American people. Some have claimed what are
supposedly the largest number of removals in history. However,
even President Obama has said the statistics put out by DHS
are, quote, ``A little deceptive.'' And a study by the
Washington Post found that the Administration has inflated its
removal numbers.
My second question is how effectively has DHS protected
jobs for American workers. With the unemployment rate over 9
percent, jobs are scarce, and millions of American families
have been hurt.
According to the Pew Hispanic Center, 7 million people are
working in the U.S. illegally. These jobs should go to legal
workers, and securing these jobs for American workers and legal
immigrants should be a priority of the Federal Government.
Each time DHS arrests, detains or deports an illegal
worker, it creates a job opportunity for an American worker.
Worksite enforcement actions open up jobs for unemployed
American workers.
Unfortunately, worksite enforcement has plummeted under
this Administration. Administrative arrests fell by 77 percent
from 2008 to 2010. Criminal arrests fell by 60 percent,
criminal indictments fell by 57 percent and criminal
convictions fell by 66 percent.
With millions of Americans unemployed, it is hard to
imagine a worse time to cut worksite enforcement efforts by
more than half. It is true that DHS has increased the number of
audits of companies' employment eligibility verification forms.
However, these audits are of questionable benefit. The GAO
has found that, quote, ``ICE officials told us that because
fine amounts are so low, the fines did not provide a meaningful
deterrent. The amount of fines may be, in the opinion of some
ICE officials, so low that they believe that employers view the
fines as a cost of doing business, making the fines an
ineffective deterrent,'' end quote.
And what happens to illegal workers when ICE declines to
arrest them? They go down the street and knock on the door of
the next employer and take jobs away from American workers.
DHS has also signaled that it may grant administrative
amnesty to potentially hundreds of thousands of illegal
immigrants currently in removal proceedings and to many others
who have yet to be placed in proceedings. But we know that when
this Administration issues deferred action to illegal
immigrants, it routinely grants 90 percent of them work
authorization.
How can DHS justify granting work authorization to illegal
immigrants when so many American citizens don't have jobs?
Twenty- three million Americans who are unemployed or can't
find full-time work must wonder why this Administration puts
illegal immigrants ahead of them.
Citizens and legal immigrants should not be forced to
compete with illegal workers for scarce jobs. The
Administration should put the interests of American workers
first.
That concludes my opening statement, and the gentleman from
Michigan, the Ranking Member of the full Committee, Mr.
Conyers, is recognized for his opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Smith, and Members of the
Committee. I join with you in welcoming the Secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security.
And I wanted to start out by reminding everybody on the
Committee that we had some hearings about all these jobs that
immigrants are taking. What was it, in Alabama and Georgia? And
nobody wanted the jobs. They couldn't get--they can't get
anybody for the jobs.
And if there's anybody on the Committee that thinks that,
among the millions of unemployed, that they are looking for
stoop labor, please see me immediately after this hearing so I
can put that misunderstanding to rest.
The heart of this hearing, from my point of view, is to ask
this one question. Who would say that the Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE)--that their time and resources are
better spent raiding kitchens and fields to deport busboys and
farm workers who've been working here for years to support
their families, usually, rather than targeting those convicted
of serious crimes or repeat offenders? And I think within the
resources of this very important agency, we will get the answer
to that.
Now, 2 months ago, the Immigration Subcommittee of the
Judiciary held a hearing on the Chairman's bill, H.R. 2497. I
always loved the title of this bill--``Hinder the
Administration's Legalization Temptation Act, acronym HALT.
Now, 2 weeks ago, that same Subcommittee met again to
conduct oversight with the director of Immigration and Customs
Enforcement, John Morton, and in both hearings, my conservative
friends of the Judiciary leveled essentially the same
criticism--that the President of the United States refuses to
enforce our immigration laws and is dead set on legalizing
hundreds of thousands of undocumented immigrants with the
stroke of a pen, and it was called back-door--a back-door
amnesty strategy, and I'll be waiting carefully to see if I
hear that phrase raised again.
And, of course, this is incorrect. Earlier this year,
Director Morton of ICE issued a series of memoranda identifying
Immigration and Custom Enforcement's priorities, providing
guidance on how ICE employees should exercise discretion to
carry out those priorities. The memos aren't surprising and I
hope that they aren't controversial to anyone.
Given the resources limited that he has, ICE intends to
prioritize, from my understanding of the hearing, the removal
of people who threaten our safety--such as terrorists, such as
criminals--before focusing on people who pose no such threat.
And I will be carefully listening for any objection to that
that might occur.
Now, no agency or department can do it all. They have to
make choices, and I will probably--we will have some of these
choices that the Secretary has to make. The Department of
Homeland Security and the Department of Justice are working
together putting these enforcement priorities into action on a
department-wide basis, and these actions couldn't have come
soon enough.
Our immigration courts are backed up--we know that--that
deportation hearings are being set for, get this--for 2014. And
the Department of Homeland Security would act to alleviate this
embarrassment just makes good common sense.
And so I close, Mr. Chairman, that--asking us to look at
this. Remember, this is the Judiciary Committee of the House of
Representatives, and remember that in the two-and-a-half years
of this Administration, we have deported a record one million
individuals, one--over a million individuals, something that I
do not--I'm not bragging about that, don't get me wrong--
increased worksite enforcement and targeted employers who break
the law by conducting I-9 audits, levying fines, bringing
criminal charges, push for the national expansion of Secure
Communities, despite some opposition from some state
governments or local law enforcement and even some advocacy
groups, and finally increase criminal prosecution of
immigration offenses so much that a legal reentry after
deportation is now the most prosecuted Federal felony in the
country.
So I'm happy to see Ms. Napolitano here and welcome her, as
does all of us on the Committee, for the discussions that will
follow this morning, and thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
Our witness today is Janet Napolitano, Secretary of the
United States Department of Homeland Security.
Sworn in on January 21, 2009, Janet Napolitano is the third
Secretary of DHS. Prior to becoming Secretary, Ms. Napolitano
was in her second term as governor of Arizona. While serving as
governor, she became the first woman to chair the National
Governors Association and was named one of the top five
governors in the country by Time magazine. Ms. Napolitano also
was the first female attorney general of Arizona and served as
U.S. Attorney for the district of Arizona.
Ms. Napolitano was born in New York City and grew up in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Albuquerque, New Mexico. She is a
1979 graduate of Santa Clara University, where she won a Truman
Scholarship and was the university's first female
valedictorian.
She received her Juris Doctor from the University of
Virginia School of Law in 1983. Before entering public office,
Ms. Napolitano served as a clerk for Judge Mary M. Schroeder on
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and practiced
law in Phoenix.
We welcome you today, look forward to your testimony, and
please proceed.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE JANET NAPOLITANO, SECRETARY,
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Napolitano. Well, thank you. Thank you, Chairman Smith
and Ranking Member Conyers and Members of the Committee for the
opportunity to testify this morning.
Today, I would like to update the Committee on the progress
we are making, particularly with respect to our efforts to
prevent terrorism and enhance security, secure and manage our
borders and enforce and administer our Nation's immigration
laws, and I think I will begin there.
The Obama Administration's approach to immigration
enforcement has been widely discussed among those who like to
debate the topic, including Members of this Committee.
Our policies have been simultaneously described as engaging
in a mean-spirited effort to blindly deport record numbers of
illegal immigrants, and alternatively described as
comprehensive amnesty that ignores our responsibility to
enforce the immigration laws.
These opposing views are both incorrect, and it is my hope
that moving forward we can have a civil and fact-based dialogue
about immigration enforcement.
And here are the facts. Overall, in fiscal year 2011, ICE
removed or returned nearly 397,000 individuals, the largest
number in the agency's history. Ninety percent of these
removals fell within one of our priority categories, and 55
percent, or more than 216,000, of those removed were convicted
criminal aliens--an 89 percent increase in the removal of
criminal aliens from fiscal year 2008.
And this includes more than 87,000 individuals convicted of
homicide, sexual offenses, dangerous drugs or driving under the
influence. Of those we removed without a criminal conviction,
more than two-thirds in fiscal year 2011 fell into the priority
categories of recent border crossers or repeat immigration law
violators.
Now, as part of the effort to continue to focus on high-
priority cases, ICE, in partnership with DOJ and across the
Department of Homeland Security, has implemented policies to
ensure those enforcing the immigration laws make appropriate
use of the discretion they already have in deciding the types
of individuals prioritized for removal from the country.
This policy will help immigration judges, the Board of
Immigration Appeals and the Federal courts to focus on
adjudicating high-priority removal cases more swiftly and in
greater numbers, enhancing ICE's ability to remove convicted
criminals.
It will also promote border security, as it sharpens ICE's
focus on recent border entrants and allows for the expansion of
ICE operations along the Southwest border.
We have also stepped up our efforts against employers who
knowingly and repeatedly hire illegal labor and have taken
action to identify visa overstays and to enhance refugee
screening and also to combat human trafficking.
Additionally, since 2009, we have carried out major reforms
to the immigration detention system. These reforms ensure the
health and safety of the detainees in our custody and allow ICE
to maintain a significant, robust detention capacity to carry
out serious immigration enforcement.
So as I hope this makes clear, we cannot on the one hand be
on the verge of removing for the third consecutive year a
record-breaking number of unlawful individuals from the
country, with the highest number of criminal removals in
history, and at the same time be abrogating our law enforcement
responsibilities.
Similarly, exercising discretion with more speed and better
prioritization than at any time in history, protecting victims
of domestic violence, engaging in worksite enforcement rather
than workforce raids, is not cosmetic tinkering. It is real
change with real results, and vesting discretion in our
immigration enforcement officers and immigration lawyers is not
amnesty. It is a prioritization system that begins with finding
and removing individuals who are criminals and repeat
offenders.
Now, at the same time, our officers have the legal
responsibility to remove unlawful individuals from the country.
They will also do so according to our priorities but they will
also do their job. This Administration is committed to making
sure that we have a southern border that is safe, that is
secure, that is open for business.
We are more than 2 years into our Southwest Border
Initiative, and based on previous benchmarks set by the
Congress, it is clear that the additional manpower, technology
and infrastructure we have added are working. Apprehensions
have decreased 36 percent along the Southwest border over the
past 2 years and are less than one-third of what they were at
their peak.
And we have matched decreases in apprehensions--and
apprehensions are a rough way to estimate how many are
attempting to immigrate--we have matched decreases in
apprehensions with increases in seizures of drugs, cash and
weapons. Violent crime in United States border communities has
remained flat or has fallen in the past decade.
And then finally, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services--USCIS--continues to improve our ability to provide
immigration benefits and services to those legally eligible in
a timely and efficient manner by streamlining and modernizing
our operations.
Our priorities are common sense. They enhance public
safety. They help secure the border. They promote the integrity
of the immigration laws.
Yet, I think we all can recognize that more is required to
fully address our Nation's immigration challenges. President
Obama is firm in his commitment to advance immigration reform,
and I personally look forward to working with the Congress in a
bipartisan way to achieve this goal and to continue to set
appropriate benchmarks for our success in the future.
So I want to thank this Committee for its support of our
mission to keep America safe.
I want to thank the men and women who are working day and
night to protect and defend our country, often at great
personal risk. And I look forward to a dialogue with this
Committee on these important issues, or any other issues you
wish to raise.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Napolitano follows:]

__________

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Napolitano.
I'm going to recognize myself for questions and then other
Members will be recognized.
Ms. Napolitano, my first question is this. DHS currently
declines to detain many criminal immigrants that are now held
in our local jails and the result of that is that they are
released into our communities.
The Congressional Research Service says that under this
Administration over half of the criminal immigrants identified,
300,000-plus have been released. Yet, when I ask what crimes
these released criminals have been charged with, DHS responded
that ICE does not track this data.
So we don't even know what crimes were committed by the
criminal immigrants that DHS refused to detain. I am just
wondering if that is the case. Do we in fact not determine what
crimes have been committed and do we not know what crimes were
committed by those individuals that DHS refuses to detain?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Smith. It seems so incredible that we would be
releasing individuals without even knowing what crimes they
might have committed. But I hope there is a good answer.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah. Mr. Chairman, I don't know the--I'm
not personally familiar with the CRS study that you reference.
But we detain and have beds at the number that the Congress
funds, which is roughly around 34,000 beds, and there are
decisions made about----
Mr. Smith. But my question wasn't about the number released
or the beds. It was about do you know the crimes that were
committed by those that you refuse to detain.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I will look into that, Mr. Chairman.
I will assume, because of my work with ICE and in this field
over the past several decades, that detention decisions are
made just as they are made in normal criminal prosecutions--
based on public safety and based on risk of flight.
Mr. Smith. But you don't know whether you know the crimes
that were committed or not?
Ms. Napolitano. I don't know exactly how they track but I
will find out for you.
Mr. Smith. Okay. My information, incredibly enough, is that
you don't know what crimes were committed and these individuals
are still being released, in effect.
A second question is this--that I wrote you in August
requesting to be provided a list of the immigrant criminals
that DHS has declined to detain. Your staff at ICE and DHS have
been cooperative and I appreciate their assistance. I was told
that DHS has generated a list of names that being cleared
before it was given to me.
Instead, a letter I received yesterday from DHS's assistant
secretary for legislative affairs contained no names whatsoever
but simply summary statistics about the Secure Communities
Program. To me, this was not a good faith response. And so, I
am just wondering what happened to the promised cooperation?
And I would like a commitment from you that by 10 a.m. next
Monday I get the information that I was promised and I would
like to be delivered by that time. And can I get a commitment
from you now that I will get that information?
Ms. Napolitano. I will look into that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. You will what?
Ms. Napolitano. I said I will look into that, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Well, let me say to you that it has been 2
months since I requested this information. We've had a good
relationship with your staff. I was told that the list was
available, had to be cleared, and now suddenly the list has
apparently disappeared.
And if I am not given that list as I understood to be
promised that list, I will have no choice but to issue a
subpoena. So I hope we can get that list.
Let me go on to my next question, and you have heard me
mention this in my opening statement. Now, worksite enforcement
has dropped 70 percent over the past 2 years. ICE agents are
instructed not to detain or remove most illegal immigrants
found working illegally in the U.S. These illegal immigrants
can simply walk down the street, knock on the door of another
employer and take another job away from an unemployed American
worker.
At an Immigration Subcommittee hearing 2 weeks ago, ICE
Director John Morton stated that illegal workers not detained,
quote, ``can obviously continue to try to find employment,''
end quote.
So my question is why does the Administration allow illegal
workers to take jobs away from unemployed American workers? Why
do you allow these individuals to walk down the street? Why
don't you make an effort to detain them and remove them and
send them home?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, let me--let me, if I might, address
the numbers and then go to--to the detention. First of all, if
you only look at the numbers in terms of percentages, you are
right. The percentage has dropped in terms of workers who are
being put into removal proceedings. But the base number is very
small.
I mean, between 2008, before this Administration, to fiscal
2011 you are talking about a reduction from between around
5,000 worker removals to 1,500.
You have to look at that in conjunction with the increase
in criminal alien removals, which we have increased almost
100,000 over the same period.
Mr. Smith. Right. Again, I am not talking about criminal
immigrants. I'm talking about----
Ms. Napolitano. I know you are not but I--I am making this
point because, because we have prioritized and because we are
removing more criminal aliens, you are going to see more of
those in detention because they are more serious offenders.
Mr. Smith. Yeah. That--that----
Ms. Napolitano. With respect to the individuals who we find
at worksites, that is really not a case of----
Mr. Smith. Madam Secretary, that really--that was not
responsive to my question and you didn't answer my question,
which was why does the Administration intentionally allow these
illegal workers to walk down the street and take other jobs
from Americans. Why aren't they being detained? Why aren't they
being removed?
Ms. Napolitano. They are being handled the way they have
always been handled, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. No. The previous Administration did a lot better
job at worksite enforcement than this Administration. As you
just admitted----
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would just have to respectfully
disagree.
Mr. Smith. You--you admitted a while ago that my statistics
were right--it is down 70 percent since the last
Administration.
Ms. Napolitano. That is right. And as I tried to explain--
let me say it again. If you actually look at the numbers, yes,
you are right if you only look at 70 percent. But it is a small
part of removal operation, and in exchange for that 3,500
diminution, we have increased the removals of criminal aliens
who are a danger to public safety and I pointed that out.
Mr. Smith. I understand that, and my time has expired. But
we are still talking about thousands of individuals taking jobs
away from American workers.
Ms. Napolitano. Not necessarily, but we can discuss that
further.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers, is recognized.
Mr. Conyers. Can I yield to Jerry Nadler?
Mr. Smith. And the gentleman yields to the gentleman from
New York, Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, there are many and serious problems with
respect to immigrant detention. I want to focus on the repeated
transfers of detainees between ICE facilities.
According to a June 2011 report by Human Rights Watch,
there were about 2 million detainee transfers between 1998 and
2010, often over long distances that required the use of
airplanes. Almost half of all detainees were moved at least
twice.
These transfers lead to inefficient removal hearings and
cost $366 million in transportation alone, facts that should
concern my friends on the other side of the aisle, among
others.
And the problems seem to be growing. Transfers tripled
between 2004 and 2009. Now, moving detainees away from where
they live impedes their ability to retain counsel, often on a
pro bono basis.
Since they are often moved when their removal hearing is
already underway the entire process bogs down, and detainees
lose access to evidence as well as friends and family, which
makes it difficult to show to a court in a bond hearing that
they are not a flight risk, and this results sometimes in
unnecessary and costly detention.
Now, DHS and ICE seem to recognize that a transfer policy
needs reform. In August of 2009, ICE Director Morton announced
a series of changes, including the creation of an Office of
Detention Policy and Planning to revise transfer policy.
In October 2009, Special Advisor to ICE, Dora Schriro,
recommended that detainees who are represented by counsel
should not be transferred outside the area unless there are
exigent health or safety reasons, and when this occurs the
attorney should be notified promptly.
In July of last year, ICE adopted an online locater--
locater system so counsel, friends and family could at least
locate detainees. Despite these steps, however, there still has
not been a comprehensive change to detainee transfer policy.
Now my questions. Madam Secretary, do you agree that we
need to change to the policies which lead to the repeated
transfer of detainees so that we can finally protect their due
process rights and improve the efficiency of our immigration
courts?
Ms. Napolitano. Representative Nadler, there are a number
of reasons why we want to limit transfers of detainees--the
cost, efficiency, access to counsel, access to family members.
The practical problem we confront is that we don't always have
detention beds where we have detainees and that causes there to
be movement.
One of the things we are doing through our Office of
Detention Policy is trying to contract for more beds in some of
our higher intensity areas so that we can limit the number of--
of movement among our detainees.
Mr. Nadler. Do you have any estimate of when the new
policies to appropriately limit the transfers will be in place?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, it is our policy now to limit
transfers. I think the question really is when will we have
contracts for more beds, and as soon as we can get them we will
get them.
Mr. Nadler. So until you have contracts for more beds you
cannot really limit transfers?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, we limit them as much as we can.
Mr. Nadler. Do budget cuts negatively impact your ability
to adopt a more humane and cost-effective transfer policy?
Ms. Napolitano. The Congress gives us a certain amount of--
of money. We have to operate as efficiently as possible within
the scope of that appropriation. We cannot remove 10 million
people from this country. We have to make choices. We have to
prioritize.
But it that conjunction, yes. If we don't have the money to
move and if, more importantly, the Justice Department, the
marshals, everybody else involved in the system doesn't have
the ability to--to manage that it--it is a problem.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Among many problems relating to
these transfers one that struck me was the impact it has on
detainees' ability to be represented by counsel.
A June--a recent June report from Human Rights Watch says,
and I quote, ``Attorneys with decades of experience told us
that they had--that they had not once received prior notice
from ICE of an impending transfer. ICE often relies on
detainees themselves to notify attorneys. But the transfers
arise suddenly and detainees are routinely prevented from or
are otherwise unable to make the necessary call. As a result,
attorneys have to search the online detainee locator for their
clients' new locations. Once a transferred client is found, the
challenges inherent in conducting legal representation across
thousands of miles can completely sever the attorney-client
relationship. This is especially true when the same person is
transferred repeatedly.''
That's the quote. Now, this is all very problematic,
obviously. Can you commit to me and to the Committee that you
will take whatever the steps necessary to try to reduce
significantly detainee transfers far away from counsel? In
other words, the location of counsel should be one of the
major--should be a determinant in--in who gets transferred to
where. Can this be a part of ICE's new policy on detainee
transfers?
Ms. Napolitano. I think it should be one of the factors
taken into account and--and I do think, you know, the--the fact
that we now have a locator when we didn't have one before, it
sounds like a simple thing but given the number of people who
run through the immigration system in a given year, it--it was
a difficult IT thing to--to get done because it is a fast-
moving system.
But that will help counsel as well.
Mr. Nadler. And--and would you agree that it would be a
better practice and policy to at least notify counsel when his
or her client has been transferred and not make them look
around on the online system?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think to the extent possible we
should do that.
Mr. Smith. And the gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. And the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Sensenbrenner, is recognized.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, it is no secret that you don't like the
REAL ID Act and you have given numerous statements and speeches
that you would like to see the REAL ID Act repealed and in its
place put something called PASS ID on the books.
Well, that is not going to happen. The suggestion didn't
get off the ground in the last Congress and it has not gotten
off the ground in this Congress.
The current exemption or extension that the DHS has given
on REAL ID To the states is now January 15th, 2013. Are you
going to extend it again?
Ms. Napolitano. Representative Sensenbrenner, first of all,
I cannot take sole credit for opposing REAL ID. When I was
involved with the National Governors Association it was
bipartisan and uniform amongst all the governors that the--the
line in the appropriations bill that was REAL ID did not
appropriately incorporate concerns of state officials on how
you actually implement, and was an unfunded mandate.
That being the case, we did work with the governors on PASS
ID and, unfortunately, for whatever reasons the Congress
decided they didn't want to take that up. It would have been
better to do so. Now we have a bill the governors still are
uncomfortable with implementing. They have budget constraints
of their own.
But we agree with the goal of the bill, and the goal of the
bill, of course, is to have a more secure, particularly,
driver's license. So we are working with the states and a
number of them--I think 22 now--are almost at the point where
they would meet REAL ID. Others are along the way.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Are you going to--are you going to drop
the boom on the states that refuse to comply or can't comply as
of January 15th, 2013? Meaning that the non-compliant driver's
license, can that be used to enter Federal buildings, nuclear
power plants, get on a planes during the TSA inspection or is
there going to be a further delay in this?
Ms. Napolitano. Representative Sensenbrenner, I can't say
right now. There's a--a year between now and then to work with
the states. I think the governors generally agree with the goal
of REAL ID. It's just how you get there.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, they are not going to get
unilateral revenue sharing out of the Congress on this. So they
can increase the cost of driver's licenses, as my state has.
But your REAL ID rules review in your shop only consists of
three professional staff members and one administrative support
person.
And as there are more documents that are submitted by the
states that are not in compliance, how do you expect to get
through that paperwork with just four people working on it?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Representative Sensenbrenner, if we
need to put some more people on that project we will. I have
not been informed that we need to do so.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Mm-hmm. Now, I'm getting back to the
question that I asked and I don't think you answered--as the--
if states are out of compliance on January 15th, 2013, are DHS
personnel going to be instructed not to accept noncompliant
identification to get into the Federal facilities or to get on
a plane?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Representative Sensenbrenner, I--I
really don't like to speculate on things that could happen over
a year from now. I am going to work with the states. We will
work with the states and bring them into compliance if we can.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. When are you going to start
informing the states of how and when REAL ID will be enforced?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, we--we stay in regular contact with
the governors primarily through the NGA about REAL ID. And I
suspect when they have their winter meeting here in January
that will be one of the topics that we take up with them.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, the 9/11 Commission was very firm
in saying that we had to have secure ID after looking at the--
the IDs that the 19 hijackers were able to get for themselves.
And the longer this Administration and the governors that don't
want to do this delay this, the more risk the American public
has on a terrorist that wants to commit a major act of
terrorism.
And I spent a lot of time during my chairmanship to try to
prevent that from happening. This is still a hole in the system
that can be exploited and it is not due to a lack of
congressional action, for once.
It is due to a lack of implementation by DHS and it is due
to a lack of will by the governors in providing for the safety
and security of their driver's licenses.
I am not for a national ID card. But the longer this goes
on, if there is a major terrorist attack because REAL ID has
not been implemented for whatever reason, there will be a huge
push here for a national ID card.
So I think it is in the interest of everybody to make sure
that REAL ID is implemented the way it was written and passed
in 2005.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Scott, is recognized.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Madam Secretary, the Alabama law that
was recently passed allows Alabama to inquire into immigration
status. Is the Department of Homeland Security working with
Alabama in helping them implement that law?
Ms. Napolitano. Representative Scott, could you--is your
microphone----
Mr. Scott. Alabama has--Alabama's immigration law allow--
allows Alabama officials to inquire as to immigration status.
Is the Department of Homeland Security working with Alabama to
help them implement that law?
Ms. Napolitano. Not in that sense. We have been working
with the Department of Justice on its challenge to that law.
Mr. Scott. Okay. And is there any way that--and how would
that law affect Hispanic citizens?
Ms. Napolitano. It--you know, I don't know the answer to
that question right now. The law has just gone into effect.
Mr. Scott. Well, I mean, you--you would have to assume that
Hispanic citizens would be adversely affected because they
would have to be showing ID about everywhere they go, other--
a--a situation that other citizens would not have to do.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that should be a real concern. You
are correct.
Mr. Scott. The Prison Rape Elimination Act--has that been
applied to ICE facilities?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes. We have a zero tolerance policy for
sexual harassment or misconduct by detention officers, be they
those who are actual public employees or--or contracted.
Mr. Scott. And how--how are we doing on that? Have there
been any complaints of sexual harassment and illegal sexual
activity?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, there are--there are complaints. And
when there--there are, the instruction is that they are to be
explored and they are to make sure that if there needs to be
corrective action taken, whatever that may be under the
circumstances, that is to be done.
Mr. Scott. How are we doing in that--in that area?
Ms. Napolitano. My understanding is that we are being very
firm in this area and that we are dealing with those complaints
expeditiously.
Mr. Scott. Are you familiar with the Frontline expose from
a few weeks ago?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Scott. Was that accurate?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Scott. Could you give an update on the TSA work with
religious groups as far as how people with religious dress can
get through security?
Ms. Napolitano. We are working--you know, the--the issue
for us is what to do with those who wear--who have bulky
clothing on, and particularly bulky head gear, and this can
affect particular religious groups and religious beliefs. We
have a process that we follow that I think has accommodated
both religious group beliefs and our security needs.
But we continue to have ongoing dialogue as--as I think we
should.
Mr. Scott. Within ICE, do you have detainees with mental
illness that causes problems, like people who are incompetent
that stay in ICE kind of limbo indefinitely?
Ms. Napolitano. Given the number of people that we have in
detention at any given time and over the course of a year, we--
I am certain we have some detainees who have mental health
issues as well as detainees who--of course, who have physical
health issues.
Mr. Scott. Now, what is done for those that are kind of in
limbo--those who are mentally incompetent that just kind of sit
there indefinitely?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, one of the things that we are trying
to do by the prioritization process and by reviewing the cases
currently on the master docket is to speed up the time by which
those in detention can actually have their cases heard. That is
one of the impetuses behind the case-by-case review.
Mr. Scott. And--and do we have people kind of in limbo that
are there indefinitely?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there are people in limbo in the
immigration system generally, and the fact that there are
people in limbo is one of the reasons why we hope at some point
in time the Congress could take up the overall immigration
system and immigration reform.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Coble?
Mr. Coble. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam
Secretary, good to have you on the Hill. Good to have you with
us.
Do you, Madam Secretary, agree with President Obama's
statement that removal numbers are deceptive and what--do you
know what he meant by that?
I am thinking he may have been referring to voluntary
returns.
Ms. Napolitano. No. I think what he was referring to, if I
recall the context of that quotation, Representative, was that
overall removal numbers are up.
As I said, we removed 397,000 people last year, more than
ever before, but he was explaining that you also have to look
at what comprise--what was in that number and he was referring
to the fact that we have greatly increased the number of
criminal aliens that are removed within the context of the
overall number.
Mr. Coble. So voluntary returns would not have been part of
his statement on that?
Ms. Napolitano. I don't believe so, no.
Mr. Coble. Over the length, Madam Secretary, of the Bush
Administration, I am told that yearly removals went up in
excess of 90 percent. Will the current Administration come
close to this rate of increase?
Ms. Napolitano. I would have to check those numbers. My
under--I don't know where those numbers come from.
Mr. Coble. And I don't recall my source. If you will get
back to us on that, I would appreciate that.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, sir.
Mr. Coble. Yesterday--well, strike that. Last week, you
told Senator Durbin that it cost in the neighborhood of $23,000
to $30,000 to annually remove one person. Earlier this year,
however, ICE provided the Judiciary Committee with data
indicating a total cost of removal of $12,198.
So the disparity is significant. Have you seen ICE's
immigration enforcement lifestyle unit cost report?
Ms. Napolitano. I don't know whether I have seen that
report. The number I gave was what it cost to go through the
entire removal including through the court system, and that is
an estimate, of course.
I don't know whether the ICE number was with respect to
ICE's part of that only. So we will--we will get back to you on
that as well.
Mr. Coble. I would be appreciative to you if you do that.
Now, again, and I'm going to blank on my source, I don't recall
where I read this or heard it, but I have heard that DHS might
consider reopening cases in which aliens with final orders of
removal have already been removed from the United States.
Is there any credence to that?
Ms. Napolitano. That would be news to me.
Mr. Coble. Okay. If you could check that out.
Ms. Napolitano. I--yes. I don't--I don't think that is
accurate.
Mr. Coble. Okay. Might DHS reopen cases in which final
orders of removal have already been removed? You say this is
not known to you?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Coble. Okay. Last week, again, during your appearance
before the Senate Judiciary Committee you testified that absent
unusual circumstances, cases with final removal orders will not
be reopened.
If you would, Madam Secretary, elaborate on what would
constitute an unusual circumstance.
Ms. Napolitano. Oh, it is hard to say, Representative.
There are so many human factors that go into immigration. There
are so many--so many variations in the cases.
It--one might be where someone is needed to come back to be
a witness in another ongoing and unrelated criminal prosecution
and where the Department of Justice asks us to bring someone
back.
Mr. Coble. Prosecutorial discretion is already being
exercised as it has always been by the officers and agents on
the front lines who are closest to the facts of the cases
involved.
Let me put a two-part question to you. Why do DHS and
Department of Justice bureaucrats in Washington have to go back
and double-check the work and expertise of those front-line law
enforcement professionals?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Representative--and I have led large
prosecution offices many times, both as a U.S. Attorney and an
attorney general, and it is important to the field for
fairness, for consistency to have guidance as to what the
prosecutorial priorities are and that is exactly what we have
been doing.
We have a big field, lot of agents out there. You are
right, they have a lot of expertise, but their expertise--and
they like this. It puts their cases--they know where they stand
and where our priorities are--puts them into an overall
framework.
Mr. Coble. I thank you, Madam. Mr. Chairman, I see my red
light is illuminating so I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Coble.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Lofgren?
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here with our Committee.
I want to touch first on a cyber security issue. DNSSEC,
which is the Domain Name System Security Extensions, was
ordered--deployed across the Federal Government in 2008 by OMB,
and in 2010, the White House said that the DNSSEC for the
Internet's root zone was a major milestone for Internet
security.
On the Homeland Security website, DNSSEC is quoted as being
of critical importance to securing a Federal Internet domain.
So here's my question. Do you think it is important that U.S.
government policies toward the Internet should preserve the
effectiveness of DNSSEC and other authentication technologies
for a cyber security point of view?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you very much.
I want to get into the immigration issue, the detention
issue.
Last week, the ACLU filed a lawsuit--Doe v. Neveleff--
accusing ICE of failing to protect female detainees from sexual
assault by a private prison guard at Hutto Detention Facility.
Nine women are specifically identified as being--having
been sexually assaulted by a guard when he transported them out
of the facility during a release process without appropriate
supervision and that countless others may have been assaulted.
In April this year, the National Immigrant Justice Center
filed a complaint with your Office for Civil Rights and Civil
Liberties alleging serious mistreatment of 13 gay and
transgender detainees, alleging sexual assault by guards and
fellow detainees, denial of medical care, use of long-term
solitary confinement, and 36 of my colleagues brought this
complaint to your attention and to the attorney general earlier
this year and I understand it is still under review.
Now, going back to Mr. Scott's question about the rape--
Prison Rape Elimination Act--it is my understanding that the
Department of Justice has specifically excluded immigration
detention facilities from their proposed rule. They seem to be
relying on ICE's detention standards on sexual abuse, but those
are not mandatory. They lack the force of law.
So I am wondering if, by your answer to Mr. Scott, you are
agreeing that that Prison Rape Elimination Act ought to, in
fact, be imposed on detention standards--in ICE detention.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, let me answer in two parts. One is
that I would obviously have to look at the act but--before
making a blanket agreement. But going to the problem that--that
we are trying to address, which is if there is inappropriate,
wrong or criminal conduct, and it can be in some circumstances
criminal, by officers against detainees, that needs to be dealt
with and it needs to be dealt with efficiently, firmly and
quickly and that--and we have a zero tolerance policy for that
conduct.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, you inherited an awful mess when--in
terms of detention when you came in. There were a lot of
stories in the--in the New York Times, the Washington Post.
There were deaths in detention, and you brought in an expert to
try and put some order to it. There was a report that was a
pretty good report and it doesn't look to me, but I guess this
is a question, that we have actually implemented that report
fully.
Can you address that?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would say we have implemented good
measures of that report and we use it as our guidepost. We did
create a separate office within ICE to deal solely with
detention.
We eliminated a number of the contractors that we were
dealing with and consolidated facilities.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, let me do this. Let me--I see my yellow
light on. I don't want to be rude but I know the Chairman's
going to gavel me down. Perhaps I can follow up with some of
the detailed questions I have with you.
I have a final question on how we are going to interact
with the new Alabama law. As you know, their new law makes it a
felony for an undocumented person to engage in any business
transaction with a government entity.
What that means is if you had a mother who is undocumented
and she gets a library card for both of her U.S. citizen
children, she committed two felonies.
Under our detention and removal priorities, that woman who
got two library cards would be the worst of the worst to be
deported. How are we going to deal with that Alabama law in our
priorities in Mr. Morton's memo?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, the scenario you depict is not within
our priorities and it is--you know, the purpose of the
litigation we have undertaken is--the underlying principle is
that it is for the Federal Government to set immigration law
enforcement priorities.
Ms. Lofgren. So we will look beyond the mere conviction?
Ms. Napolitano. We will look at the cases individually,
yes, as we will in other states as well.
Ms. Lofgren. Very good.
Ms. Napolitano. Not just in Alabama.
Ms. Lofgren. Very good. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Lofgren.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary, for being here.
Just for my own edification, did the president get any
information or guidance from you or anyone in your department
before his decision to support the ouster of President Mubarak
and also to assist the rebels in Libya?
Ms. Napolitano. He did not get any information from me or
my department, to my knowledge.
Mr. Gohmert. You didn't give any guidance on that at all--
nobody from your--Homeland Security did that?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Did the President get any information or
guidance from Homeland Security before his decision to pull out
the troops from Iraq or a drawdown in Afghanistan? Do you
assist in that at all or anybody from your department?
Ms. Napolitano. Again, these are not matters really within
the purview of the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. So they were considered completely
unrelated to our own homeland security?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, you can--Homeland Security covers so
many fields that I wouldn't--that what I would say simply is,
if the question is were we involved in that----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, the question was as it was.
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Was I involved in that
decision.
Mr. Gohmert. Did you provide information that would have
been utilized in any of those decisions?
Ms. Napolitano. Not that I--not that I know of.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Last year, Admiral Mullen said that--his
words--the national debt is the single biggest threat to our
national security. We have millions of people coming into this
country on visas, some illegally, who come in and get health
care and leave without paying. It is an ongoing problem.
We now are seeing that there will be Americans who are not
getting health care as quickly as they need or that they need
because it appears we are moving to rationed care. So it should
be a very important issue.
We have inquired of the State Department about the
applications for visas. They tell us that there is no provision
in the application that indicates whether they have been
diagnosed with any condition--heart problems, cancer,
pregnancies, needed surgeries--on the application for a visa.
So that is not considered at all when people come in.
We are also told by the State Department that even though
the spouse's name is on the application, they don't normally
ever check the spouse's name on the terrorist watch list before
deciding to approve the benefits of a visa.
Do you think that would be a good idea to check the
spouse's name on the terrorist watch list or do you concur that
there is just not time and it is not worth it?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I can't answer because I haven't seen
what the State Department responded to or what they----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, I am just--that wasn't my question to
you. My question to you is would it be a good idea to check the
spouse is on the terrorist watch list.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think that one of the--the things
that we have been able to do over the past several years is to
unify databases, unify search engines in such a way that those
kinds of security checks can be more easily done.
Mr. Gohmert. But if they don't do the checks it is a
problem, isn't it?
Ms. Napolitano. It could be a problem. But, again, I don't
know about that.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. All right. Let me move on.
Do--do you make the final decision as to who is put on your
Countering Violent Extremism Working Group?
Ms. Napolitano. We have an individual in the department who
is the lead on CVE and so----
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Do you--are you consulted at all on who
is put on that working group?
Ms. Napolitano. I have not been, no.
Mr. Gohmert. All right.
Are you aware that the president of ISNA, Imam Magid, is a
member of that working group, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. I can't answer that. I don't know whether
that is an accurate statement or not.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Well, you can go look at your own
website and find the documentation. He has been on your working
group, the Countering Violence--Violent Extremism. Do you know
how many of the members of your Countering Violent Extremism
are members of Muslim Brotherhood?
Ms. Napolitano. Again, since I--I am not involved in the
appointment but if I might--if I might just----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, let me--my time is running out, so I
really don't have time but----
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. If I might elaborate on my
answer.
Mr. Gohmert [continuing]. But I have got a very serious
question that needs to be confronted.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would be happy to look into that.
Mr. Gohmert. Are you familiar with Mohamed--are you
familiar with----
Ms. Napolitano. Sir--sir, I would like the ability to
expand on my answer, if that is all right with you.
Mr. Gohmert. I don't have time. I am running out and I
can't be filibustered.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, okay.
Mr. Gohmert. But let me ask you, Mohamed Elibiary is--was a
member of the working group. You promoted him, and it said
there--I have got articles here that say you swore him in as a
member now of your, let's see, the Homeland Security Advisory
Group. He has apparently been given a secret clearance. Do you
know, Mr. Elibiary?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Gohmert. OK. Were you aware he had a secret clearance?
Ms. Napolitano. I believe everybody on the Homeland
Security Advisory Council ultimately gets a secret clearance
because of the materials they would get.
Mr. Gohmert. Would you be surprised if they--well, I don't
have time. But were you aware that he spoke at the big event in
Texas honoring the Ayatollah Khomeini?
Ms. Napolitano. I am not aware of all the places he has
spoken.
Mr. Smith. The Chairman's time has expired.
Mr. Gohmert. But may I--if I could just have 15 seconds.
This is critical.
Secretary, were you aware that a week ago today, from his
home computer he accessed the SLIC database, got information
off and has been shopping a story to national media on
Islamophobia directed at the governor of Texas and the security
folks there in Texas? Were you aware of that?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. I'm telling you it happened. Do we need to
appoint somebody or will you have that investigated yourself,
and if so, by whom?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, since I don't know the facts, I will
have to look into the facts.
Mr. Gohmert. So you will be the one to make that call?
Ms. Napolitano. We will have somebody, and it will be
myself or someone.
Mr. Gohmert. Does it concern you at all that it happened? I
am telling you it happened.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Doesn't come----
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Quigley, is
recognized.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here today.
As you know, I am the sponsor of the Secure Travel and
Counterterrorism Partnership Program Act, which would allow you
to bring additional eligible countries into the visa waiver
program by modifying the primary qualifying criteria for entry.
I am doing that with many others, including Mr. Chaffetz, from
this Committee.
On Wednesday, October 5th, the House Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Intelligence held a
hearing on what DHS is doing regarding security and safety for
international travel.
At that hearing, Mr. Heyman testified and spoke to the
issue of the visa waiver program and said that it would be--he
thought it would be terrific to expand visa waiver.
He didn't have the technical specifications about the
department's data capabilities, but he did say that any changes
would be rolled over--rolled out over a period of time and they
would allow DHS to meet the necessary requirements.
What I have been telling folks about why I support this
program is that it is not your father's visa waiver program--
that your agency and others have been working hard to increase
the security in this program and how it would perform under
existing programs and additional in countries.
I was hoping that you might speak about what the department
is doing, the work on this data and what we might be seeing in
the coming weeks and months that would increase our knowledge
about who is coming and going under existing programs and under
countries like Poland that, I think, should have been part of
this program for a long time.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Representative Quigley, we would like
to provide not only technical assistance on review of that but
support. You know, Poland's been an ally of ours for a long
time. They are--they are--we have a very good relationship with
Poland. So that is, I think, would be a good thing for the
United States to do.
With respect to visa waiver generally, one of the things,
as I was explaining earlier, we have been able to do over the
past several years is to really make our data systems, both
biographic and biometric, much more robust in a way that gives
us a lot of the security features of the old visa--of visas
without necessarily having a visa issued.
Part of this, of course, is what we have done to
incorporate ESTA with respect to flights leaving for the United
States. Part of it has to do, again, with uniting CBP databases
with TSA databases in a way they weren't united prior to 2009.
Mr. Quigley. I think you testified earlier to the Senate
about some of this, and you were stressing biographic
information and the new research that is being done and the new
work you are doing, why that is as important or more important
or more feasible than biometrics. Could you focus on that for a
minute?
Ms. Napolitano. That is right. Well, biometric, as we have
looked at it, particularly for exit, is extraordinarily
expensive. And what we have found is by greater use of much
more robust biographic data, we really get to 99 percent of
what you would have with a very expensive biometric system.
Mr. Quigley. In--in a nutshell, can you explain to those
new to this issue why countries that participate in a visa
waiver program, especially under this new information you are
requiring, actually makes us safer?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, because part of the agreement to
engage or be a visa waiver country, part of that agreement is
also the agreement to sign other agreements; for example, one
called the PCSC--the Preventing and Combating Serious Crime--
which relates to the exchange of criminal history databases.
So in exchange for a visa waiver, there are other
agreements that we get from the countries in the program.
Mr. Quigley. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Poe, is recognized.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here, Madam Secretary.
The GAO has reported that 44 percent of the border is
somewhat secure. Fifty-six percent is not secure. Do you agree
with that statistic?
Ms. Napolitano. No, and I don't think that is exactly what
they said, and I have testified to this several times,
Representative. They were using the phrase ``operational
control,'' which is a term of art within the Border Patrol.
It is actually somewhat misleading because it doesn't
capture not--not just the--the Border Patrol, but the
technology and infrastructure that goes along with it. So it is
not an accurate statement.
Mr. Poe. So what would you say is secure? So it is not an
accurate statement?
Ms. Napolitano. It is not an accurate statement, no.
Mr. Poe. All right. So who controls the other 56 percent if
we don't have operational control?
Ms. Napolitano. No. We--we have--we have the responsibility
for that entire border, as you know. It includes a----
Mr. Poe. So who controls it?
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Amount of manpower and
technology and infrastructure we have put down at the border.
It is a very different border than it was even three or 4 years
ago.
Mr. Poe. I agree. It is worse.
The Iranians, apparently, think our border is less secure
than we do. Otherwise, they wouldn't have gone to Mexico to
work with supposedly the Zetas to smuggle in explosives into
the United States.
What do the Iranians know about the cross-border traffic of
the Zetas or other drug cartels that we are missing? In my
opinion, the Zetas, other drug cartels, have--they have access
to the United States. They have access back to Mexico.
So it seems like the Iranians, obviously, know something
about the--the lax border than we do.
The Bureau of Prisons says that 27 percent of the people in
the Federal penitentiary--27 percent--are foreign criminal
aliens. That means they are illegally in the United States when
they commit a felony. All of those 27 percent--a fourth of the
population in the Federal penitentiaries--got here some way,
and they got here illegally, according to the statistics of the
Bureau of Prisons.
And if the border is so secure--let me give you some
insight as to the Texas border where I have been numerous times
in areas that aren't exactly as safe as you claim.
The sheriffs--on any given day, we will call the sheriffs
in the border jails and say, how many people are in your jail
that are foreign nationals? Not criminal aliens--foreign
nationals.
The most recent one is a--I have the border counties--and
the average is about 34.5 percent of the people in Texas border
jails are from foreign countries. Now, these are cross-border
criminals. These are people who come in the United States, many
of them commit their crimes and then they go back to where they
came from--into Mexico--unless they are caught by local law
enforcement.
These aren't people in jail with immigration violations.
Based on your experience, do you think 34 percent is a high
number of foreign nationals in anybody's jail?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I--I----
Mr. Poe. I mean, either you do or you don't.
Ms. Napolitano. Listen----
Mr. Poe. I am listening. You listen. Answer the question.
You're a lawyer. You know to answer the question and not just
ramble so that the time expires.
Do you think 34.5 percent of the people in jail being from
foreign countries is a high number or not?
Ms. Napolitano. The border communities in Texas, Arizona,
New Mexico and California have either had violent crime rates
the same or decreasing in the last 5 years, and dramatically
so. They are listed--El Paso, Austin, San Diego--among the
safest communities in the United States. We have, and that does
not mean----
Mr. Poe. Reclaiming my time. Sorry. Reclaiming my time.
I'm not talking about specific towns--El Paso. The crime is
in between the ports of entry. It is not necessarily in
Brownsville or San Diego or in the city of El Paso. The crime
is in between. The jails are occupied by 34 percent foreign
nationals.
My question is simple. Do you think that is a high number?
Either you do or you don't.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, that is one of the--if that is
accurate--and I don't know that it is accurate--if it is
accurate, it is one of the reasons we installed Secure
Communities in the border jails first.
Mr. Poe. Let me ask you another question.
The 20-point deferred prosecution memo that came out--Mr.
Morton testified that there was White House input on that. Do
you agree with his statement when he testified before us that
there was White House input on the 20 points deferred
prosecution?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think the memo was prosecutorial
discretion, not deferred prosecution.
Mr. Poe. That's correct. I'm sorry. Prosecution discretion.
Ms. Napolitano. And--well, because immigration involves two
major agencies--DHS and DOJ--it is entirely appropriate, and
yes, there was coordination with the White House.
Mr. Poe. Do you know of statutory authority, not court
authority, statutory authority for deferred prosecution?
Congress, that is us, Congress passing laws allowing for
deferred prosecution, or prosecutorial discretion. I'm sorry.
Prosecutorial discretion.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there--you know, you forget Congress.
You go back to Article 2, Sections 1 and 3 of the Constitution.
Mr. Poe. Well, of course, the Constitution does say that
the--Congress is to be responsible for naturalization and
making the laws on naturalization, not the Executive Branch. So
if you want to quote the Constitution you might want to----
Ms. Napolitano. Well, the----
Mr. Poe [continuing]. Read that section as well.
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Section in the--Article 2,
Section 3 says, ``The Executive Branch shall make sure the laws
are carried out.'' And that has been interpreted by the U.S.
Supreme Court and by statute to mean----
Mr. Poe. What's the statute?
Ms. Napolitano. That the Executive Branch has prosecutorial
discretion.
Mr. Poe. I didn't ask you about the Heckler case. You
noticed I didn't ask you about that. I am asking about
constitutional, legislative, statutory authority to ignore
portions of the law based on a memo. Is there statutory
authority to do that?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there----
Mr. Poe. The Constitution does say that the----
Ms. Napolitano. Wait.
Mr. Poe. Wait a minute. I'm talking.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Poe. The Constitution does say that the Executive
Branch is to enforce the law of the land--carefully enforce the
law of the land--and it seems to me the Executive Branch is
giving a pass to a lot of folks under the guise of
prosecutorial discretion. I will yield back my time.
Mr. Smith. Okay. The gentleman's time has expired. Which--
--
Ms. Napolitano. Mr. Chairman--Mr. Chairman, may I--may I
respond or----
Mr. Smith. Yeah.
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Would you like me to wait?
Mr. Smith. Madam Secretary, please respond to the question.
Sure.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah. I would--I would simply say that
prosecutorial discretion by prosecutors, by immigration has
been enforced and--and done by Republican and Democratic
administrations, and it makes sense.
Mr. Smith. Okay. And let me also add and say to the
gentleman from Texas that the GAO study that he referred to
which found that only 44 percent of the border was under
operational control found that only 15 percent of the border
was under actual control. So it is a lot less than might--than
many people might think.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, is recognized.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Madam Secretary, I want to thank you for moving forward
with clearer guidelines for ICE officers to use prosecutorial
discretion on these immigration cases. And I think, in fact,
that it uses our available resources to target those who need
it the most, which is serious felons, drug traffickers, and
others who would do America harm.
This is just common sense. We should be using our scarce
taxpayer dollars not to deport students but to primarily
convict--to deport those convicted of violent felonies who pose
a threat to public safety. And though some say that you are
doing something new here, I know that all law enforcement
bodies set priorities and that our immigration enforcement
agencies are not different.
Republicans and Democrats have called for more discretion
and your agency under both Republican and Democratic
administrations have issued policies on, and required the use
of, prosecutorial discretion. And, in fact, as a long-time
prosecutor, you know better than most that you can't enforce
the law and prosecute if you can't get it on the court's
docket.
Our immigration court system is incredibly backlogged. More
than 300 cases--300,000 cases are pending at any time and
immigration judges are scheduling hearings for 2014. So it
makes sense that you are now reviewing that backlogged docket
to--to sort through the cases.
And isn't it right that Code 6 USC 202 specifically directs
you to establish national immigration enforcement policies and
priorities? And in Congress' annual appropriations bills, have
we not directed you to repeatedly prioritize the removal of
serious criminal aliens, and funded programs that specifically
target such--such populations?
And, in fact, in this effort could you tell me how it
enhances your ability to swiftly remove people who are a
priority to the agency?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, the answer is yes. Congress has given
such direction. I don't know the exact number of the citation
but I think that is accurate.
What we are doing is--is if you--if you think about the
immigration system in segments, the segment is who is being
picked up for removal and that is where we are prioritizing our
enforcement efforts.
So you get operations like Cross Check, where we picked up
thousands of criminal fugitives just a--a couple of weekends
ago. Then we have the--the 300,000 or so cases already on the
master docket, and it turns out those aren't prioritized at
all. And so you get these never-ending court dates that just
get pushed back and back and back, as you referenced.
What we are doing is going through those to make decisions
as to which should come first in order to facilitate the
movement of the--the detainee docket through the removal
process and to facilitate the removal of criminal aliens from
the country. It is one of the reasons why we are going to
continue to see those numbers go up.
Ms. Chu. And why is this not amnesty and not a free pass?
Ms. Napolitano. I--I couldn't hear you with the bell.
Excuse me?
Ms. Chu. Why is--is your effort toward prosecutorial
discretion not an amnesty, as some claim, and not a free pass?
Ms. Napolitano. Oh, it is--it is clearly not. Yeah, it is
what law enforcement does on a routine basis, which is to
evaluate cases on their facts and make decisions as to which
one merit the use of the government's resources.
Ms. Chu. Thank you for that.
I'm going to turn toward a different topic and it is on
TSA--TSA and the racial profiling issue. First, I'd like to ask
unanimous consent that this letter from the Sikh Coalition can
be entered into the record expressing their current concerns
about the treatment by TSA.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Ms. Chu. Well, this year marked the 10th anniversary of 9/
11, yet South Asians continue to be the victim of
discrimination. And here in the Judiciary Committee I heard the
anguished testimony of Sikh Americans who are pulled out of
lines at airports just because they were wearing a turban. They
were put in glass cages on display like some animal--pulled
into rooms and interrogated for hours where even their babies
were searched, yet no Sikh has ever committed a terrorist
attack in the United States.
But when Sikhs complain about this racial profiling, there
have just been a--a lack of response from the TSA, and when
guidelines are passed down many times they are ignored. Both
TSA and the Department of Homeland Security claim to have a
robust complaint and redress system.
However, the experience for Sikh travelers have been
woefully inadequate. Complaints oftentimes go unanswered for
several months. And, in fact, there was an instance of one
complaint that I looked at where their response took 6 months
and it basically said you don't have any documentation.
Now, we met with Administrator Pistole and he said that
they are going to have a review of the complaint system. I
wanted to know what the status is of that review. We have
waited for 3 months for some kind of system to be put into
place that--that would be more timely.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, there is that review, and our Civil
Rights and Civil Liberties group has been looking into the--
that issue specifically. We have greatly reduced the time it
takes to address complaints. We do have outreach to the Sikh
and other communities.
I would suggest, however, that, you know, we are very
respectful of the Sikh community and--and work with them on a
number of areas. The issue from a TSA security perspective is
if there is bulky headgear or bulky clothing, the current
technology cannot ascertain whether there may be something in
it of an--that is explosive and they have to find some way to
clear that passenger.
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired. Thank you,
Ms. Chu.
The gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz?
Mr. Chaffetz. Madam Secretary, thank you for being here.
You said you disagreed with the GAO analysis of the
percentage of the border that is secure. What percentage of the
border do you think is secure?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think that having lived and worked
on that border----
Mr. Chaffetz. I'm just looking for a number. I got to go
very quickly.
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. And having lived and worked on
that border most of my--my life, I say it is as secure as it
has ever been. But it is an ongoing project.
Mr. Chaffetz. Like what--do you have a percentage? You
don't have a percentage?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would say it is very secure, Mr.
Chaffetz. [Laughter.]
Mr. Chaffetz. Okay. When did you first speak with Eric
Holder about ``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. I don't believe I have ever spoken with
Eric Holder about ``Fast and Furious.''
Mr. Chaffetz. How many--how many agents--since you have
taken office, how many of your agents have been killed in the
line of duty?
Ms. Napolitano. Oh, too many.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do you know the--do you have any number?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would--I would have to double-check
but I would say at least 12.
Mr. Chaffetz. How many guns from ``Fast and Furious''
operation were detected crossing the border?
Ms. Napolitano. I do not know.
Mr. Chaffetz. How many guns from ``Fast and Furious'' were
seized at the border?
Ms. Napolitano. I do not know.
Mr. Chaffetz. Why is it that an operation that big and that
important and that much in the news you don't have the details
of?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Representative, as you know, it was
an ATF operation.
Mr. Chaffetz. In 2009, we know of two incidences where ICE
ceased investigating at the request of the ATF.
Are there any other instances where you were asked--your
department, your agency, was asked not to pursue cases that
potentially had a conflict with ``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. In the wake of your investigation of ``Fast
and Furious'' I have been made aware of those two ICE
instances. I don't think I have been made aware of any others.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me go to testimony that you had last
week. Last week you were with Senator Grassley. You were asked
about communication with Mr. Burke regarding ``Operation Fast
and Furious.'' Question from Senator Grassley: ``Have you had
some communications?''
Your response, and I will read it very quickly: ``No, not
about 'Fast and Furious.' When Agent Terry was killed it was
December 14th. I went to Arizona a few days thereafter to meet
with FBI agents and assistant U.S. Attorneys who were actually
going to look for the shooters. At the time, nobody had done
forensics on the guns and 'Fast and Furious' was not
mentioned.''
You went on to say, ``But I wanted to be sure that those
responsible for his death were brought to justice and that
every DOJ resource was brought to bear on the topic. So I did
have conversations and it would have been December of '09--I
think you meant December of '10 about the murder of Agent
Terry. But at the point in time, nobody knew about ``Fast and
Furious'' so that is a different question.''
And yet, we have documents that show, and this is a quote,
``an urgent firearms trace requested by ATF agents on the scene
to determine that these firearms came from 'Fast and
Furious'.''
Why is that you, as the Secretary of Homeland Security with
one of your agents dead on the scene, did not get briefed about
``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. I do not know.
Mr. Chaffetz. How is that acceptable? Do you think that
they withheld that information from you or is it your
responsibility to actually find that information?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think the focus, Representative
Chaffetz, is we had a dead agent, and a dead agent killed in a
very rugged area of Arizona. And the number-one thing that was
on my mind when I went out there was to make sure that the
appropriate resources were being dedicated to that
investigation.
Mr. Chaffetz. But you have guns from ``Fast and Furious''
that are found on the scene. You testified here just last week
that there was no knowledge of ``Fast and Furious'' at the
time--that the--you went out of your way to say that the
forensics were not done. And yet, that is not true. That is not
true.
Ms. Napolitano. I am not going to comment on that. I don't
know the document to which you refer. What I can say and what I
think is fairly clear from the context is I was speaking to my
knowledge at the time and I did not know about ``Fast and
Furious.''
Mr. Chaffetz. Did you direct or was there any direction
from your department and agency to allow the guns to go across
the border that were involved in ``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. ``Fast and Furious'' was an ATF operation.
Mr. Chaffetz. So you--if your agents detected weapons going
south across the border, you'd just let them go because it was
an ATF operation?
Ms. Napolitano. As the two incidents you refer to--the two
ICE incidents--I think, reveal, is when they ran gun--picked up
guns and ran them or asked ATF to E-trace them, ATF came back
and said these are part of a larger operation--stand down.
After the second incident in which that occurred, that
matter was taken by the ASACs to the assistant U.S. Attorney,
which is common. That happens in the field. And the assistant
U.S. Attorney said that the ATF operation would take
precedence.
Mr. Chaffetz. So was it the Department of Homeland
Security's policy to allow guns to go south into Mexico if they
were involved in ``Fast and Furious?''
I'm looking for a yes or no.
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Chaffetz. How is it that you can make the claim that
the border is now more secure than ever and yet the Obama
Administration purposely allows more--nearly 2,000 guns to be
released, knowing that they are going to go to Mexico, with
hundreds of people killed by those weapons--two dead U.S.
agents--and yet you don't even know if we have detected even
one of those guns?
In fact, on January 14th, you did detect somebody in New
Mexico. There were eight guns found. They didn't even run a
trace on them and you let those guns go into Mexico. I find
that absolutely stunning.
And for you to have two dead agents and to have never had a
conversation with Eric Holder about ``Fast and Furious'' and
about this is totally unacceptable. Totally unacceptable.
I'll yield back.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from----
Ms. Napolitano. Mr. Chairman, I know Representative
Chaffetz has his opinion on this matter, as his--as the tone of
his question reveals, but I simply would suggest that no one
takes the deaths of agents more seriously than I, and also,
that one of the reasons that we have not directly dealt with
the attorney general on this is he very quickly and
appropriately put this matter in the hands of the inspector
general.
Thank you.
Mr. Smith. And the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr. Griffin?
Mr. Griffin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, I want to talk to you about the memo that
has been raised earlier here today--the Morton memo from June,
and the part of it, in particular, entitled, ``Factors to
Consider When Exercising Prosecutorial Discretion.''
I--I am certainly familiar with the concept of
prosecutorial discretion. In my experience, that has been more
of a bottom-up discretion exercised by individual prosecutors.
That having been said, when I look at the list of factors
and the degree of specificity in that list, it strikes me that
whether intended in this--to be this or not, it strikes me that
it is a roadmap for retaining illegal immigrants.
And it seems to me you could look at this list and meet a
few of these categories and have a good chance at being pushed
to the bottom of the prosecutorial list. That is particularly
so when I--when I look at the draft memo that--that referred to
the DREAM Act that came out of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services last year.
And I understand we have had assurances that that draft
memo was just a draft and parts of it were not included in the
Morton memo.
But my question is, looking at the extensive nature of the
list of factors to consider, in your experience as a prosecutor
have you ever seen or are you aware of other memos like this in
the context of other crimes--for example, in the context of
Federal crimes at the Department of Justice, or any other
crime?
Are you familiar with memos this extensive that lay out
with this specificity what prosecutorial discretion is? Because
I have never seen such detail and I would be interested to hear
your view on that.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, the Department of Justice has the
whole U.S. Attorneys manual, which is to guide the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion and it is pretty thick.
Mr. Griffin. Sure.
Ms. Napolitano. So there's a lot there. And also,
Representative, there is a November, I think, 2000--I have to
go back and check the date out--I want to say 19--it's a Doris
Meissner memo that lays out the exercise of prosecutorial
discretion in immigration cases and specifies what a
significant Federal interest is in that connection. That memo
has in turn been cited by subsequent directors, either of INS
or ICE, as recently as Julie Myers in the previous
Administration.
Mr. Griffin. Sure. I would--I will say a couple of things.
The U.S. Attorneys manual certainly lays out broadly for
individual prosecutors guidance for them as they prosecute
cases. This, I have--I have never seen and I would--I would
like if you--if you can point to other guidance with this
specificity, I would love to see it, particularly when these
factors consider things like whether the person subject to
prosecutions spouse suffers from an illness. That seems
extraordinary when you are deciding whether to prosecute
someone for a criminal act.
Ms. Napolitano. If I might explain.
Mr. Griffin. Yes.
Ms. Napolitano. Here's--here's what can happen in the
immigration context. You have a U.S. citizen spouse who is very
ill and requires home care, and the issue is do you deport
someone who has been taking care of that U.S. citizen spouse,
and then put that spouse into much more expensive health care
or do you allow the spouse to stay in country.
Mr. Griffin. Sure. Sure.
Ms. Napolitano. So those are the kinds of scenarios that
need to be adjudicated or looked at on a case-by-case basis.
Mr. Griffin. If you take this list, you can--you can see a
lot of--you can come up with a number of--of different
individual circumstances. Certainly most prosecutors know, in
my experience, the difference between prosecuting a petty thief
and a terrorist and without the specificity here.
I could make the case that certain aspects of the DREAM Act
are implemented in here--not--not verbatim. But when you read
all of the policy documents that relate to this stuff, it is--
it is not difficult to see that this, in my opinion, and a lot
of people in my--in the 2nd Congressional District of
Arkansas--in our opinion, this looks like--more like a policy
document.
And let me say a couple things. I am running out of time
here. If you look over at the--the ICE union issued a press
release in response to this. These are union members.
They said, quote, ``Unable to pass its immigration agenda
through legislation, the Administration is now implementing it
through agency policy and bypassing Congress.''
Now, this is a union agreeing with me, which doesn't happen
a lot. But on this particular instance, I would welcome your
comments.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would say we are not bypassing the
Congress, much as we would like the Congress to address these
issues and, in fact, would invite that kind of engagement. What
we are is suggesting or--or giving guidance to the field.
By the way, I met yesterday in Chicago with all of the area
directors for ICE in this area and--and we went through and
talked about the operations that are going on and how they are
going to impact public safety and how we want to guide our
resources. And this is a group that is fully engaged. They get
it.
Mr. Griffin. Let me--let me real quickly mention a couple
of things.
It--it seems to me that a lot of what we see in terms of
state legislation in Arizona and Alabama and--and Florida and--
and Virginia and other states that is passed to address
immigration issues, it seems to me that that is simply the
states' reaction to what they see as the Federal Government's
failure to do its job on the border. Not just in this
Administration--in Administration after Administration,
including the one that I served in--the last one.
And it seems to me if--if the Federal Government was truly
securing the border, you would not have to deal with this--with
a lot of these state laws that are percolating up to address
what folks back in the states see as the Federal Government's
failure to do its job. And, again, it goes across
Administration. But I have one quick question--unrelated
question.
Mr. Smith. The----
Mr. Griffin. May I have a----
Ms. Napolitano. Could I--may I--and I would like an ability
to respond to that, if I might.
Mr. Smith. The----
Mr. Griffin. Mr. Chairman, may I have a quick----
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired. Let--we will
let the Secretary respond to your question.
Ms. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would suggest, first of all, that much of the information
about the border that is distributed is not in fact accurate
and one of the things I am trying to do is get--get the
accurate information to the Congress and invite anyone from the
Congress to come to the border.
But, secondly, in my judgment, I think a number of the
states are acting because the Congress has failed to act.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Griffin.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Secretary, thank you so very much for
sharing your time with the Judiciary Committee this morning,
recognizing the challenges of multi-jurisdiction for Homeland
Security.
I wanted to compliment you on one aspect of your very
august resume and that is that you are a graduate of the
University of Virginia Law School, one of the best law schools
in the Nation. I happen to have passed through there a couple
of years. And so I just wanted to make note about our fellow or
common law school and I hope it served you well, as it did me.
Let me raise some questions and repeat what I heard you say
in your opening statement--that 90 percent of the deportations
are priority deportations, as I understood your testimony.
Ms. Napolitano. For fiscal year '11.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Fiscal year '11. Fifty-five percent were
criminal aliens. Is that----
Ms. Napolitano. That's true.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. About the right number? And
it looks as if you said that two-thirds were without--were
recent border crossers or repeat violators. Is that accurate?
Ms. Napolitano. Two-thirds of the remaining 45 percent fell
within those categories.
Ms. Jackson Lee. All right. So I think if we look--and the
reason why I want to clarify this because many of us who have
been advocating for a comprehensive approach to immigration
might take offense to the recitation by the Administration that
they have done more than Bush, Clinton, et cetera, in
deportations.
We might take offense because we believe that it might have
an impact on the people we believe could readily be, if you
will, legalized or given some status through a comprehensive
approach.
But when you look at these numbers and you clarify them,
many of us would not have a disagreement that this is the
appropriate approach to take.
So I just want to make sure these numbers--I want to recite
them into the record. And I want to ask the question, is the
Administration stepping away from its commitment to
comprehensive immigration reform?
Ms. Napolitano. Not at all. The President wants it. I would
like to see it and stand ready to work with the Congress on a
moment's notice on it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Before I go into my questions about
comprehensive immigration reform, let me pose a question on our
detention facilities, which you have overlapping jurisdiction.
I have worked through my years on this Committee--in
Judiciary--on trying to improve those Committees--excuse me,
those facilities, particularly as it relates to women and
children.
We have made some progress. We passed legislation where
there are facilities that address the question of women and
children waiting for deportation, putting families together. It
has come to our attention that we have had some incidences at
the detention facilities impacting--I read an article. I read a
news line on assaults by officers in those facilities.
Are you aware of that, and if not, what kind of procedures
are in place to protect those incarcerated who are non-
criminal, who are waiting for action through the court or
waiting for action in deportation? They include families and
children, and particularly women.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, as I explained earlier, we have a
zero tolerance policy for any of--any misconduct of that
nature. There is a grievance process. There is a process by
which we will immediately deal with officials who are--or
officers who are found to have committed that kind of conduct.
We are constantly auditing or--or reviewing, particularly
the facilities that we contract with--we have reduced the
number of contractors--but to improve the conditions of
detention.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, could I ask you as--whether or not
you are ensuring sufficient attentiveness and staffing to
ensure the highest level of protection of those non-criminal--
well, everybody should be protected but certainly those non-
criminal families, children who are waiting on a civilian or a
non-criminal processing.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that we are.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay. Let me proceed with--and I would ask
if I could follow up after the fact either with your office
directly or--on a specific questions in our region in Texas.
But I want to go to the Morton Amendment that seems to have
caused so much attention.
And part of it is--delineates and--and let me say that I
claim a--a good relationship with unions from--from all over
the sectors and including the union that my colleague just
mentioned. But we can have differences of opinion, and I
appreciate prosecutorial discretion. It is used all the time.
One aspect of his delineation, and I think it should be
noted, the memo includes factors--the length of time a person
has lived in the United States, the circumstances of arrival, a
child that has come, military services by a person, the
strength of ties and contributions to the community, the
strength of ties to the home county conditions, and whether the
person has a U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident parent,
child, or spouse.
Do you think that is unreasonable? You have been an
attorney general for the state. You've prosecuted. Do you think
that is an unreasonable, if you will, framework, and ties the
hands of prosecutors in making an appropriate decision on
behalf of the people of the United States?
Ms. Napolitano. No. I think that is an important factor to
consider given that the Congress gives us the resources only to
remove about 400,000 a year.
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman?
The last gentleman--I had one last question. The last gentleman
went on and on on the red light and you allowed that
gentleman----
Mr. Smith. Most Members have been granted an extra 30 to 45
seconds----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, I would--I would appreciate it----
Mr. Smith [continuing]. And you--you reached that limit
like all the others. But we will be happy for you to ask
another question.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank you so very much, Mr. Chairman.
There have been a number of legislative initiatives
introduced by Members of Congress upwards of 175, 200 on
comprehensive immigration reform. I want to defend the Congress
in the sense that there is a body politic of those of us in the
House and the Senate that desire comprehensive immigration
reform.
I would like to just point to one Save America
Comprehensive bill--there was the Ortiz bill--but, in
particular, access to legalization where you have a process for
those who have been here to access legalization.
Is that still a--a readily acceptable approach to look at
that would answer some of the concerns of our colleagues that
have been mentioned here?
These are individuals that are working, paying taxes.
Wouldn't that be an aspect of what we might look at if we ever
got to comprehensive immigration reform?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, but with a clarification I think
because these terms get--get confused. Access to legalization
versus access to citizenship--that's something I think that
would have to----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Two distinct points.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And so the legalization is giving them
status while they pay fines and look at how they would process
citizenship. Is that my understanding?
Ms. Napolitano. That--that is a--yes. That is a common use
of the word ``legalization.''
Ms. Jackson Lee. Still in discussion and still----
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, is
recognized.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, you were both a state and Federal
prosecutor. Did you ever approve or sanction investigations
that allowed gun walking?
Ms. Napolitano. No. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Gowdy. Why would you not allow gun walking?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I don't think the--those matters or
those kinds of investigations were ever presented to me.
Mr. Gowdy. But had they been presented to you, there is a
reason you don't allow contraband cash and guns to walk. As a
former Federal and state prosecutor, can you give us those
reasons?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I--I don't like to speculate. You
know, every case is different.
Mr. Gowdy. I am not asking you to speculate.
Ms. Napolitano. Every prosecutor makes different decisions
and I don't believe I was ever presented with that decision.
Mr. Gowdy. So you can't think of any reasons not to let
contraband walk outside the care, custody, and dominion of a
law enforcement officer?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think in the common context when
you--in drug cases or firearms cases or whatever, when you are
trying to work the case up, you know, from the low level to the
higher levels and--and put somebody more--the more serious
criminal off the streets, often times you let contraband get
into the hands of others.
Mr. Gowdy. And then you immediately interdict it and arrest
them? I have done it--did it for 16 years, Madam Secretary. You
never let drugs, cash or guns walk. You immediately interdict
them.
When do you learn of ``Fast and Furious'' for the first
time?
Ms. Napolitano. I learned of it after the death of Agent
Terry.
Mr. Gowdy. And when did you learn that gun walking was part
of ``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. I would say sometime between his death and
the early spring.
Mr. Gowdy. To your knowledge, is every--has anyone ever
communicated or did anyone communicate with Mexican authorities
that guns were being allowed to cross our border into Mexico in
contravention of their gun laws?
Ms. Napolitano. I can only speak for communications that I
know of and I know of no such communications.
Mr. Gowdy. When you were the United States Attorney in
Arizona, did you make routine use of proffers, 5K1.1s and Rule
35s?
Ms. Napolitano. Sure.
Mr. Gowdy. So there is no prohibition in the District of
Arizona from using the same investigatory and prosecutorial
tools that we use in every other district?
Ms. Napolitano. Not that I know of.
Mr. Gowdy. So there is no reason that this, quote, ``gun-
trafficking case'' could not have been handled like it is
handled in all the other states?
Ms. Napolitano. I am not commenting to this one. I am not
second-guessing ``Fast and Furious.'' It is under investigation
now.
Mr. Gowdy. Everyone else has second-guessed it. The
attorney general has said there were problems. The President
has said there were problems.
So I am not asking you to say anything they haven't already
said. Do you agree there were problems with ``Fast and
Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. I thought you were asking a much more
specific question. But what I would say is obviously there were
problems with ``Fast and Furious.''
Mr. Gowdy. What were those problems?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, obviously, you don't want to let guns
with the kind of firepower that--that we now know were involved
to get out of your--your control.
Mr. Gowdy. Is firepower the only reason you don't allow
guns to walk?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there is--there is a number of them.
But--but if you want to cross-examine me about it----
Mr. Gowdy. I am not cross-examining you, Madam Secretary. I
am asking you about ``Fast and Furious.'' I am asking you when
you knew about it.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, what I am explaining to you--what I
am explaining to you is that the case itself and the matter in
which it was handled is under the jurisdiction of the Inspector
General. But, obviously, from a--from a what-we-know
perspective, yeah, there were--there were problems. Absolutely.
Mr. Gowdy. When you were the United States Attorney in the
District of Arizona did you ever have Title 3 cases?
Ms. Napolitano. T-3s? Yes.
Mr. Gowdy. And those applications were approved by whom?
Ms. Napolitano. The court.
Mr. Gowdy. And, ultimately, before they got to the court
they had to be approved by the Department of Justice, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, yes.
Mr. Gowdy. So for the Department of Justice to contend in a
Title 3 OCDETF case that they did not know about ``Fast and
Furious'' would be disingenuous at best, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. I just am not going to comment to that. I
don't know those specifics. That was not within the Department
of Homeland Security.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, let me--I am asking you as a former
prosecutor who did T-3 cases. The Department of Justice has to
approve those applications, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. That is the procedure, yes.
Mr. Gowdy. And in those applications is a narrative or
summary of the case?
Ms. Napolitano. That is correct, yes.
Mr. Gowdy. So someone at the Department of Justice had to
know about ``Fast and Furious'' for the T-3 to ever have been
approved, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. I--I just can't comment. I don't know that
there was a T-3 approved in ``Fast and Furious.''
Mr. Gowdy. If there were a T-3 approved in ``Fast and
Furious'', and there were, the Department of Justice would had
to have known about it, correct?
Ms. Napolitano. I am going to leave that for your own
investigation, sir. I am just not going to comment or go beyond
what I know, and what I know is that after the death of Agent
Terry, it--the ``Fast and Furious'' label became apparent and
we become knowledgeable about it.
Obviously, there were problems with the operation.
Obviously, it did not succeed and--and the Inspector General
has that under investigation right now. From a law enforcement
perspective--from a law enforcement perspective, yes, ``Fast
and Furious'' is very troublesome.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Chairman, if I might, could have just an
additional 30 seconds, which may be the custom this morning.
Mr. Smith. Without objection.
Mr. Gowdy. Madam Secretary, my point on ``Fast and
Furious'' is that there weren't just problems. It was flawed
from its inception. Any investigation that countenances gun
walking across the border is flawed in its inception.
So what I take offense at is when the attorney general and
others on the other side of the aisle say that only when
problems became apparent that--this investigation was a problem
from the very beginning. I am going to ask you one final
question because you mentioned twice this was an ATF
investigation.
It was, in fact, an OCDETF investigation, which means what,
as a former U.S. Attorney?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, it means--and now you are into
something I really don't know anything about. I don't know
whether it is OCDETF, whether it was handled by an AUSA. I--I
really don't know that.
Voice. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Gowdy. If it were OCDETF, then there would be more than
one Federal law enforcement agency involved, correct? That is
by definition.
Ms. Napolitano. I just can't comment to that. I just don't
know the answer to that.
Mr. Gowdy. Okay. Fair enough.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is recognized.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
And Secretary Napolitano, I think you have done an admiral
job here this morning. It is always impressive to see a long
table and a big room with a bunch of men, mostly seated, ready
to question one solo witness down there and that witness has no
control--just has to respond to the questions, sometimes the
insinuations, sometimes which can border or which can be
political in tone and totally inappropriate.
But you have endured through this process. It is, in fact,
part of your job, and I know it is not probably one of the most
pleasant aspects of the job but you have acquitted yourself
well before this Committee and I appreciate your service to the
Nation.
And I am not going to blame every problem that exists as
far as immigration or, you know, Federal law enforcement--I am
not going to blame that on you or make you responsible or
appear to be responsible for that nor will I infer that the
Obama Administration is immune to the normal problems that crop
up in the course of the Federal Government's dealings. I mean,
you are going to have some mistakes made. You are going to have
some bad choices made. You are going to have some good things
done, too. Those things should be pointed out.
But I will say that you weren't the Secretary of Homeland
Security in 1999. Department of Homeland Security itself wasn't
created until 3 years later. But back in 1999, we also saw
Members of Congress express frustration with the INS about the
issue of prosecutorial discretion.
As we have heard today when Chairman Smith led a bipartisan
letter to Attorney General Janet Reno and the INS Commissioner
Doris Meissner on that topic, he specifically urged the INS to
use prosecutorial discretion to avoid unfairness and, quote,
``and unjustifiable hardship,'' end quote.
The following year, according to Anthony Lewis' op-ed in
the United--excuse me--in the New York Times, Chairman Smith
complained that the INS was spending its time on cases that cry
out--that, quote, ``on cases that cry out for compassion,'' end
quote, instead of focusing resources on, quote, ``hardened
criminals or hardened criminal aliens,'' end quote.
Now, I would like to enter both the letter and the op-ed*
into the record. Is that permissible?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The Committee did not receive the op-ed referred to in time for it
to be included in this printed record.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Smith. Without objection that will be made a part of
the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Smith. But I would also like to say to the gentleman
from Georgia that he might want to put the contents of those
letters in context. They were generally referring to legal
immigrants or legal--and also was referring to not making
general categories of individuals eligible but for going
through on a case-by-case basis.
So I wouldn't want the gentleman to give a misimpression to
anybody about the contents of those letters.
Mr. Johnson. Certainly, and no intent to do that, Mr.
Chairman. And the letter and the article will speak for
themselves and you have made--you have duly noted your position
for the record.
And I look at the immigration laws that were creating
unfairness and injustice in 1999 and they look like the same--
they look like the same laws that we are dealing with today.
Small wonder that the need for prosecutorial discretion has not
diminished during that period.
You have spoken about the need for prosecutorial discretion
in order to meet smart law enforcement priorities, but what
about the cases that, quote, ``cry out for compassion,'' to use
Chairman Smith's words?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, thank you and thank you for your--
your opening comments, and I would simply say that nothing in--
in Director Morton's memo suggests a categorical amnesty for
any group. What it suggests is that there be a case-by-case
evaluation of the individual circumstances in--there are very
clear cases that require immediate deportation.
There are very clear cases where we know the Nation's
public safety is involved. We have repeat violators. We have
fugitives. But there are other cases that are different in
context and kind, and part of having a--a reasonable
immigration system is the ability to look at those.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. And I will yield the balance of my
time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
We will now go to the gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs. Adams.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Secretary.
I have been sitting listening with great interest as a law
enforcement officer for so many years. I have to tell you I was
interested in hearing what you said about Alabama and that you
were part of that. And you have said over and over again,
including this morning, that you don't have the funds so you
have to prioritize.
So why not accept states' help to be a force multiplier for
your agency?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, we--we do in what--and--and let me
tell you, the most important way that states help us right now
and localities is through Secure Communities. That is an
important tool, as we have now been able to expand it, to help
us identify criminal aliens in the Nation's jails and prisons.
Mrs. Adams. And I listened as many of my colleagues asked
questions and the one in particular, Representative Gohmert,
had said something and I was watching your reaction, and I was
surprised that you didn't say if, in fact, that is a problem
that we need to look into it and, you know, has something been
compromised and is someone shopping a story.
That concerns me that you didn't step up and say, we will
put national security over any type of politics and I will look
into it. Will you commit to look into what Representative
Gohmert brought up earlier? Yes or no.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I apologize. I don't remember
specifically what he brought up, but, yes, if there are
national security issues or important policy issues involved
then, obviously, we would.
Mrs. Adams. Well, I want to make sure that we are doing our
national security above politics at all times. I am really----
Ms. Napolitano. Of course.
Mrs. Adams.--I--I believe that wholeheartedly.
Ms. Napolitano. Of course.
Mr. Smith. Would the----
Mrs. Adams. I heard someone else say----
Mr. Smith. Will the gentlewoman yield for just a moment?
Mrs. Adams. I will in just a minute. I want to get through
my questions.
I heard someone else ask you about limbo indefinitely but,
in fact, isn't it true that if they are in a deportation status
and their home country will not accept them that you release
them back into the communities----
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there----
Mrs. Adams [continuing]. Based on a ruling?
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah. There is a Supreme Court case called
Zadvydas, which is a due process case, which, if--if the home
country cannot accept or will not accept, gives us about a 6-
month detention period.
Mrs. Adams. And, in fact, some of these people have come
back into the communities and committed heinous crimes--truly
heinous--like Huang Chen, who killed a young woman, I believe,
after China had refused to repatriatize him. Is that true? And
if I remember reading this correctly, they still have not
located her heart and lungs.
So, I mean--and another one who killed a police officer in
Ft. Myers after being released back into the community because
their home country would not take them.
You know, Section 243(d) of the Immigration Nationality Act
requires a government to sanction countries that refuse to
repatriate by suspending issuance of immigrant or nonimmigrant
visas or both to nationals of the country until it takes the
aliens back.
You--now it is DHS--is supposed to order or give the
country that refuses back--take back its aliens to the
Secretary of State shall order that the visas to its citizens
be suspended.
How many have you recommended, under Section 243(d)?
Ms. Napolitano. We have not. What we have done is work with
their countries that systemically refuse to accept their aliens
back.
Mrs. Adams. So you are telling you have not done any?
Ms. Napolitano. Not that I am aware of.
Mrs. Adams. And so we could possibly have----
Ms. Napolitano. I don't know if we are talking about the
same thing. I am having a----
Mrs. Adams. Well, it says that these are people who were
pending removal but their home countries aren't taking them.
Ms. Napolitano. All right.
Mrs. Adams. You have the ability to recommend that they--
you know, upon notification by the Attorney General now given
by DHS that a country refuses to take back its aliens, the
Secretary of State shall order that further visas to its
citizens be suspended.
I asked you how many times have you recommended and how
many times has that happened.
Ms. Napolitano. I would have to look into that.
Mrs. Adams. It seems to me, Madam Secretary, that if you
are not willing--you said just a minute ago you had not, now
you are going to look into it. I have listened to that all
morning long.
I have been amazed at some of the answers given, knowing
that you were coming before this Committee. You have got deaths
of agents in ``Fast and--``Fast and Furious.''
You have Iran planning to come across our borders because
they see what, apparently, your agency does not--that we have
an open border, and you have deaths of our citizens and law
enforcement officers based on people being--not because their--
their own home countries won't take them but because they are
being released into our country after committing crimes.
And you are telling me you don't know now--at first you
said you hadn't done it, now you don't know if you had
recommended that there be some kind of diplomacy pushed forward
on these countries because----
Ms. Napolitano. Well----
Mrs. Adams. Now, let me finish.
Ms. Napolitano. Excuse me, Representative. I just want to
make sure we are being clear because in this Committee, I think
it--I am trying to provide as accurate information as I can.
Mrs. Adams. Correct.
Ms. Napolitano. What I am suggesting to you is that we have
been working through the State Department with some of the
countries that routinely refuse to accept illegal aliens back.
But I don't know for other diplomatic reasons whether the State
Department has actually suspended visas.
Mrs. Adams. Okay. Tell me this. Has DHS sought or
obtained--has DHS sought or obtained any legal opinion that,
for some reason, DHS need not comply with this duly enacted
statute?
Ms. Napolitano. I am not sure. Again, that is kind of a
``gotcha'' question. What I am saying is that we are working
and have been working with the State Department with some of
the countries that routinely refuse to take back criminal
aliens.
Mrs. Adams. Madam Secretary, with due respect, that is not
a ``got you.'' These are statutes, and what I have heard from
my Committee Members is that they have been asking you several
times have you been complying with statutes or is there a
statute that you can rely on for not complying to statute.
So well, I will ask respectfully if you will get me that
number--how many times. Since you do not have that number now--
you said at first, no, you didn't do it--now you don't know--I
will be more than happy for us to put it in writing so that
there will be no misinformation or misunderstanding. And I
yield back.
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Puerto Rico, Mr. Pierluisi, recognized
for his questions.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, I would first like to applaud you for
crafting a common sense policy of exercising discretion over
which immigration cases to prosecute. But I would now like to
address the department's drug interdiction work in the
Caribbean region, particularly Puerto Rico.
Many experts, including the U.S. Attorney in Miami, have
recognized that as the Federal Government curtails the flow of
drugs across our Southwest border, drug trafficking
organizations are increasingly turning to the Caribbean as an
alternate means to get their products to end users in the--in
the U.S.
According to estimates provided to my office, approximately
80 percent of the South American cocaine that arrives in Puerto
Rico is subsequently transported to the U.S. mainland, and the
20 percent of cocaine that remains in Puerto Rico for local
consumption is the primary cause of the island's unacceptably
high number of murders.
I know you share my view that from the Federal Government's
perspective the violent death of an American citizen in Puerto
Rico is of no less consequence than the violent death of any
American citizen, be it in Florida, New York, or any other
state.
ICE has made several high-profile drug arrests on the
island over the past year. But I remain concerned that ICE and
other DHS component agencies are not devoting sufficient
resources to address the surge in drug trafficking through
Puerto Rico.
I, thus, have a couple questions for you. First, how has
DHS responded to the balloon effect I just described whereby
drug traffickers are shifting part of their operations from the
Southwest border to the Caribbean? Have you increased the
personnel and assets you are deploying in the Caribbean?
You know, I am a former AG in Puerto Rico and I know very
well that this is like a moving target. You need to make sure
that your resources are well placed. But you cannot just leave
one area unprotected because they just go there.
The second question--and I just want to know whether you
have given additional attention and resources to Puerto Rico
and the--and the Caribbean region. The second question I have
is the following. It is related.
Most of the drugs entering Puerto Rico come from the
Dominican Republic these days. But there has been a surge as
well entering the island from the east coast, particularly from
the smaller Caribbean islands, and I understand that it takes
the Coast Guard over an hour to respond to a suspected incoming
drug shipment in the eastern part of the island and that CBP's
presence in the area is minimal.
Again, what is the department doing in terms of CBP
resources, Coast Guard resources? So, again, first question is
in general--are you taking a look at our area and devoting
additional resources as you should in terms of protecting our
borders? This is the southernmost border, and secondly, eastern
Caribbean--what is happening over there? Because I am
concerned.
Ms. Napolitano. Yes, Representative. First, I think this
is--I don't want to make too big a point of this but I think it
is important to note that the--that the fact that drug
trafficking has moved into the littorals, into--into the area
you suggest, I think, is evidence of the fact that the
Southwest border is actually been fortified to a large degree
so and--and now the traffickers are having to move.
Mr. Pierluisi. I agree.
Ms. Napolitano. We are looking at that. We are looking at
do we have the right amount of Coast Guard assets already
deployed there--do we need to change the number and also the
kinds of vessels we have. We have a BEST team now in Puerto
Rico.
We--we--we will evaluate and continue to evaluate whether
we have the right number of agents associated with that. We are
working with the OCDETF unit down there, among other things.
But the answer to your question is, yes, I am aware of it, yes,
I share your concern, and yes, we are looking at our
deployments there.
Mr. Pierluisi. Okay. I have met with Attorney General
Holder to go over the details of--of this situation in the
past, and I would really appreciate it if you would give me the
time to sit down with you and get to the specifics at some
point in the near future.
Ms. Napolitano. We will make sure you get briefed.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thanks.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Pierluisi.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Quayle, is recognized.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary.
I just want to get some clarification. Earlier you
testified that Congress has only appropriated about $400,000--I
mean, 400,000 deportations. Is that based on the $23,000 number
for--that you state is the cost for--after, you know, arrest,
removal and deportation?
Ms. Napolitano. I would have to check.
Mr. Quayle. So you----
Ms. Napolitano. But it is a--it is a commonly used number.
It has been the same for several years and it is the number
referred to in the Appropriations bill.
Mr. Quayle. It is the number--they--so the Appropriations
bill actually has 400,000?
Ms. Napolitano. May not be in the bill but in some of the
supporting materials in the Committee.
Mr. Quayle. Because usually it is just the--the actual
dollar amount, right? Okay.
Ms. Napolitano. Exactly right. So I think it is in some of
the materials provided to the Committee.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Because I am trying to--earlier Mr. Coble
was talking to you about the discrepancy between the ICE number
and the number that you have used in--in testimony where you
were saying it is $23,000 to $30,000 per actual person who is
deported.
And ICE basically said--they said it was about $12,500, and
I appreciate that you are going to get us the information in
where that discrepancy is. But when you were speaking earlier,
you said kind of just off the top of your head that maybe the
ICE one doesn't actually include the amount that could be used
in--for trial. Is that right?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, it may not include the Justice
Department factors in there, and I will just have to look into
that for you.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Because--because what I am trying to make
it clear or get a clear understanding is that last week when
you testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee, you stated
that the number was $23,000 to $30,000 and that was only for
what DHS has and that excluded the Department of Justice.
So is the $23,000 to $30,000 with Department of Justice or
not?
Ms. Napolitano. We will get back to you on that.
Mr. Quayle. Okay.
Ms. Napolitano. I just--I want to be very clear on that----
Mr. Quayle. Yeah.
Ms. Napolitano. Because obviously you all want to--want to
make some points with those numbers. So you need to have the
accurate numbers.
Mr. Quayle. Yeah. We are--we are just trying to figure out
exactly where the cost breakdown is----
Ms. Napolitano. Indeed.
Mr. Quayle [continuing]. And that--and that is because--I
would also like, if you could, kind of--if that number came
from internal computations of the actual breakdown in the
costs--if you could tell us that.
Is that actually from internal computations or did you get
it from external sources?
Ms. Napolitano. I will find out for you. It may be--it
could be a number of sources----
Mr. Quayle. Okay.
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Internal, OMB, Appropriations
Committee. A lot of people have input into what is appropriated
there.
Mr. Quayle. Because when we were looking into this--because
that number just kind of jumped out at me when--when it was--
when it was stated, and we called over and they said that that
number actually came from the Center for American Progress,
which is a liberal think tank that has been pushing the--the
high costs of deportations.
And I would hope that DHS would be more reliant on their
actual internal numbers rather than relying on an external
think tank. So if you could get some clarification on that as
well.
Ms. Napolitano. Right. But I think your point, and--and I
think it is important for--for this Committee in particular--
the Judiciary Committee--the immigration system crosses Federal
agencies and, indeed, it crosses branches of government, and
one of the things--because we have never addressed
comprehensively immigration in the Congress, what gets lost in
there is what the total cost of the system is.
Gets divided between different Appropriations
subcommittees. It gets divided, you know, some here the--what--
what DOJ gets, what we get, et cetera. So one of things I think
would be beneficial is to look at the system as a whole.
Mr. Quayle. Well, I--I--I appreciate that, but I think the
other thing that we are looking at is that as Administration
officials and you as well have said that you don't have the
resources to be able to actively and pursue deportation just
because the money is not really there and you said that there
is only 400,000 people that you can actually deport.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah, I understand the point you all----
Mr. Quayle. So I am just trying to say, you know, the
breakdown of cost and make sure that we are actually doing this
in an efficient manner. I think that that is extraordinarily
important, especially when we are in these tough budgetary
times.
Ms. Napolitano. Indeed.
Mr. Quayle. And switching topics, I was just wondering and
this has nothing to do with any specific state law but as we
are looking Federal Government and Federal budget restraints
and the problems that the Federal Government is having to live
within its means and we don't have the resources, as some have
said, to actually enforce our immigration laws. They are just
making it more difficult.
If certain states want to actually act as force
multipliers, shouldn't we be looking to them and--and actually
embracing that to be able to enforce those immigration laws?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think it is important to recognize
that what is involved here is who sets the immigration
priorities for the country, and that is a Federal
responsibility.
Mr. Quayle. Absolutely.
Ms. Napolitano. Now--now, we do work with states and
localities. The primary way we do it now is through Secure
Communities. And as you have heard in earlier conversation from
some of the members, we--we--we have been criticized by some
communities that don't want to participate in Secure
Communities but I believe it is an essential tool moving
forward to help us direct our prosecutorial resources.
Mr. Quayle. Okay. Great. Thank you, Madam Secretary. I
yield back.
Mr. Gallegly. The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch?
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary, thank
you for being here. Thanks for the fruitful exchange.
I am concerned with the Department of Homeland Security's
formula that is used to determine the tier status of urban-area
security initiatives for purposes of receiving funding.
Specifically, I am extremely concerned with the application
of the department's formula to the Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI
in the state of Florida.
The Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI encompasses Palm Beach,
Broward, Miami-Dade and Monroe counties, including the district
I represent.
The Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI has more than 5.6 million
residents living throughout--throughout these counties'
population with the highest level of density and diversity.
There are more than a hundred municipalities, four
international airports, large convention centers, numerous
sports venues that host major sporting events and other
critical utility and water infrastructure.
It is also home to agriculture, banking, health care and
other major industries. Moreover, the U.S. Southern Command
Homestead Air Reserve Base, U.S. Coast Guard operations at Air
Station Miami and Station Miami Beach, the National Access
Point Center for the Americas, Turkey Point Nuclear Power Plant
and the National Hurricane Center are located in the Miami-Fort
Lauderdale UASI.
It also covers more than 300 miles of coastline. An
extensive coastline is very porous and is a risk for drug and
arms trafficking and other threats. Many large cruise ships
dock at Port Everglades in Fort Lauderdale and the Port of
Miami, both of which are located in the Miami-Fort Lauderdale
UASI.
In fact, Port Everglades is the home port of more cruise
ships than any other port in the world. These cruise ships
transport thousands of families and crew members in and out of
the United States.
In addition, Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI is a gateway to
South America and Central America for business, tourism and
international trade. Millions of people and commerce cross the
border through south Florida airports and ports.
In fact, the Port of Miami, Madam Secretary, imports and
exports more than 7.8 million tons of cargo annually to more
than a hundred countries and 250 ports around the world, and
Port Everglades, Florida ranks as the 12th leading container
port in the Nation, exporting to and importing from more than
150 ports in 70 different countries.
The port is also the primary storage and distribution
center for refined petroleum products for all of south Florida,
supplying nearly one-fifth of entire state's energy
requirements, ranging from propane and gasoline and diesel and
jet fuel.
Yet, despite being major centers of economic security and
tourism activity, the Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI inexplicably
does not qualify for Tier One funding out of the Department of
Homeland Security's current funding formula.
Because the Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI does not qualify for
Tier One funding, it will have its funding for the upcoming
year dramatically reduced, cut almost in half--reduced by $8
million from $17 million down to $9 million.
The Department of Homeland Security's funding formula is
limited to accounting for legal and border crossings. This
formula, therefore, does not include the more than 300 miles of
coastline, four international airports and several cruise ship
ports that are located within the Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI.
Several questions--shouldn't these air and water entry
points in the U.S. be considered with legal and border
crossings by the department in its formula?
And it is my understanding that the Secretary of Homeland
Security has the discretion to expand the number of UASIs that
are included in Tier One funding. In fact, there has been
expansion recently. Currently, 11 UASIs are eligible for Tier
One funding.
And so for the reasons that I have laid out, for the safety
and security of the millions of Americans who live in, do
business in and visit south Florida, I would urge you in the
strongest possible terms that you expand the Tier One funding
to include Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI.
I would welcome any response now or following this
Committee meeting.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would make two points. One is the--
the reduction in Tier One identification was in part a reaction
to Congress's reduction--significant reduction in UASI funding
overall, and the question presented to us and to me was whether
we just dole out smaller amounts of money or do we continue to
fully fund at prior year levels the Tier One locations.
We made the decision to--to--to restrict the number of
locations so that we could fully fund the Tier Ones.
Tier Ones are evaluated by risk and consequence. So
national elements such as you described--coastline, nuclear
reactors, critical infrastructure, economic impact--are all
taken into account.
As I recall, when we made the decision to cut back and then
to identify Tier One, Tier Two, there was a clear delineation
from an evaluative standpoint between the top 10, and 11 was
virtually identical to 10, so top 11 and those below it, and
that is--that is where Miami was.
If--if Congress puts more money into UASI or goes back to
prior year levels, we can reconsider that decision.
Mr. Deutch. But--but the decision--the decision to expand
Tier One is a decision made by your office.
Ms. Napolitano. That is correct.
Mr. Deutch. And, in fact, Tier One has been expended in the
past not just to include----
Ms. Napolitano. When there was money, yes.
Mr. Deutch. I understand, but the further--and I--I also
understand the decisions Congress makes about funding, but
the--it is the decision of the Department of Homeland Security
to keep the Tier One funding the same and slash dramatically
the funding to the Miami-Fort Lauderdale UASI.
Ms. Napolitano. I think that the reason, Representative, is
because the evaluation of risk and consequence did not put the
Miami UASI into the Tier One status.
Mr. Deutch. I would urge you to reconsider the--and--and
realize the--the risk and consequences involved in the
decision.
I yield back. Thank you, Madam.
Mr. Gallegly. Time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Issa?
Mr. Issa. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Madam Secretary, back in February, I recall that you and I
were on the phone and on another important issue, but it had to
come to a premature end or come to an end because you had to
attend a memorial service for Jamie Zapata.
Do you remember that conversation?
Ms. Napolitano. I don't remember the conversation. I do
remember the murder of Jamie Zapata.
Mr. Issa. But I won't forget it because it was sort of just
at a point in which ``Fast and Furious'' obviously was becoming
a major issue, both with Senator Grassley and with my Committee
next door.
Since that time, we have done a lot of work and I--I want
to run you through some questions that concern me that fall
within your lane.
One of them is earlier today, you have repeatedly said that
this was an ATF operation. Out of concern for the investigatory
process and the prosecutions that are ongoing, we have--we have
avoided interviewing Lane France. Do you know Lane?
Ms. Napolitano. I do not.
Mr. Issa. Do you know he works for you? He is an ICE agent
that was part of the ``Fast and Furious?''
Ms. Napolitano. I know there was a field agent assigned to
a task force--this is all things I have learned in the wake of
your investigation--assigned to a task force for deconfliction
purposes in the wake of the two ICE matters that were resolved
by the AUSA to be within the context of ATF.
Mr. Issa. Well, it is--it is our judgment that he likely
was very aware that there was gun walking going on, had that
information. The question is, when you assign somebody like
that, do you have a flow of information back to your department
so that your--somebody in your department could have, should
have or would have known about the operation?
Ms. Napolitano. Representative, we have hundreds of
operations and--and thousands of agents on a daily basis. So to
my knowledge, the fact that an agent was assigned somewhere
about some matter would not necessarily come to----
Mr. Issa. So----
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Even--even to ICE
headquarters, much less to DHS headquarters.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So I guess I am going to make an assumption
here and that is that it is a fire and forget. You send----
Ms. Napolitano. Pardon?
Mr. Issa [continuing]. You send these people over there.
Ms. Napolitano. I'm sorry. I couldn't hear you. Sorry----
Mr. Issa. Fire and forget, kind of like the missile that
you just send off and it looks for heat, and if it hits
something so be it, even if it is one of the friendly aircraft.
Ms. Napolitano. Oh, I don't think that is a----
Mr. Issa. Well, let's go through this.
Ms. Napolitano. Accurate----
Mr. Issa. You--you testified that in December, you became
aware of ``Fast and Furious.''
Ms. Napolitano. I said after the death of Agent Terry, yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And the details you became aware of
basically after our investigation began, putting those details
out.
Ms. Napolitano. I became aware, as I testified here and in
other Committees, after the death of Agent Terry and--and knew
some of the details and the name ``Fast and Furious'' certainly
no later than March.
Mr. Issa. Okay. You testified here today that you--you
haven't talked to Eric Holder about this.
Ms. Napolitano. That is correct.
Mr. Issa. And he testified here that he only knew about it
a few weeks before the interview he had in May here before this
Committee and that he basically heard about it in the
newspaper.
So you have two dead agents that worked for you--one north
of the border, one south of the border--and particularly in the
case of Brian Terry, he was gunned down with two weapons from
``Fast and Furious.''
It has been months, and you tell me that you are not--you
were not--you were not doing it because of an IG investigation.
Well, let's go through a few questions here, Madam Secretary.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, wait--wait just a minute.
Mr. Issa. No, no. No, wait----
Ms. Napolitano. Wait just--wait just a minute.
Mr. Issa. Let me finish my question.
Ms. Napolitano. Wait just a minute.
Mr. Issa. Madam Secretary, let me finish my question.
Ms. Napolitano. Go ahead, but that insinuation is not an
accurate----
Mr. Issa. Your--Madam Secretary, you--you--we could have
the record read back. It would take a few minutes but----
Ms. Napolitano. No, it is the insinuation I am objecting
to. But go ahead and ask your question.
Mr. Issa. Look, the--you said because of an IG
investigation you were not having further investigation, except
you became aware of this in December. The IG investigation
began in February.
For 3 months, you had a dead Border Patrol agent and there
was no IG investigation. What did you do between December and
February to find out about ``Fast and Furious'' since a--and we
can give you the documents, happily. We would get you the
unredacted ones if we could. You get them from other parts of
government.
You--people on the ground knew those were ``Fast and
Furious'' weapons found at the scene within hours. So it wasn't
something that wasn't known. It was known at the time.
The question is, a Homeland Security employee is gunned
down, two weapons found at the scene part of ``Fast and
Furious.'' Agents on the ground know that it is ``Fast and
Furious'' before Brian Terry was laid to rest.
Three months go by, and now--and today you told us about an
IG investigation. My question is, first of all, do you have an
IG and are you going to have your IG look into what happens
when you segund agents and they are aware of gun running or,
sorry, gun walking and do nothing? Is that appropriate for you
to have your IG investigate? Yes or no, please.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, that--I think I--that question merits
a lengthier response and I am glad to give it to you.
Mr. Issa. I will look--I will look forward to that in
writing. But back to the basic question. You knew about--when
Brian Terry was gunned down you knew, in fact, he was gunned
down.
People on the ground knew that he was gunned down with
``Fast and Furious'' weapons. Three months went by. What did
you do between--between December and February to find out the
details about his loss of life, and aren't you outraged here
today that you--if you were not informed that you were not
informed that weapons allowed to walk into drug dealers'
cartels' hands had killed one of your agents and during those 3
months they kept it from you?
Ms. Napolitano. I think your insinuation that----
Mr. Issa. Ma'am, please answer the question. Don't--don't--
please don't talk in terms of insinuation.
Ms. Napolitano. Mr. Chairman, may--may I have the
opportunity to answer, please?
Mr. Gallegly. Madam Secretary, I--if you would try to
succinctly answer his question, and then if you would like to
elaborate the Chair will give you the time.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, what--let me make a suggestion, if I
might, because he is--the representative is combining a lot of
different things. If he would give me his questions I will be
happy to respond in writing.
Mr. Issa. Well, the one question I would like a succinct
answer to is, you became aware that Brian Terry had been gunned
down. People on the ground at that time knew they were ``Fast
and Furious'' weapons. That was December.
Between December and February of 2011, what did you do to
discover further the conditions around his death, one? And then
the second question, which was equally straightforward, aren't
you here today furious that the Justice Department--not ATF,
the Justice Department--withheld from you the knowledge of
``Fast and Furious'' during this entire period of time,
including one in which you had an agent dead?
Ms. Napolitano. I think we all should be outraged at the
death of Agent Terry, and I think the first thing is to
recognize who actually killed him, and that our number-one
priority was to make sure the shooters were found--some had
gone back into Mexico--and that the FBI was in charge of that
investigation.
Several days, as quickly as I could get to Arizona after
his death, I met with the FBI, their agents in charge. I met
with the AUSA who was going to conduct that investigation, and
that was my number-one concern--that those responsible for the
shooting death of Agent Terry were brought to justice, and that
is what I was being kept apprised of.
I will be--I would be happy to answer your other questions
in writing.
Mr. Issa. Ma'am, we will be glad to follow up in writing,
and I thank the Chairman for his indulgence.
Mr. Gallegly. The time of the gentleman has expired.
Ms. Sanchez?
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you.
Madam Secretary, we appreciate your presence today before
the Committee, and as you can see, there is a broad range of
questions that people can ask.
Ms. Napolitano. I have noticed that.
Ms. Sanchez. And you are asked to be an expert on--on each
and every one of them and to know information at the tip of
your fingertips, which I know is not always possible.
Earlier in--we appreciate the effort nonetheless--earlier,
you mentioned the Secure Communities program and it is
principally that program that I want to discuss with you.
Studies by the Warren Institute showed that 93 percent of
those identified through Secure Communities were Latino as of
2010, and given the scope of Secure Communities that number
seems a bit--well, not a bit--it seems alarmingly high to me
and hard to explain simply by saying, you know, with sample
size or mathematical variance.
Many of my constituents, for example, look at that number
and conclude that the Secure Communities program may be
inadvertently encouraging local law enforcement officials to
racially profile against the Latino community. And I am not
suggesting that this is overt encouragement or even conscious
activity on behalf of local law enforcement but that number
does really trouble me.
I am wondering if, perhaps, you have a way to explain the
93 percent figure and what steps DHS has taken or could
possibly take to address the concerns that are raised.
Ms. Napolitano. Right, and, again, we get into these
numbers things and you have to look at the period evaluated and
the sample and all that.
But I think, more fundamentally, what we have done is
through our Civil Rights and Civil Liberties unit established
monitoring of the numbers--as we now have enough communities
that are in the program that you are starting to get a
substantial number--to monitor those numbers to see whether any
are out of kilter with criminal prosecutions generally in an
area and if statistically there are significant variances to
have the ability to go in and actually look at A files or
things of that nature to see what underlies the numbers.
So--and this is intended to be a very transparent process.
We do not intend to keep those numbers secret. They will be--
they will be put or posted when they become available with
appropriate explanation.
Ms. Sanchez. Okay. But can you understand the concern
that--that folks might hesitate to cooperate with local law
enforcement if, you know, this perception, you know, backed by
the initial figures, lead people to suspect that certain
communities are, in fact, being racially profiled?
Ms. Napolitano. I can understand that concern.
I can also understand that we have--we have Secure
Communities now in enough jurisdictions to know how you work
with Secure Communities, how police departments continue their
relationship with the local community, how you use neighborhood
policing in the right way with respect to Secure Communities.
There are best practices that are developed that are being
shared.
So I understand the concern. What I am suggesting is that
we need to continue to watch it, to watch the numbers, to do it
in a statistically valid way, to be able to make those numbers
transparent, and then to work with and share best practices
among all of the jurisdictions now using the program.
Ms. Sanchez. Okay. Following up on that, when U.S. citizens
or legal residents are administratively arrested under the
Secure Communities program, approximately how long are they
detained for?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, under the new detainer form they
cannot be detained longer than 48 hours.
Ms. Sanchez. And during that process, what information are
they given and are they allowed to contact counsel or their
families during that process?
Ms. Napolitano. There is a--there is a whole--there is a
new detainer form that we have put into place. It is in
English. It is also one available in Spanish--I think other
languages as well. It has numbers to call and all sorts of
information on it. We could get you a copy of it.
Ms. Sanchez. It would be helpful because, you know, part of
the concern is that if legal permanent residents or citizens
are somehow arrested under this or taken into custody, I should
say, under this program that they would be able to communicate
with family and----
Ms. Napolitano. Well, they are not arrested, if I might,
under Secure Communities. Secure Communities only comes into
play after an arrest and a booking, and what Secure Communities
is is a data-sharing agreement between us and the FBI to check
fingerprints not just against criminal databases but against
immigration databases.
So it is not like there is a Secure Communities task force
out there arresting people. It is an after the--after the
booking process.
Ms. Sanchez. I understand. I misspoke, but my concern being
that there could be legal permanent residents or citizens that
are caught up in this and not--they don't have an opportunity
to contact family or counsel to sort of----
Ms. Napolitano. No, that--I don't think so and the reason
is if--if--one of the things we run them through is IDENT and
if there is an IDENT match and it shows that they are LPRs or
citizens, we stop right there. So nothing else happens.
Ms. Sanchez. So there is never an incidence in which--in
which a legal permanent resident or a citizen could be
accidentally deported because of a program in which they have
been picked up?
Ms. Napolitano. Look, I--we deal with so many and, of
course, it would be outrageous to have that kind of a
situation. But what I am suggesting is--what I am suggesting--
--
Ms. Sanchez. And I would suggest that that has happened in
the past.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, there have been instances in the
past, but under this program once an IDENT match is made and
the IDENT match reveals that this person is a citizen or--or a
lawful permanent resident, that is it. It is done. We don't put
any detainer or anything on that individual.
The local authority may hold them under whatever criminal
law they may have violated but we will not be putting a
detainer on them.
Mr. Gallegly. Time of the gentlelady has expired.
Mr. King?
Mr. King. Mr. Chairman, I would like to yield to the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr.--thank you, Steve. Secretary,
since you seemed a little fuzzy about Elibiary, let me make
sure you leave here understanding. He was a featured speaker at
the tribute to the great Islamic visionary, Ayatollah Khomeini,
December 11th of 2004.
You had him on your Countering Violent Extremism working
group. You promoted him and from your own website, Secretary
Napolitano swears in Homeland Security Advisory Council
members. You swore him in and according to your testimony here
today that is where he got the security clearance.
He has written glowingly of Kotbi, on whom Osama bin Laden
relied heavily for his barbarism justification. He has written
against the trial and conviction of the Holy Land Foundation's
funding of terrorism.
He has still remained in this Homeland Security Advisory
Council and now he has accessed a week ago the state and local
intelligence community database.
He took documents that said ``For Official Use Only'' and
shopped them with national media. It appears not only is our
security being compromised--a secure system--but he is using it
to help his friend politically, the President.
I have got one question and it is not a ``got you''
question. There is nothing confusing about it. Before you came
in here today, were you given information about Elibiary using
the state and local intelligence committee the--community
database and taking information he downloaded and shopping it
to the media?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Gohmert. If anyone from Homeland Security, your staff,
advised anyone else that you were briefed last night they would
be wrong. Is that correct?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. King. I yield back.
Mr. King. Thank you, and reclaiming my time.
Thanks for your testimony, Madam Secretary. It just caught
my attention when you responded to the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Poe, and this--the discussion about prosecutorial
discretion, and you referenced Article II, Section 3 of the
Constitution.
Could you expand on that a little bit and about how Article
II, Section 3, grants prosecutorial discretion?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, Article II, Section 3, says that the
executive branch shall take care to faithfully execute the laws
of the United States, and then when you read the U.S. Supreme
Court authorities interpreting that Cheeney or Haney, whatever,
and then Reno v. Arab American Anti-Discrimination League is
the one that is specific to immigration, that is taken and put
into the analysis of how you exercise discretion or the source
of discretion----
Mr. King. Well, thank you----
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. In the immigration context.
Mr. King. And I expected that would be your response. I
just wanted to make the point that the Constitution doesn't say
so. You can make those references to those--those cases and I
won't take issue with that. But it does say, ``He shall take
care that the laws be faithfully executed.''
I would also point out in the President--the President's
oath, ``I will faithfully execute the office of president of
the United States,'' by extension that oath then applies to his
officers that also take that oath. Would that not be correct?
Ms. Napolitano. That is true.
Mr. King. Okay. Then I just wanted to clarify that. It
isn't so much an issue. It is this--that when--when we see the
litigation that is coming forward against Alabama, Arizona and
it looks like any state that wants to pass immigration laws,
the executive branch is litigating that through the courts.
Now, if they are successful--if Eric Holder is successful
in scrubbing these immigration laws from the states--that
leaves then the Federal Government with the exclusive authority
to enforce immigration law, does it not?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, again, as I've referenced several
times, when we have partnerships like Secure Communities, that
indeed helps us focus the exercise of that discretion.
Mr. King. Then let me restate my question.
If the attorney general is successful in the litigation
that he has initiated on these states that have passed
immigration laws, rather than the Secure Communities component
of this or the 287(g) component of this, there would be then no
latitude for states to pass immigration laws that they would
enforce at their discretion.
Ms. Napolitano. There would be no latitude for states to--
to make--pass laws that change Federal immigration policy.
Mr. King. I don't think that is--I will disagree with that.
But rather than dig down into that and burn up our time, I will
just make this point--that it looks to me that the
Administration is going down the path of shutting down all
state legislation on immigration regardless of whether it goes
beyond the mirroring the Federal law, which is what Arizona was
designed to do, and that in the end it takes away the authority
of the states to do that--to do immigration enforcement.
I will take you also to some other data that Judge Poe
addressed and that is the 34-and-a half-percent of foreign
nationals that are occupying the jails on the border states.
Are you familiar with a GAO study that is March 2011 criminal
alien statistics and it addresses the--okay. Then I have it in
my hand and I will reference it.
In it, it has data in there that shows that we have 25,064
arrests of criminal aliens for homicide.
Now, that covers some years, I will admit, but I would put
that up against the losses that we have had on the southern
border--25,064 in arrests for homicide generally means at least
one grave, and that generally that are--those are Americans
that are--that are killed at the hands of criminal aliens.
And so when I heard you reference the 34,000 beds and that
is all that Congress gives you to work with and you have to use
prosecutorial discretion in order to utilize those beds to the
best of your ability, what I don't remember hearing--and I have
been here 9 years--is a request from the Administration, first,
to look at all of the assets that are deployed on the southern
border.
It wouldn't be just your department, obviously. I am going
to suggest that that ranges in the area of $12 billion across
that southern border--about $6 million a mile. I have yet to
hear anybody put all those assets together and make the ask how
many prison beds, how many prosecutors, how many judges--how do
we actually get 100 percent enforcement on that border so we
can begin to save some of these 25,064 lives.
Have you put together any kind of a proposal that would
actually rearrange the assets so that we could bring 100
percent enforcement rather than letting drug smugglers go
because we don't have the prosecutors or having to do, if it is
something you are reluctant to do, this administrative amnesty
that we call it and this discretion that you call it? Have you
put that package together?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I am going to take the--your--this in
two bites. Number one, under our policy, somebody who is
accused of homicide would be detained and would be a priority
case and we would have created room on the master docket to
move that case through and--and we would get that case after
the person served his sentence for the--for the homicide.
Mr. King. But they might released into society under
Zadvydas, wouldn't they?
Ms. Napolitano. Secondly, as I mentioned earlier, one of
the things I think it is important for this Committee to look
at is the entire immigration system from where we get
investigation to prosecution to--to incarceration and then
potentially--and then to the removal.
And each one of those crosses different Federal agencies.
So we have a comprehensive Southwest border strategy we use
with ICE and CBP, to some degree CIS. We have moved ICE
resources down to the border. We have moved detention beds down
to the border.
We have more resources at the Southwest border than have
ever existed before. But that is not to say that the Congress
in its own organization doesn't have the ability to look at it
overall.
Mr. King. What are the sum total of the assets and what is
asked of this Congress to give you all the tools you need to
give a hundred percent enforcement on the border?
Mr. Gallegly. The time of the gentleman has expired but I
will allow you to answer that question and then we will move
on.
Ms. Napolitano. I think the best way to answer it is to say
that we believe that with the asks we have made for--
particularly for CBP at the border and--and the movement of ICE
resources to the border that from the DHS perspective we have
been able to greatly improve and secure that border.
Mr. Gallegly. Time of the gentleman has expired.
Mr. Goodlatte?
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
welcome. The U.S. Border Patrol agents that are employees of
the Department of Homeland Security and under your jurisdiction
have tough, tough jobs. They are out there in the middle of the
night trying to track down illegal aliens and drug smugglers,
weapon smugglers and other contraband and so on.
They are fired at, sometimes with weapons provided by other
government agencies, sometimes wounded, sometimes killed. I
wonder if you could comment on a court decision that came down
in the case of the prosecution of one of your agents, a Jesus
E. Diaz, Jr., who was sentenced last week to 2 years in prison
for what could best be described--in fact, how the Washington
Times described as improperly lifting the arms of a handcuffed
15-year-old drug smuggling suspect who was--that is a common
technique used by law enforcement to force people to the ground
to control them is to--is to lift their arms to force them down
onto the ground if they are struggling, attempting to escape
and so on.
This was--this prosecution apparently took place at the
behest of the Mexican government and was conducted by the same
U.S. Attorney's office that prosecuted two agents not under
your watch but under the previous Administration for having
shot at another drug smuggler. They were subsequently granted a
pardon or had their sentences commuted by President Bush. You
may recall those two agents.
Are you familiar with this case involving Jesus Diaz?
Ms. Napolitano. I am not familiar with that decision.
I can agree, however, with your beginning statements that
our Border Patrol agents have very difficult jobs under very
difficult physical circumstances and they do. It is a 24/7 job
and they are doing a remarkable job down at the border.
Mr. Goodlatte. This case has been pending for--for a few
years now, and that seems a pretty serious sanction--two years
in prison. Both your Inspector General's office and the Office
of Professional Responsibility at ICE cleared this agent of any
wrongdoing but nonetheless he was subsequently prosecuted.
The Law Enforcement Officers Advocates Council, an
organization that obviously looks out for the interests of
people who are doing these dangerous jobs, says that this was a
totally improper prosecution of this individual, and you are
not at all familiar with this?
Ms. Napolitano. I am not.
Mr. Goodlatte. Would you look into this and report back to
the Committee and let us know what your thoughts are about this
prosecution of one of your agents?
Ms. Napolitano. I would be happy to review the decision.
Mr. Goodlatte. I would appreciate that.
Let me ask you this. If you are not familiar with this, how
often do you meet with Attorney General Holder?
Ms. Napolitano. Oh, it varies. Not that often, really, in
the context of things.
Mr. Goodlatte. Do you think it would be helpful, in light
of the ``Fast and Furious'' debacle, in light of prosecutions
like this one, that that department of the government ought to
be informing your department on a more regular basis of what
they are undertaking so that you can be better informed and be
outspoken in representing the interests of your agents and the
responsibilities of your department?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, sir, I think I am outspoken in the
interests of my agents and I do think there will be lots of
lessons learned from ``Fast and Furious.''
Mr. Goodlatte. But if you are not informed, if you don't
know about these incidents----
Ms. Napolitano. Well----
Mr. Goodlatte [continuing]. And if you don't know about
``Fast and Furious'' and it went on for a long period of time
and you are not informed, how can you be effective?
Ms. Napolitano. You know, what is the question?
Mr. Goodlatte. The question is, shouldn't you have closer
communications with the other principal law enforcement agency
of the Federal Government so that you can know what is going on
when your agents are being endangered by their allowing weapons
to walk, when your agents are being prosecuted by their U.S.
Attorneys?
If pressure was put on our government by the Mexican
government to do this prosecution of one of your agents, don't
you think you or somebody in your department should have been
informed of that, either by the Secretary of State or by the
Attorney General or somebody involved in this kind of cross-
border politics where drug smugglers here--here for the second
or third time?
I am aware of a prosecution of a--of a deputy in Texas as
well for attempting to stop drug smugglers. And yet, the people
who are getting prosecuted aren't the drug smugglers in these
cases--they are the people who are trying to enforce the law.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, as I said earlier, I think my number-
one interest when we had a dead agent, Agent Terry, was to get
the shooters--to get those who killed him, some of whom had
fled into Mexico. And I think that was----
Mr. Goodlatte. I think that is a--that is a--that is a
laudable goal, Madam Secretary, but it was too late. The fact
of the matter is there needs to be better communication so
somebody can say, ``Whoa, this is a crazy idea. You are giving
guns to drug smugglers that are going to come back and be used
to kill my agents.''
Ms. Napolitano. And it--and, Representative, it--it will
be, and I think this Committee has to avoid a rush to judgment
here. But it seems to me that there will be lessons learned
from this and there very well may be changes in the field as a
result of this.
The question you asked me, however, was how often I met
with Attorney General Holder, and I was saying in the context
of things, given his schedule, my schedule, the myriad
responsibilities we each have, not that frequently.
Mr. Goodlatte. I hope that you will make an effort to--if I
might have leeway to ask----
Mr. Gallegly. Without objection.
Mr. Goodlatte. One more question.
You have indicated you will investigate this matter with
regard to Jesus Diaz Jr., one of your Border Patrol agents, who
is now facing 2 years in prison.
If the prosecution in this case--if the conviction is not
overturned on appeal, will you recommend to President Obama
that he pardon Agent Diaz? If you find--if you find, as your
Inspector General found and as the ICE Office of Professional
Responsibility found, that there was no wrongdoing on his
part--if you find that to be indeed the case, would you
recommend to the President that he protect your agent?
Ms. Napolitano. You know, Representative, I don't play
what-ifs. I will be happy to review the case and get back to
you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Gallegly. Time of the gentleman has expired.
For the record, you--you made a commitment you would review
this officer's prosecution, and I would request----
Ms. Napolitano. I said I would review the decision.
Mr. Gallegly. The decision. You would--you would review the
decision. Further, would you make a commitment to this
Committee that you would respond in writing to Mr. Goodlatte
and also to the Committee your--your assessment of your review?
Ms. Napolitano. We will get back to the Committee, yes,
sir.
Mr. Gallegly. I will take that as a yes.
Ms. Napolitano. We will get back to the Committee, yes,
sir.
Mr. Gallegly. Mr. Marino?
Mr. Marino. Good afternoon, Madam Secretary.
First of all, I want to state that I have the utmost
respect for the ICE agents. I am a former district attorney and
U.S. Attorney, and I kind of look at us as colleagues, based on
our experiences, and some of the best people that I have ever
worked with, and they extraordinary circumstances which they
work under. So I do have a total respect for those individuals.
You raised an issue concerning Zadvydas--the Zadvydas case,
which I think in----
Ms. Napolitano. Zadvydas?
Mr. Marino. Zadvydas.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah.
Mr. Marino. Yeah. Excuse me. That within, what is it, 60
days----
Ms. Napolitano. Six--six months.
Mr. Marino. Six months--they would be released if nothing
is done. Does that just pertain to removal from the country or
if they have committed a crime----
Ms. Napolitano. No. I think it is a--it is a due process
removal case.
Mr. Marino. So if there is a crime committed by an
individual who is here illegally----
Ms. Napolitano. They still serve their sentence.
Mr. Marino. They still serve the sentence.
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah.
Mr. Marino. Do--do you see a problem with that 6-month time
period whereby you may not, in conjunction with the U.S.
Attorney's office, have the time to get that prosecution
completed?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think it--it--it--I think we have
to be guided by the Supreme Court and when it says that you
have to--to move, you have to move. I mean, you have to--you
have to meet the timelines they set.
Mr. Marino. You stated earlier that Congress needed to act
more so when it comes to immigrations. Could you explain to me
what should Congress be doing pursuant to enforcement?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, one of the areas where I think
Congress should--should look at enforcement is--is in terms of
employers. Right now, it is very difficult to getting a felony
case against employers. The fines are too low to be an--a
deterrent.
The employers are the magnet for much of the illegal
immigration that goes on. So that, I think, is an area that
deserves examination.
Mr. Marino. Good. And I prosecuted one of those cases as
a--as a U.S. Attorney and we did, in fact, send hundreds of
illegals back but we went after the employers. I would like to
see more of that because you are right--it is the magnet.
May I ask you a question and if you would care to share it
with me? Do you support total amnesty?
Ms. Napolitano. No.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Now, you stated earlier--and I don't play
gotcha so I am just paraphrasing this--that we as prosecutors
we have slight differences or variations on our discretion on
why we prosecute a case and why we do not prosecute other
cases.
Do you--do you agree with me that there is just not a
strict line to follow?
Ms. Napolitano. I think that is accurate.
Mr. Marino. I am going to go back to the factors for
considering prosecutorial discretion and give me your input,
give me your feeling on something like this when--there's a
list of them and I have not seen a list like this as a
prosecutor pursuant to other crimes, at least federally. And I
have had the manuals on my desk and I didn't memorize them by
any stretch of the imagination, but I have gone through them.
But do you have any problems with--I am just going to
rattle off three or four, and you have heard one of these--when
a person has a U.S. citizen permanent resident spouse, child or
parent, whether the person is a primary caretaker of a person
with a mental or physical disability, minor or seriously ill
relative, whether the person or the person's spouse is pregnant
or nursing, and finally, whether the person or the person's
spouse suffers from severe mental or physical illness.
I am not familiar with any other Federal crimes code that
applies such strict parameters before enforcing the law. Can
you help me out here?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I--no, I think--here is what we are
doing, and I think what Director Morton is correctly doing is
saying, look, we want to prioritize those who are criminals,
those who are fugitives, those who are repeat violators, those
who we are capturing at the border, those who raise national
security interest.
And so in terms of planning our operations and where we
want to put our manpower and the like, those are the things
that really affect the public safety in our community.
And by deploying Secure Communities, among other things, we
are now seeing the composition of the numbers--of the numbers
deported--change, and the composition is changing to reflect
that we are deporting more criminals than ever before.
Now, with respect to others who don't fit in those
priorities, they are not given amnesty. But there are some
factors to take into consideration, and I think that the memo
is merely an effort to elucidate some of those factors.
Mr. Marino. So you don't see this as a--as a strict
guideline. You are looking at this as all right, the prosecutor
or the--is the prosecutor because he or she is qualified, they
are put in there in that responsible position, they have--they
do have that discretion?
Ms. Napolitano. That is right, and one of the things that
we have done is speak with the lawyers--OPLA, the lawyers who
handle these matters--and treat them like AUSAs who have
discretion to look at a number of factors----
Mr. Marino. And as was...
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. Just as they would in--in any
other kind of a criminal case.
Mr. Marino. And as was stated by the commissioner who
participated in this, this isn't an invitation to violate or
ignore the law.
Ms. Napolitano. Not at all. It is--it is to enforce the law
in a smart and effective way.
Mr. Marino. Yeah. I have just a couple other questions. I
will get through these quickly.
And I trust that you as a law enforcement colleague, as I
said before I believe we have some type--something in common as
being prosecutors--are going to keep politics out of when it
comes to enforcing immigration laws.
Ms. Napolitano. That is correct.
Mr. Marino. We just--we just--both sides, we have to keep
the political arena very far from us, particularly when it
comes to immigration.
Ms. Napolitano. That is right, and one of the things, you
know, the--the insinuation of politics has--has been made by
others, and I would remind the Committee--and I actually have
the testimony--when I testified in the Senate in--in the spring
of '09, not too long after I had become the Secretary of
Homeland Security--I said specifically that we were going to
focus on criminal aliens and that we were going to prioritize
within the immigration universe.
And there was no question raised at that time as to whether
that was proper or not. And that is really--we have done what I
said we would do 2 years ago.
Mr. Marino. Mr. Chairman, do I have a couple minutes here?
Mr. Gallegly. Would you please make it brief?
Mr. Marino. I will make it brief.
Mr. Gallegly. A few minutes over so if you just have one--
--
Mr. Marino. Okay.
Mr. Gallegly [continuing]. Question. We have two more
witnesses. It has been a long morning.
Mr. Marino. Okay. I have--I would never criticize you on a
political aspect at all. I know how tough the job is. As a
prosecutor, I am very familiar with it.
Let's switch gears here for a moment. Let's talk about FEMA
for 1 second. We had quite a disaster in Pennsylvania where I
am from, the 10th Congressional District. Many communities were
destroyed. People just lost their homes.
One of the questions I raised in Homeland Security is do
you feel that FEMA has to or is there some way that we in
Congress can give FEMA the authority to step into a state when
FEMA feels it is necessary even before a governor ask for that
help?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, in reality, that is what happens
because one of the things we have been very successful at in
terms of disaster management is when we see a disaster coming--
a hurricane, flooding, a weather system like an Irene, for
example--is to pre-deploy resources and pre-declare disaster
before the disaster even hits. It allows us to put, as I like
to say, speed and mass on target.
Mr. Marino. Right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Gallegly. The time of the gentleman is expired.
At this point, I am going to yield myself 5 minutes in
the--in the sequence that the Chairman had listed the speakers.
I, first of all, apologize for coming in a little late. I
have been in a classified briefing for an hour and a half this
morning on some national security things or I would have been
here. And I certainly want to associate myself with a couple of
things that my good friend from Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino,
alluded to.
You have a very tough job. We all recognize that. And there
are some very tough issues we are all dealing with, and I don't
want to make your job more complicated and I think when I
finish here, you will accept the fact that I have not done
that.
When I walked in, Ms. Chu from California, my good friend
and colleague, was talking about the number of precious dollars
we have to do the jobs that we have to deal with. As Chairman
of the Immigration Subcommittee of this Committee, I have been
working on immigration issues for 25 years and it seems to me
that there are some issues that still boggle my mind how we are
dealing with them.
One, of course, is the issue, and there is not a simple
answer to it and it can be spun any number of ways, but at a
time when we have the millions and millions of people
unemployed, that the President of the United States would put
out an order to put on hold approximately 300,000 deportation--
people who are in the actual deportation process--and there
have been millions and millions of dollars prosecuting these.
Ms. Napolitano. Representative, that is not exactly what
happened, but go ahead.
Mr. Gallegly. Okay. Well, for the sake of--of--of brevity
here I will--I will let you have some time and set the record
straight.
But however many they are we will set aside for a second.
Are you aware of the earned income tax credit program or
refunds?
Ms. Napolitano. Yes.
Mr. Gallegly. These are where individuals earn some money
but not quite enough money to pay any income tax----
Ms. Napolitano. It's a refundable tax credit.
Mr. Gallegly [continuing]. And then at the end of the year
they are eligible for a tax refund even though they paid no
taxes.
Are you also aware that last year there were 2.3 million
people illegally working in this country? This is per the Obama
Treasury Department's records--2.3 million people illegally
working in this country that received over $4 billion in tax
refunds, and this is a 4 percent increase over what illegal
immigrants were receiving in tax refunds after paying no taxes
over the past 5 years.
Now, this is a matter of the record. I am not going to ask
you to respond to that. However, you may or may not know the
answer to this and if you don't know the answer to this I would
like to see if you could get me the answer.
Of the 300,000 or whatever this magic number is of people
that are in the process of being deported, how many of those
have received earned--these tax refunds? And also, of those
that have received tax refunds, how many have any form of a
criminal record?
Ms. Napolitano. Well, first of all, I don't know the answer
right off the top of my head, as you might anticipate, but the
case-by-case review of the--of the cases ongoing is designed to
make sure that we are moving priority cases through the
detained docket to removal from the country. Those that have a
criminal record are those that fit within the priority
category.
So what we are trying to do is clear the docket. Remember,
the docket is setting cases in 2014 and 2015. So this is a
docket that is really backlogged.
Mr. Gallegly. Oh, I know--I know. Some of these cases that
have been pending for five, 6 years----
Ms. Napolitano. Indeed.
Mr. Gallegly [continuing]. With just one--one----
Ms. Napolitano. Continuance after another----
Mr. Gallegly. Just one extension or continuance after
another----
Ms. Napolitano. That is----
Mr. Gallegly [continuing]. Some arbitrarily and
capriciously, in my opinion----
Ms. Napolitano. Right.
Mr. Gallegly. With the hopes that one day amnesty will
solve all these problems and these cases will disappear.
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I think what we are trying to do is
reprioritize the cases that are in the system so that the most
serious ones go first.
Mr. Gallegly. Well, this gets back to the issue of--of what
constitutes criminal and this--this--this prioritization is
important. Is three drunk-driving arrests considered a
criminal? Is it robbery? Is it assault? Is it burglary?
How--how does that--you know, and maybe you could just give
us some kind of a written assessment of how these priorities
work. Because sometime when someone has been arrested at three
drunk-driving arrests and then on the fourth time they kill
somebody, we have case after case after case of these where
they are still living and they have been in the deportation
process.
Ms. Napolitano. I--I--I agree with you. I think those--
those kinds of cases are the ones we want to put into detention
and removal. I will be happy to describe for you level one, two
and three and how that works.
Mr. Gallegly. That--you want to just send that to the
Committee in writing for me or you want to try to do it now?
Ms. Napolitano. We can--we can provide--I think we have
provided a briefing to staff already but we will get you
something.
Mr. Gallegly. And if you would, for my benefit and the
Committee's benefit, send me an assessment--it may take a
little time to put these together--of--of the number of people
that have received income tax--this $4-plus billion in the last
year--how many of those individuals have actually had a
criminal record. To me, a criminal record is being put in jail
for drunk driving.
Ms. Napolitano. Okay.
Mr. Gallegly. Okay.
Ms. Napolitano. And if you could supply my staff with the
Treasury report to which you are referring so that we can take
a look at it, that would be helpful.
Mr. Gallegly. We will be happy to get that to the
appropriate person on your staff.
I do appreciate the job you are doing. Don't always agree
with everything you are doing but I do understand it is
complicated and I hope that we can work together for the sake
of the country.
Ms. Napolitano. Indeed.
Mr. Gallegly. Mr. Jordan?
Mr. Forbes. Well, I think you meant me.
But Madam Secretary, good news is I am last up for the----
Mr. Gallegly. Randy Forbes, I am sorry. I didn't mean to
slander you.
Mr. Forbes. That is--that is okay. That is okay.
[Laughter.]
I wouldn't mind being Jim Jordan.
Madam Secretary, I want to just continue, if you don't
mind, with the discussion of what some people call
administrative amnesty and I realize you call prosecutorial
discretion and, as a courtesy, I will call it prosecutorial
discretion.
We talked about the fact you have limited resources but the
reality is every prosecutor has limited resources. So that
doesn't justify bad policies if they happen to be bad policies.
I want to come back on some of the items in the memo and
kind of elaborate on what Mr. Marino was talking about a little
bit.
Do you know of any situation where the violation of law a
prosecutor would be correct in discriminating by prosecuting
more people who were uneducated or had less education than
those who had more education?
Ms. Napolitano. Educational attainment in and of itself
is--is--in an isolated--as an isolated factor is--is not a
prosecutorial issue in that sense.
Mr. Forbes. You talked about we should be prosecuting more
employers perhaps, I think. Is that a fair representation?
Ms. Napolitano. That is--and auditing more and debarring
more and finding more. That is correct.
Mr. Forbes. Would there be a situation where you think a
prosecutor would ever be justified in discriminating against
employers who had less education by prosecuting them more than
by those who had more education?
Ms. Napolitano. I think the things we look at are employers
who are intentionally and repeatedly violating immigration law.
Mr. Forbes. That is not my question. Madam Secretary, my
question----
Ms. Napolitano. It is an impossible question to answer.
Mr. Forbes. Well, the reason I say it is one of the----
Ms. Napolitano. Yeah. You obviously have a situation in
mind.
Mr. Forbes. I do.
Ms. Napolitano. Why don't you just give me the situation?
Mr. Forbes. Well, one of the criteria you have in your
prosecutorial discretion is to look at persons who are pursuing
education in the United States.
So, effectively, by those people who couldn't afford to
pursue that education, who might be undereducated or less
educated, you are having a discrimination against them. The
second----
Ms. Napolitano. Well, I would--I would disagree and that is
why I say it is important----
Mr. Forbes. Well, I am just looking----
Ms. Napolitano [continuing]. It is important to look at
factors all together in context.
Mr. Forbes. I am looking at the wording, Madam Secretary.
Ms. Napolitano. That is what a case-by-case review means.
Mr. Forbes. The other thing I would like to look at is
this. You have got one of your criteria persons whose spouse
are pregnant. Would there ever be another situation where
someone who had violated the law you would think a prosecutor
could prosecute more individuals who were unmarried or perhaps
in same-sex marriages and therefore didn't have a spouse that
was pregnant?
Is there ever a situation where that would be justified?
Ms. Napolitano. I think the prosecutorial discretion memo
speaks for itself. It lists the categories. There are things
that can be taken into context by trained agents, by trained
attorneys, looking at all of the--all of the facts.
Mr. Forbes. Madam Secretary, I am simply asking you is
there any other law to which you would allow a prosecutor to
say, if you have a pregnant spouse we are going to be less
likely to prosecute you than if you don't have a pregnant
spouse?
Ms. Napolitano. You know, I think in being a former U.S.
Attorney and attorney general and very familiar with county
attorneys and district attorneys there are always situations
where humane situations are taken into account.
Mr. Forbes. Madam Secretary, are you telling me that if you
have an employer that you want to go after that you think a
prosecutor should be able to prosecute those individuals who
are unmarried or perhaps do not have spouses that are pregnant
more than those who have a pregnant spouse?
Ms. Napolitano. You know, Representative, I just can't
answer the question as you phrased it.
Mr. Forbes. Madam Secretary, in all due respect to you,
these are your policies that you have written or approved from
your department, and what you have said in here is a prosecutor
can discriminate in favor of people who have more education
when you are talking about whether you are going to prosecute
them for being in here illegally.
But there is no crime anywhere where you would justify
prosecutors saying, we are going to prosecute people with less
education more than we do with more education. So it is a bad
policy.
There is no policy--there is no situation where you would
look at an employer and say, well, if you have got a pregnant
spouse we are not going to prosecute you for violating the
immigration laws less than we prosecute somebody who might not
have a pregnant spouse.
And then when you look at the situation on somebody who has
a spouse that has an illness, there is no situation that you
can suggest to me where any agency in the country has said that
you ought to be able to have prosecutorial discretion on
somebody that has violated the law in case they have a spouse
that might have an illness.
And what I am going to ask you is give me the examples, if
you can, of other such situations where prosecutorial
discretion is there.
Ms. Napolitano. Prosecutorial discretion is always there.
There are always factors that are taken into account. And if I
may finish, I think the way you have posited the question is
determined to reach a particular result, and I just cannot
answer it the way you have posited it.
Mr. Forbes. Madam Secretary, in all due respect, you just
don't want to answer the question because they are the policies
you wrote. So, what I am going to ask you is this, the same way
the Chairman did.
Will you give me in writing a single situation where any
agency in this country has given to their prosecutors a
situation where they suggest that they use prosecutorial
discretion and they use one of these criteria--either, one, you
should prosecute less if somebody has an education, or that you
should prosecute them less if their spouse--they have a spouse
that is pregnant, or you should prosecute them less if they
have a spouse who is ill?
You can't say that here, I understand, because you don't
know it, and the reason you don't know it is because it doesn't
exist. But if you would go back and tell me, in writing, if it
exists anywhere in the country. And Madam Secretary, it
doesn't. And if it doesn't, then you ought to look at your
policies and say maybe your policies aren't appropriate.
Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
Mr. Gallegly. The time of the gentleman has expired.
We have no further requests. It has been a long morning.
You have been under the gun for almost three and a half hours
now. I thank you for your testimony and I would like to thank
all the Members that participated. I will allow, without
objection, all Members to have 5 days to submit additional
written questions for the witness or additional material for
the record.
And with that, the full Committee stands adjourned.
Ms. Napolitano. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 1:16 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


