- FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 31, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-129

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

74-415 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JARED POLIS, Colorado
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Richard Hertling, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr., Wisconsin, Chairman

LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas, Vice-Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        Virginia
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TED POE, Texas                       HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                   Georgia
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JUDY CHU, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           TED DEUTCH, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MARK AMODEI, Nevada                  MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
JARED POLIS, Colorado

Caroline Lynch, Chief Counsel

Bobby Vassar, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MAY 31, 2012

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the State of Wisconsin, and Chairman,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........     1
The Honorable Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Virginia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........    14
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    15

WITNESSES

Kenneth L. Wainstein, Partner, Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft LLP
Oral Testimony.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Marc Rotenberg, President, Electronic Privacy Information Center
(EPIC)
Oral Testimony.................................................    27
Prepared Statement.............................................    29
Jameel Jaffer, Director, Center for Democracy, American Civil
Liberties Union (ACLU)
Oral Testimony.................................................    38
Prepared Statement.............................................    40

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr.,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Wisconsin, and
Chairman, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security.......................................................     3
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................    16

FISA AMENDMENTS ACT OF 2008

----------

THURSDAY, MAY 31, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
and Homeland Security,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable F. James
Sensenbrenner, Jr. (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Sensenbrenner, Goodlatte, Lungren,
Marino, Gowdy, Scott, Conyers, Cohen, Johnson, Chu, Jackson
Lee, and Polis.
Staff Present: (Majority) Caroline Lynch, Subcommittee
Chief Counsel; Sam Ramer, Counsel; Arthur Radford Baker,
Counsel; Lindsay Hamilton, Clerk; (Minority) Bobby Vassar,
Subcommittee Chief Counsel; and Aaron Hiller, Counsel.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The Subcommittee will be in order.
Today's hearing examines the FISA Amendments Act of 2008,
which is set to expire at the end of the year. The Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA, was enacted in 1978 to
provide procedures for the domestic collection of foreign
intelligence.
In the 40 years since FISA's enactment, communication
technologies have changed dramatically and revolutionalized the
transmission of international communication. The shift from
wireless satellite communications to fiber-optic wire
communications alter the manner in which foreign communications
are transmitted. The use of wire technology inside the United
States to transit a phone call that takes place overseas have
the unintended consequence of requiring the government to
obtain an individualized FISA Court order to monitor foreign
communications by non-U.S. persons.
In 2008, Congress passed and the President signed the
bipartisan FISA amendments to update our foreign intelligence
laws. The Act permits the Attorney General and the Director of
National Intelligence to target foreign persons reasonably
believed to be located outside the U.S. to acquire foreign
intelligence information. The Act requires prior Court approval
of all government surveillance using these authorities,
including Court approval of the government's targeting and
minimization procedures.
The FISA Amendments Act strengthens civil liberty
protections for U.S. citizens by requiring the government to
obtain an individualized Court order from the FISA Court to
target them anywhere in the world to acquire foreign
intelligence information.
Foreign surveillance under the FISA Amendments Act is
subject to extensive oversight by the Administration and
Congress. Every 60 days, the Justice Department and the
Director of National Intelligence conduct on-site reviews of
surveillance conducted pursuant to the FISA Amendments Act. In
addition, the Attorney General and the DNI conduct detailed
assessments of compliance with Court-approved targeting and
minimization procedures and provide these assessments to
Congress twice a year.
The Administration is also now required to submit to the
Judiciary and Intelligence Committees a copy of any FISA Court
order, opinion, or decision and the accompanying pleadings,
briefs, and other memoranda of law relating to a significant
construction or interpretation of any provision of FISA.
The Obama administration supports reauthorization of the
FISA Amendments Act for 5 years. DNI James Clapper and Attorney
General Eric Holder have identified reauthorization of the Act
as the top legislative priority of the intelligence community
and are urging Congress to reauthorize the Act without
amendment.
Without objection, a February 8 letter from Director
Clapper and General Holder and a March 26 letter from Director
Clapper will be made part of the record.
Hearing no objection, so ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Sensenbrenner. Foreign terrorists remain committed to
the destruction of our country, and their methods of
communication are constantly evolving. It is essential that our
intelligence community has the necessary tools to detect and
disrupt such attacks. We have a duty to ensure that the
intelligence community can gather the information they need to
protect our country and its citizens. I look forward to hearing
more about this issue and thank all of our witnesses for
participating in today's hearing.
It is now my pleasure to recognize for his opening
statement the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee, the gentleman
from Virginia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you for
holding this hearing on the FISA Amendments Act of 2008. That
is the FAA of 2008.
The Act established some parameters for the secret and, in
my view, unconstitutional collection of intelligence
information that had been ordered following the 9/11 attacks.
However, some gaping holes were left in what is required to
adequately protect the privacy of United States citizens.
Americans have the right to feel as well as be free and secure
in their persons belonging and activities from unwarranted
government intrusion, and I am concerned that the FAA does not
fully meet that standard.
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, or FISA, was
passed in 1978 to curb abuses that had been occurring in the
collection and use of intelligence information, foreign and
domestic. It was not passed for the purpose of excluding all
foreign intelligence collection from the United States but to
regulate and separate foreign and domestic intelligence
collection.
Collection of foreign intelligence requires merely that
there is--collection of foreign intelligence requires merely
that there is probable cause to believe that an actor is an
agent of the foreign government and that foreign intelligence
is a significant purpose of the collection. Now, foreign
intelligence collection is only a significant purpose of the
collection. We are left to wonder what is the primary purpose
of information gathering. And with the USA Patriot Act we have
added members of terrorist organizations and lone wolf
terrorists to this low threshold for collecting intelligence.
FISA has also recognized that foreign intelligence
collection falls under the requirements of the Fourth Amendment
when rights of U.S. persons are implicated.
Such a low threshold for collecting intelligence--with such
a low threshold for collecting intelligence, diligent oversight
and reporting is required to ensure that the collection is not
for a broader purpose than is necessary to achieve the goals.
We should not be surveilling Americans by this low standard
without some significant oversight. That is why we need clear
standards that are rigorously enforced.
The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court was created
under FISA to oversee the operations of foreign intelligence
gathering, and I suspect that the Court is doing a good job and
may be doing a good job within its authority, but it operates
in secrecy. I believe that the public has a right to know from
laws and policies and reports on their implementation that the
government is being held accountable for the Constitution and
the laws. I do not believe that the FAA provides sufficient
assurances to the public in either of these areas.
We often hear the need for the government to expand its
powers to meet the needs of technology but seldom do we hear
the likewise need to protect privacy when technology advances.
In 1978, there was little American communication to and from
foreign countries compared to today's constant barrage of
emails, phone calls, and other electronic communications. What
was rare in 1978 is now commonplace and just as deserving of
privacy from government spying and intrusion.
The FAA processes result in massive amounts of information
being collected with an untold amount of it affecting Americans
in America. Now when we talk about government collection of
data it is not just computers, it is government officials who
may be your neighbors; and when you spread it around to other
agencies you may be talking about other neighbors who are
getting access to your private information.
The primary requirements of the Fourth Amendment are
probable cause warrants and particularity in conduct and place.
It is not clear that these standards are being met when
required under the FAA's current structure.
Now we hear complaints that it is too burdensome for the
government to go through the procedures required and that we
have to give up some of our privacy for greater safety. I am
reminded of Ben Franklin's comment that those who would give up
essential liberty to purchase a little temporary safety deserve
neither liberty nor safety.
Neither the government's press for access to information to
accomplish its authorized purposes or the ease by which it can
get the information should lessen our constitutional
protections. Emergency procedures are provided under the
Constitution and under the FAA, but the exception should not
become the rule.
I look forward to the testimony of our witnesses on where
the FAA properly draws the lines between the insurance the
public is entitled to under the Constitution and the legitimate
needs of the government to do its job.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking
Member of the full Committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Sensenbrenner.
This is a sensitive discussion, as we all know, but the
Fourth Amendment is critical. And I do not think that the
Supreme Court--the courts have not finally ruled on what is
going on. I come to this hearing disturbed by how little we
know and how much more we need to know. I am glad that we are
going to have closed door hearings in the near future, and I
hope that they will be productive in terms of settling some of
the lack of information that we have about this subject.
So I guess it is going to be legitimate for us to ask how
much do we need to know, how much can we talk about publicly,
and how do we make sure that, quite frankly, FISA is not out of
control? At this point, we do not have any way of knowing that,
and one of the problems is the so-called minimization strategy.
So I think we need to strengthen minimization and to make sure
that this is a very understandable FISA operation that is
satisfactorily constitutional, and right now we are not able to
do that.
So I am hoping that, in addition--and I hope the Chair will
support or even lead in this--we need to talk to FISA
officials. This whole idea of us holding a hearing about FISA
and nobody from FISA is here is part of the problem. We want to
talk to the director, publicly or privately, and I have not had
that opportunity yet, and I hope that the Members of the
Committee share in my desire to do that.
And so I will put the rest of my statement into the record.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee
on the Judiciary
I want to begin by thanking both Chairman Smith and Chairman
Sensenbrenner for scheduling this hearing in such a timely manner.
Mr. Scott, Mr. Nadler, and I wrote to Chairman Smith on May 9,
requesting public hearings on the expiring provisions of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act. Here we are, just a few days later,
beginning an important discussion about civil liberties and the scope
of secret government surveillance. I look forward to additional
hearings on this topic, and I thank you both.
Four years ago, when we passed the FISA Amendments Act of 2008, we
authorized the electronic surveillance of suspected terrorists and
foreign agents located outside the United States.
Although the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court has some
measure of oversight over these programs, the sweeping and general
nature of this authority has given many cause for concern.
For example, the government may describe its operations to the
court in exceptionally general terms--as broad as ``all phone calls,
emails, and text messages originating in Pakistan''--and conduct wide-
ranging, dragnet surveillance from there. Although the law requires the
government to use ``minimization procedures'' that limit the impact of
these programs on American citizens, there is no question that the
government can and does intercept and listen in on the communications
of U.S. persons.
The scope of this law has also raised questions about the practice
of ``reverse targeting,'' where the government officially targets a
foreign person in order to listen in on the conversations of U.S.
persons on the other end of the line. This practice is explicitly
prohibited by law--but with so much about these programs conducted in
secret, including basic information about the impact of these programs
on Americans, we have no way of knowing for sure whether the government
conducts itself lawfully.
These concerns are more than theoretical. In 2009, the New York
Times reported that the NSA had engaged in the ``overcollection'' of
American communications in situations not permitted by law. The
government assures us that this problem, although widespread, was an
accident and has been corrected. Whether or not the practice was
deliberate, it was illegal--and it does not inspire confidence in the
program.
More recently, in a letter to Senators Ron Wyden (D-OR) and Mark
Udall (D-CO), the Office of the Director of National Intelligence
stated that it is ``not reasonably possible'' to determine how many
people in the United States have had their communications intercepted
and reviewed under this law. That answer is not satisfactory, and the
public deserves better.
Four years ago, supporters of the bill assured us that it would
adequately protect the privacy of American citizens and other U.S.
persons. They continue to make those assurances. But the reason the
FISA Amendment Act included a four-year sunset is so that Congress can
conduct meaningful oversight--and not merely rubber stamp an executive
branch prerogative.
The government can and must do a better job of responding to our
questions about privacy and other civil liberties. It can do so without
compromising national security or specific operations. I have no doubt
that these programs are important to the executive branch, but Congress
must have these answers before we can act responsibly.
I look forward to the testimony of each of the witnesses today.
__________

Mr. Conyers. But I would hope that my dear friend, Bobby
Scott, will not support Ben Franklin's motto, take it too
seriously, because we will end up in a worse situation than we
are now.
I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. I thank the gentleman.
Let me say for those who have missed it, this is a rare
chance to see bipartisanship in action. You have the
Republicans supporting the Obama administration and the
Democrats criticizing the Obama administration, and I hope that
everybody in the room duly notes that.
I would point out that since the FAA amendments of 2008
there has been no Federal court to my knowledge that has
declared any part of the FAA amendments unconstitutional on
Fourth Amendment grounds. There is a case where the Supreme
Court has granted certiorari called Clapper vs. Amnesty
International, but that is on the question of standing rather
than on the question of alleged Fourth Amendment violations.
That being said, it is now my pleasure to introduce today's
witnesses:
Kenneth Wainstein is a partner in the law firm of
Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft, where his practice focuses on
corporate internal investigations. He is also an adjunct
professor at Georgetown Law School. Mr. Wainstein served as an
Assistant U.S. Attorney in both the Southern District of New
York and the District of Columbia. Later, he served as U.S.
Attorney in D.C. And then was Assistant Attorney General for
National Security. He has served as FBI Director Robert
Mueller's Chief of Staff and then as President Bush's Homeland
Security Advisor. Mr. Wainstein received his undergraduate
degree from the University of Virginia and his law degree from
the University of California at Berkeley.
Marc Rotenberg is Executive Director of the Electronic
Privacy Information Center, known as EPIC, in Washington, D.C.,
and is also an adjunct professor of law at Georgetown
University Law Center. He has served on several national and
international advisory panels and chairs the American Bar
Association's Committee on Privacy and Information Protection.
He is a founding board member and former chair of Public
Interest Registry which manages the .org domain. He is a
graduate of Harvard College and Stanford Law School.
Mr. Jameel Jaffer is Deputy Legal Director at the ACLU and
Director of the ACLU Center for Democracy. He joined the staff
of the ACLU in 2002. Before joining the staff of the ACLU, he
served as a law clerk to Judge Amalya L. Kersey on the Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit and then to Judge Beverley
McLachlin, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada. He
is a graduate of Williams College, Cambridge University, and
Harvard Law School.
Without objection, the witnesses' statements will be
entered into the record in their entirety, but I ask that you
summarize your testimony in 5 minutes or less. And to help you
stay within the time limit there are the green, yellow, and red
lights before you, and I think you all know what they mean.
I now recognize Mr. Wainstein.

TESTIMONY OF KENNETH L. WAINSTEIN, PARTNER, CADWALADER,
WICKERSHAM & TAFT LLP

Mr. Wainstein. Chairman Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member
Scott, Ranking Member Conyers, Members of the Subcommittee, I
want to thank you for the invitation to appear before you
today.
Before getting into the intricacies of the FISA Amendments
Act, it is important to remind ourselves about the national
security threats and particularly the threat from international
terrorism that this legislation was designed to address.
Since the attacks of 9/11, we have been at war with al
Qaeda and its terrorist affiliates around the globe, and we are
making great progress against them. There are many reasons for
that progress. But one development that has contributed
significantly to that progress has been Congress' decision to
modernize our national security surveillance efforts with the
passage of the FISA Amendments Act in 2008.
In considering the FAA's reauthorization, we also need to
remember why it was that it was necessary to modernize the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act in the first place. As
you know, FISA was passed in 1978 establishing the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court, or FISA Court, and requiring
that any electronic surveillance of foreign powers or their
agents must first be approved by that Court.
In crafting this law, however, Congress recognized that it
had to balance the need for a judicial review process for
domestic surveillance against the government's need to freely
conduct surveillance overseas. It accomplished that objective
by clearly distinguishing between surveillances directed
against persons located within the United States, where
constitutional protections apply, and those directed against
persons outside the United States, where the Fourth Amendment
does not apply.
In identifying those targets that would fall within the
statute and could therefore be surveilled only after the
government puts together a voluminous application and obtains a
court order from the FISA Court, the FISA statute laid out a
number of factors the FISA Court and the government should look
at, including the type of communications technology that the
target was using, whether he was communicating by wire--a
cable--or by satellite transmission. The result was a carveout
from the court approval process for surveillances that targeted
communications that were being made from overseas locations.
With the change in technology over the intervening years
since 1978, however, that carveout has started to break down
and the government found itself expending significant manpower
generating FISA Court applications for surveillance against
persons outside the United States. As a result, the government
was unnecessarily expending significant resources and was
increasingly forced to make tough choices regarding
surveillance of worthy counterterrorism targets.
To its enduring credit, Congress recognized that this
situation was untenable in a post-9/11 world; and after more
than a year of careful consideration it passed the FAA, which
did three critical things.
First, it authorized the FISA Court to approve surveillance
of categories of non-U.S. person intelligence targets overseas
without requiring the government to provide an individualized
application as to each particular target, which brought the
operation of FISA back in line with its original intent.
Second, it established a multi-level system of oversight by
the FISA Court, by Congress, and by various actors within the
executive branch to ensure this authority would be exercised in
full compliance with the law and the Constitution.
And, third, it significantly added to the protections for
U.S. persons by imposing the requirement for the very first
time that the government seek and obtain an individualized
order from the FISA Court whenever it seeks to conduct overseas
intelligence collection on a U.S. person while that U.S. person
is outside the United States.
In sum, the FISA Amendments Act was a particularly well
calibrated piece of legislation.
With the FAA set to expire at the end of this year the
Administration has strongly urged Congress to reauthorize the
legislation. In supporting the Administration's call for
reauthorization, I ask Congress to focus on the three
considerations that have been the focus of my remarks here
today: One, the vital importance of the FAA surveillance
authority to our counterterrorism efforts; two, the extreme
care with which Members of Congress considered, crafted, and
limited that authority when they passed the FAA 4 years ago;
and, three, the representations by the executive branch that
that authority has been implemented to great effect and with
full compliance with the law and the Constitution.
In addition, we must also focus on one other important
consideration, which is the severity of the terrorist threat we
still face today. While we have certainly weakened them in many
ways, our terrorist adversaries are still intent on inflicting
damage and death on the United States and its people. Given
that reality, now is not the time to rest on our
accomplishments, to weaken our defenses, or to scale back on a
critical intelligence authority. To the contrary, now is the
time to redouble our efforts, to press the advantage that we
have gained, and to reauthorize the statute that has done so
much to protect our people and their liberties over the past 4
years.
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak about this
important matter. I look forward to answering any questions you
may have for me.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wainstein follows:]

__________

Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Wainstein.
Mr. Rotenberg.

TESTIMONY OF MARC ROTENBERG, PRESIDENT,
ELECTRONIC PRIVACY INFORMATION CENTER (EPIC)

Mr. Rotenberg. Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee,
thank you very much for the opportunity to testify today.
My name is Marc Rotenberg. I am Director of the Electronic
Privacy Information Center. We are a nonpartisan research
organization very much concerned about the government's use of
electronic surveillance authority.
I am also the former chair of an ABA committee that looked
at reform of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act shortly
after 9/11. The committee was fully aware of the threats to
national security to our country and considered certainly the
essential purpose of the FISA to enable the collection of
important foreign intelligence information.
The committee made three recommendations to also ensure the
protection of important privacy interests and constitutional
interests of U.S. persons: Suggesting first that Congress had a
critical oversight role to play--and in that spirit we are
grateful for the hearing today; secondly, that data collection
be focused so as to protect constitutional interests; and,
third, I think of particular interest to the Committee this
morning is a recommendation that the public reporting
requirements for the use of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act be expanded so that information would be
available to the public on the use of FISA similar to the
information that is available for the use of Title III criminal
wiretap warrants. And my testimony this morning really focuses
on the need to promote this type of transparency and
accountability in the use of FISA authority.
Now, you may be aware that the administrative office of the
U.S. courts publishes an annual report. It runs almost 200
pages. It details the use of wiretap authority in the United
States for criminal investigations. It provides a great deal of
information about the cost, about the effectiveness, about the
jurisdictions that are using wiretap authority, as well as the
number of incriminating and nonincriminating communications
that are gathered.
Most critically, this report, which has been produced every
year for over 30 years, provides only statistical data. It does
not implicate any particular investigation. It does not reveal
any details about ongoing investigations. It does, however,
provide a basis for the public and for the Congress to evaluate
the effectiveness and the use of electronic surveillance in
criminal investigations.
The ABA recommended in 2033, and EPIC very much supports
the view, that in your consideration of the FISA Amendments Act
there should be greater public accountability for the use of
these wiretap authorities. There is simply too little known
today by the American public about the circumstances under
which FISA authorities are used. And the problem has become
somewhat worse because one of the key changes that was made in
the FISA Amendments Act of 2008 was to authorize the use of
warrants for categories of targets rather than particular
individuals, raising significant constitutional questions but
also calling into question the very minimal reporting that
currently takes place under the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act.
In our testimony, we suggest that a number of the internal
procedures that have been established which provide from the
Attorney General and from the Director of National Intelligence
reports to you about the use of section 7 of the Act could be
presented in such a way that they could be made available to
the public with simply the statistical data about the use of
the 702, 703, and 704 authorities. We think if this information
were made available then the public would have more confidence
about the use of FISA authority.
Now, Mr. Jaffer is going to speak in a moment, I know,
about the case Clapper vs. Amnesty, which the Chairman
mentioned a moment ago. The question that arises in that case
is whether the American public has a well-founded fear that the
FISA authorities might be misused, that they might be subject,
in fact, to unlawful surveillance.
I think we have to say at this point without better public
reporting we simply do not know. We simply do not know the
circumstances under which FISA authorities are used. So we
would recommend enhanced public reporting. We have additional
suggestions as well that we think would improve oversight and
transparency for the FISA Court of Review. There are checks
there in the reporting to Congress, but the reporting to the
public at this point is simply inadequate, and we would urge
you to consider those changes before reauthorization.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Rotenberg follows:]

__________
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much.
Mr. Jaffer.

TESTIMONY OF JAMEEL JAFFER, DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY,
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (ACLU)

Mr. Jaffer. Chairman Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member Scott,
thank you for inviting me to share the ACLU's concerns about
the FISA Amendments Act.
We urge you not to reauthorize the Act in its current form
and not to reauthorize the Act in any form until the government
discloses more about how the Act has been used. In essence,
this Act allows the dragnet surveillance of Americans'
international communications. Although it bars the government
from intentionally targeting people who are overseas--inside
the United States, it places virtually no restrictions on
targeting people overseas, even if those targets are
communicating with U.S. citizens and residents.
The Act's effect is to give the government nearly
unrestricted access to Americans' international phone calls and
emails. It permits the government to acquire those
communications without requiring it to specify the people or
facilities to be monitored, without requiring it to comply with
meaningful limitations on retention, use, and dissemination,
and without requiring it to obtain individualized warrants or
even to make prior administrative determinations that the
targets of government surveillance or foreign agents are
connected in any way to terrorism.
The technology is more advanced now, but the Act authorizes
what the framers would have described as general warrants. A
single surveillance order can be used to justify the monitoring
of millions of communications. It can authorize the acquisition
of all phone calls to or from a country of foreign policy
interest, Russia or Iran or Mexico, for example, including
phone calls to and from U.S. citizens inside the United States.
To engage in that kind of surveillance the government would
need to target people outside the United States. But in
targeting people outside the United States it would collect
countless Americans' private communications.
The Act also has dramatic implications for the freedoms of
speech and association. The experience of other countries shows
that these freedoms whither in an environment in which
government surveillance is unrestrained. Thirty-five years ago,
the Church Committee warned that unrestrained government
surveillance threatened to undermine our democratic society and
fundamentally alter its nature.
It would be irresponsible to disregard that warning. You
should not reauthorize the FISA Amendments Act without
prohibiting the dragnet surveillance of Americans'
communications and more narrowly restricting the circumstances
in which those communications can be retained, used, and
disseminated.
And you should not reauthorize the Act in any form without
first requiring the government to make public more information
about its interpretation and use of the Act. The government has
not disclosed its legal memos interpreting the Act, nor has it
disclosed even in part any relevant opinions issued by the FISA
Court. It has not disclosed the number of times the DNI and the
Attorney General have invoked the Act, the number of Americans
who have been unlawfully targeted, or the number of Americans
whose communications have been collected in the course of
surveillance nominally directed at people overseas.
Now, some of that information has been made available to
some Members of Congress and the FISA Court, but there is no
reason why this same information, redacted to protect
intelligence sources and methods if necessary, should not be
made available to the public and to all Members of Congress.
The public surely has a right to know how the government
interprets its surveillance authorities, and it has a right to
know at least in general terms how those authorities are being
used.
Further, Congress cannot responsibly reauthorize a
surveillance statute whose implications for Americans' privacy
the executive refuses to explain. The little that we do know
about the executive's use of the Act is troubling. Records
obtained by the ACLU show that the Act has been violated
repeatedly. The New York Times reported in 2009 that the NSA
had intercepted private email messages and phone calls of
Americans, quote, on a scale that went beyond the broad legal
limits established by Congress.
We strongly urge Congress not to reauthorize the Act in any
form without first requiring the government to disclose more
information about how the Act has been interpreted and used.
Thank you again for giving me this opportunity, and I look
forward to hearing your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jaffer follows:]

__________

Mr. Sensenbrenner. I want to thank all of the witnesses for
staying within the 5-minute time limit.
The Chair will withhold his questioning and will start by
recognizing the Chairman from California, Mr. Lungren, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lungren. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jaffer, do you have a problem with the FISA Court's
competence in reviewing on an annual basis the procedures that
are used by the intelligence community to conduct these
programs, that is, that the programs have an annual review?
Mr. Jaffer. I do not think the question is one of
competence. I think the question is one of the Court's
jurisdiction and the Court's mandate. And here the question is,
has the Court given--has the Court been given the authority to
actually ask the government why it is engaged in this kind of
surveillance, who its targets are, what kinds of
communication----
Mr. Lungren. So your question is you do not know whether
that is the case or you believe that that is not the case?
Mr. Jaffer. I don't think there is enough public
information to know anything about the way the Court has acted
or----
Mr. Lungren. So your statement that there is a failure to
have an auditing process of the procedures they use that then
leads you to talk about this being a dragnet is based on lack
of sufficient information in the public domain to make that
judgment, is that correct?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, there are two things. There is the
statute itself which authorizes this kind of dragnet
surveillance, and the Obama administration has not disagreed
with that.
Mr. Lungren. I do not think they call it ``dragnet'', but
go ahead.
Mr. Jaffer. Well, they did not use that word, but they did
say that this statute can be used for nonindividuals----
Mr. Lungren. What I was trying to understand is you said
there is no auditing process. In fact, there is a requirement
that the Court must review these programs--these specific
programs on an annual basis in addition to the specific
applications that are requested by the Court in particular
cases.
Mr. Wainstein, could you reflect on that, based on your
prior experience?
Mr. Wainstein. The competence of the Court, sir?
Mr. Lungren. Yeah. And whether they do in fact ask these
kinds of questions. I mean, I could tell you what I know from
classified briefings and what we have seen, but your experience
on that.
Mr. Wainstein. Thank you for the question, sir.
I was the Assistant Attorney General for National Security
and so I was sort of on point with my folks in dealing with the
FISA Court for the time I was in that position, and I can tell
you from personal experience they are very active. They are
Federal judges. They are used to asking questions and getting
answers to those questions. And they take their responsibility
very seriously--their responsibility being their oversight
responsibility.
So when you go in--I mean, there are routine orders that
you apply for and get, and that is just sort of like any
Federal judge who issues search warrants. They base their
decision on the facts that you present to them. But they also
have the broader purpose of making sure that the program is
being run responsibly, and they ask the tough questions.
And I cannot speak from personal experience about their
oversight under the FAA, because that happened after I moved
out of that position, but I can tell you, knowing those judges,
that they are being very aggressive in asking the questions
about making sure that the targeting procedures are well
designed and they are being well applied to minimize the
instances where there might be mistakes and people within the
United States end up getting swept into that.
Mr. Lungren. And, Mr. Rotenberg, it is a fact that those of
us in Congress who serve on the Judiciary Committees and the
Intelligence Committee have the ability to look at the
documents and the decisions made by the Court, both in terms of
the general review of programs and any decision made by the
Court that has a significant legal issue. Is your problem that
that is limited to just those Members of Congress--although I
believe if another Member of Congress asked the Chairman of
either Intelligence or Judiciary it would be up to the Chairman
of either of those Committees to make that decision. But is it
your objection that that is too limited and that those of us on
these Committees either do not have the competence or that it
should be expanded, that other Members have it, or that the
public should have that information as well?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I think it is the latter, Mr. Lungren.
I mean, clearly, it is an important oversight mechanism that
you do have access to this information, and we fully support
that. But we also do think that the public could be provided
with statistical reports. It is something that has been done
routinely over the years for Title III.
And going back, of course, to the history of the
warrantless wiretapping program, part of the reason that the
oversight mechanism broke down and the FISA Court itself was
not informed about the activities the government was engaged
in, because there were not enough routinized reports that were
put in place.
So we are certainly not questioning the competence of the
Court or the oversight committees. We are saying that this
additional safeguard that would give the public the opportunity
to have a general picture of this very important government
function would be helpful.
Mr. Lungren. I appreciate that, and I understand the
different positions here. I would just stress that this is an
independent Court. It is made up of regularly sitting Federal
judges. There is a review Court as well, and those of us in the
Congress who serve on these Committees have access to any major
decision made by the Court as well as these annual reviews done
by the Court.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The time of the gentleman is expired.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jaffer, you indicated that you could target emails if
they are sent overseas. You can pick up emails anywhere. How do
you know that an email has been sent overseas?
Mr. Jaffer. Thank you for the question.
So this is actually one of the questions that I think
Congress should try to get to the bottom of. Because it really
is a concern that the Act forecloses the government from
targeting people who are known to be in the United States. In a
lot of instances, you do not know. You do not know where a
person is. You do not know where the communication is coming
from or going to. And under this statute the government has the
authority to pick up those kinds of communications. That is one
of our concerns about the Act.
Mr. Scott. You talked about nonindividualized as technology
allows you to get a whole lot of information. Should there be a
difference between getting information and then what you do
with it after you get it, what sort, select and search kind of
things?
Mr. Jaffer. Absolutely. I think that is exactly--you have
to divide this into two questions. There is a front-end
question of what the government should be permitted to pick up
in the first instance, and then there is a back-end question
about what the government can do with what it has picked up.
I think on the front end--and this goes to Mr. Lungren's
questions, too--it is important to recognize that the Court's
role here is very, very limited. This is not like a search
warrant--a traditional search warrant process in which the
Court is presented with evidence about a particular target,
some justification for wiretapping that target.
This is a system in which the FISA Court reviews broad
programs. The only question that the FISA Court asks is whether
the program as a whole has as its significant purpose gathering
foreign intelligence information and whether the targets are
overseas. But, again, targets overseas very commonly speak to
people inside the United States, and it is those communications
that we are worried about here.
Mr. Scott. Well, you said ``the'' significant purpose. It
is ``a'' significant purpose. In response to a question I asked
the former attorney general, it is just a significant purpose
and not the primary purpose, what could the primary purpose do.
And we have some of these joint task forces where you may have
an intelligence official sitting up there and others who are
restrained by criminal warrant standards where they need real
probable cause that a crime is being committed in evidence and
the foreign intelligence standard which means that it is
relevant to foreign intelligence which could be about anything.
In response to a question, what could the primary purpose
be if it is not foreign intelligence, you said it could be a
criminal investigation, which means you are doing a criminal
investigation on a much different standard. Should we change a
significant purpose back to the primary purpose, the way it was
before the early 2000's?
Mr. Jaffer. I think that that would be a great thing to do.
I think that there are a few other things that you should
consider doing as well. One is foreclosing dragnet surveillance
of Americans' communications, and there are a variety of ways
to do that, and a variety of proposals have already been made.
And then the other is--and you were alluding to this, Mr.
Scott--strengthening the minimization requirement. So even if
Congress decides that it is in the interest of the country to
give the government unfettered access to Americans'
international communications in the first instance, there is
still the question what can the government do with those
communications once acquired, and there are ways to strengthen
minimization to ensure that Americans' privacy is protected.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Mr. Wainstein, you indicated the comparison between in FISA
Courts the search warrants and how the Court has to go through
a process. The difference between search warrants in a criminal
case and the FISA warrant is that search warrants eventually
become public so the public can see what is going on. What kind
of information should be made available to the public so that
we can have confidence that the program is being run
appropriately?
Mr. Wainstein. Ranking Member Scott, that is a very good
question. And the concern about transparency and public
knowledge of any national security program is a very serious
concern. Because the more knowledge the public has the more
confidence they have that an authority is being responsibly
exercised. So that is an important concern.
I will say that when it comes to FISA Court operations they
are the most sensitive of the sensitive operations in our
national security apparatus. And, recognizing that, FISA, the
statute itself, decided appropriately to give that insight
into--for Congress. So Congress gets reports on a regular basis
about all the orders that are issued by the FISA Court, can ask
questions about the program, can bring members of the executive
branch up and quiz them about, in closed session, about
classified information. And that is the balance. That is the
balancing that provides the representatives of the people with
insight into a very classified world but also does not divulge
important secrets.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir.
I think our discussion so far this morning brings us to
this issue: Can and should we get more information in the
process of reauthorizing FISA? And with the exception of the
former attorney general of California on the Committee I think
everybody that I have heard thinks that there is nothing wrong
with getting a little bit more information so that we know what
is happening. Would you say that is a fair opinion to hold at
this point, Mr. Wainstein?
Mr. Wainstein. I would say in theory, as a matter of
principle, more information to the public is better, all things
being equal. However, in this area where you are talking about
intelligence officials coming into the FISA Court, laying out
the most sensitive information about sources and methods----
Mr. Conyers. Well, we did not say--I do not want to do that
either. So I agree with you. We do not want to throw out
sensitive information. That is why I said this is a somewhat
tricky sensitive kind of a discussion we are having. Let us
agree that we do not want to do that, and I would never
rationalize doing it.
What do you think, Mr. Rotenberg?
Mr. Rotenberg. I think it is a very good approach, Mr.
Conyers. If nothing else, it will give us more information to
evaluate the effectiveness of the program. Certainly in looking
at the annual wiretap report we get very useful information. It
shows us strengths and weaknesses and where government
authorities maybe need to be enhanced, and I think that would
help here.
Mr. Conyers. After all, we want to improve the laws. I know
you are very generous in your compliments about the Congress
acting on this originally. But for goodness sake, just to okay
it again because we did it before--couldn't we improve it a
little bit?
What about minimization, Mr. Jaffer? Doesn't that require a
little more carefulness?
Mr. Jaffer. I think it does, Mr. Conyers.
The way that minimization works right now, the government
is required to minimize only insofar as the information
obtained is not foreign intelligence information. But foreign
intelligence information is defined extremely broadly. And so
anything--any communication about, for example, foreign affairs
is one that the government under the statute can disseminate.
And Americans talk about foreign affairs all the time, over
the phone, in emails. And I think it is unacceptable to say to
Americans that when you are communicating about foreign affairs
in an email that is something that the government can have
access to, even if you have never done anything wrong and even
if the person you are talking to is not believed to have done
anything wrong.
But, Mr. Conyers, if I could just say one more thing about
the transparency point that you raised. There is precedent for
the release of FISA Court opinions with redactions. The FISA
Court released an opinion in 2002 about the significant purpose
amendment. The FISA Court of Review released an opinion in 2003
about that same amendment. In 2008, the FISA Court of Review
released another opinion about the Protect America Act.
So there is precedent for the release of legal reasoning in
these opinions with the redaction of legitimate sources and
methods, and I think everybody is in agreement that some
information in these opinions is likely to be sensitive and the
government has a legitimate interest in keeping that
information secret. But it is a different story when what the
government is keeping secret is legal reasoning.
Mr. Conyers. Professor Rotenberg, let me close with this
observation. We have been told that we cannot even tell how
many people are being subjected to this process located in the
United States and that we do not know and they cannot tell us.
And I think we could get a little bit closer. There could be
some reasonableness there to give----
You know, it is this kind of vagueness that creates in
those of us in the Congress suspicions that are negative rather
than suspicions that are positive. We do not know and we cannot
be told basic information like this.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman's time is expired.
Mr. Conyers. Do you mind if he responds?
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The witness will respond.
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I agree of course, Mr. Conyers.
As I said in my statement, I think when you create
authorities for the government you need to create a
counterbalance of oversight. And the problem with the FISA
Amendments Act of 2008 that actually went quite far with new
surveillance authorities, in our view, these means of public
oversight do not match the authorities.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Chu.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Jaffer, in your testimony you mentioned the New York
Times article which revealed that the National Security Agency
had intercepted private emails and phone calls of Americans.
You stated that the ACLU had obtained records showing that
agencies conducting surveillance under FAA have improperly
collected, retained, or disseminated U.S. persons'
communications. Could you talk more specifically on the kinds
of information that the ACLU obtained?
Mr. Jaffer. Sure. Thank you for the question.
The ACLU filed Freedom of Information Act litigation a few
years ago to find out how the statute had been implemented. And
all of the records are now--we have made them available on our
Web site. But the records show, among other things, that the
government has repeatedly violated minimization and targeting
rules, and at least some of those violations resulted in the
collection of Americans' communications. There have also been
violations of the targeting restriction against directing
surveillance in Americans. So, in some cases, Americans have
been targeted inappropriately and unlawfully.
There was also at least one occasion in which the FISA
Court apparently got so frustrated with the executive's
repeated violations of the Act that the Court ordered the
Justice Department to provide reports every 90 days to explain
compliance issues.
On the one hand, I think that is a sign that the FISA Court
sometimes does have the authority to do what we want it to do.
On the other hand, it raises real concerns about whether we can
trust the executive branch to police these limitations; and I
think that we have at least enough information now to warrant
Congress asking more questions and certainly to warrant pausing
before reauthorizing the statute in its current form.
Ms. Chu. Do you believe that there is any legislative
remedy to this--to address the fears that Americans have that
they are being subjected to warrantless surveillance?
Mr. Jaffer. Absolutely. I think that when this Act was
first proposed by the Bush administration the main problem that
the Bush administration identified was that they believed that
they could not wiretap foreign-to-foreign communication--so
communications between non-U.S. persons--without getting a
warrant, because some of those communications were running
through the United States.
And nobody is making the argument that we should revert to
a world in which the government has to get a warrant for those
kinds of communications. What we are talking about is something
relatively narrow here. What we are asking for is a fix that
prevents the government from engaging in suspicionless dragnet
surveillance of Americans' international communications, and
there are a variety of ways in which Congress could make that
fix.
Ms. Chu. Mr. Rotenberg, how rigorous is the certification
process of the Attorney General and the Director of National
Intelligence regarding the authorization of a surveillance
program under Title VII of FISA? Has the FISA Court ever
rejected an application under Title VII?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, that is a very good question,
Congresswoman, and I could not answer because the information
is not made available to the public.
There are statutory provisions as to the contents of the
report that are made available to your Committee. But here is
the information that is made available to the public about the
use of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. It is a two-
page letter. It is sent at the end of April every year from the
Attorney General to the Speaker and to the President of the
Senate. And this is what we know about the use of FISA
authority.
So in recommending that more information be made available
to the public about the use of FISA we are suggesting in part
it would make it possible to evaluate the adequacy of the
oversight techniques.
They may be working, by the way. I am not suggesting that
there is a competency or a systemic problem here. But you see
it is a small number of people that have access to this
information and it takes time to evaluate.
Ms. Chu. In exigent circumstances the FAA allows the
government to conduct electronic surveillance for 7 days
without even making an application to the FISA Court. What is
the standard for exigent circumstances and who gets to decide
when that standard applies?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I mean, that is also set out in the
statute, and that is actually consistent with other provisions
in similar surveillance authorities.
So certainly there will be circumstances, for example,
where the government needs to undertake a search. It believes
that it does not have time to obtain the Court authority. It
can go forward with the search. But it is quite important,
actually, that the statute requires the government to come back
later and make the application that is required; and if they
cannot get approval for the application, then the surveillance
activity is suspended. And, again, the requirements for that
are set out in the statute.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman from Colorado, Mr. Polis.
Mr. Polis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Mr. Jaffer. The first question, in your
testimony you mention your concern that the Administration is
conducting ``bulk collection'' of American communications. I
was hoping you could explain that term and kind of the evidence
that you have that this is occurring.
Mr. Jaffer. Well, when the Bush administration proposed the
statute, they explained that one purpose of the statute was to
allow for bulk collection, meaning nonindividualized
collection. In that kind of situation, the government does not
go to the Court and say we want to target this specific person.
Instead, it goes to the Court and says we want to target people
overseas generally. Maybe we want to target everybody in this
particular city or we want to target everybody in this
particular country.
Mr. Polis. So, to be clear, they could be like every email
from Karachi or something like that, hypothetically.
Mr. Jaffer. Or Mexico, right, absolutely.
Mr. Polis. And do you have any evidence that this is
occurring?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, this is something that came up in Clapper
vs. Amnesty, the case that we are litigating right now,
involving this Act. And the Administration was asked this
question--the Obama administration was asked this question by
the Southern District and then again by the appeals court. And
the Administration had an opportunity to say that this is not
how the Act is being used, and it declined to take that
opportunity.
Mr. Polis. Now, presumably, if used for bulk collection,
there would be enormous amounts of resulting data. Do we--or is
there any public knowledge about how that data might even be
gone through or what safeguards might be in place to prevent
inappropriate use of personal data unrelated to a threat from
that data?
Mr. Jaffer. Well, we have the statute, and the statute does
lay out in broad terms what safeguards have to be put in place.
And our concern is that those safeguards are too weak.
One of the concerns is that the definition of foreign
intelligence information is so broad that minimization applies
only to a subcategory of the most sensitive information. And
the result is that Americans' communications about things like
foreign affairs can be disseminated, analyzed, retained forever
without really any other safeguard.
And that is a concern not just from a privacy standpoint
but from a First Amendment standpoint as well. Because, as I
said in my introductory remarks, this kind of surveillance has
a chilling effect on activity that is not just protected but is
sort of necessary to our democracy.
Mr. Polis. Now, many proponents also say that any issues
that arise under it can be dealt with by Federal judges who
actually approve the FAA applications, and I wanted to question
you about how effective that has been. How effective has the
role of Federal judges been in administering the FAA and are
there any specific recommendations for improving the ability of
judges to administer the FAA?
Mr. Jaffer. Thank you for that question. I think that is an
important question.
So I guess there are two separate parts of this. One is the
FISA Court itself. And I think, as Mr. Rotenberg has pointed
out, part of the problem is we do not know precisely what is
going on or even in the most general terms what is going on in
the FISA Court. And we think it is important that some of the
FISA Court opinions relating to the FAA be released, at least
in redacted form.
But then--and this goes to something that Chairman
Sensenbrenner said right at the beginning--it is true that no
other Federal Court has weighed in on the constitutionality of
the FAA and no Court has found any provision of the FAA to be
unconstitutional. But that is because the Administration, first
the Bush administration now the Obama administration, have
insulated the FAA from judicial review. And they have done that
by saying to plaintiffs that the only people who can challenge
this kind of surveillance are people who can show that their
own communications have been monitored. And obviously nobody
can show that their own communications have been monitored,
because that is not information that the Administration has
released.
So you are in this situation where this extremely far-
reaching surveillance statute, definitely the most far-reaching
surveillance statute ever enacted by Congress, is essentially
beyond the reach of the courts, and that I think is a problem
in itself.
Mr. Polis. And I think from your description it sounds like
one of the issues is there is insufficient standing to bring it
to Federal Court. So one legislative improvement might be to
define standing in such a way that you do not have to know
something that by its very nature you do not know about
yourself. So there might be others or some that therefore have
standing to get it to Federal Court. Is that the issue you
identified?
Mr. Jaffer. I think that would be an improvement to the
law.
That said, we believe we have standing in the case that we
are litigating before the Supreme Court, and the Second Circuit
agreed with us.
Mr. Polis. But you believe that there is still this issue
with regard to standing; and, as you said, it is something by
very nature people do not know about themselves would be the
ones who would have to object.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. With respect to the Director of National
Intelligence, what is the relationship between that office and
the other--I believe it is--what--26 intelligence-gathering
agencies within the U.S. Government? What is the relationship,
Mr. Wainstein.
Mr. Wainstein. Well, Congressman Johnson, the Office of the
Director of National Intelligence was established sort of to be
the ``quarterback of the intelligence community'' so the DNI,
the Director of National Intelligence, sets the requirements
for the Intelligence Community, the collection requirements,
and provides oversight in a number of ways. And in this
particular process the DNI plays a critical role, because, as
you know, the Director of National Intelligence and the
Attorney General have to jointly certify to these collections
and certify that they are being done legally and
constitutionally.
Mr. Johnson. Certainly. But DNI is pretty much the
quarterback for all of the other intelligence agencies within
the Federal Government. How many are there, about 26 of them?
Mr. Wainstein. Sixteen, right? I am forgetting, but I want
to say 16.
Mr. Johnson. Sixteen, okay. That might be good.
But now the process is--16?
Mr. Wainstein. I am getting nods from the audience, 16.
Mr. Johnson. The process is that the intelligence community
uses or the tools that are used to conduct surveillance are
products from defense contractors and intelligence agency
contractors; is that correct?
Mr. Wainstein. A lot of the technology is worked on by
contractors as well as people within the intelligence
community, yes.
Mr. Johnson. And I suppose there are some firewalls between
the various intelligence agencies, but perhaps not. What do you
think about that?
Mr. Wainstein. Firewalls for the passage or the conveying
of information?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Wainstein. Actually, one of the major efforts since 9/
11 has been to take down the stovepipes and the walls between
these different agencies. And there are--obviously, for
sensitive information there are limitations on dissemination,
et cetera. But the focus of the DNI has been to try to make
sure that everybody gets the information they need to do their
job.
Mr. Johnson. Certainly.
Well, tell me this now. Does the intelligence community
have the technological capacity to identify Americans based
upon the content of their electronic communications?
Mr. Wainstein. That is actually a very good question; and,
obviously, I can't get into classified techniques that they use
to identify communicants----
Mr. Johnson. But they do have that capability, wouldn't you
agree?
Mr. Wainstein. My understanding is they have the capability
to an extent.
But keep in mind when you try to identify a communication
like a telephone call, just in our own experience, you look
at--you know, if you try to figure out whether the person is
American or not you might look at the phone number, you might
try to ask the person on the phone. I mean, you might listen to
the content to determine whether they are talking about being
overseas or not. There is not sort of one set of indicia that
definitively identifies every communication being overseas.
Mr. Johnson. I have a hard time getting a good answer for
that question.
Tell me, what I would assume that we do have the ability to
identify Americans based upon the content of their electronic
communications. I would assume that we would be able to do
that. But I can't get anyone to admit that we do have that
capability, not that we do it but we have the capability, and
that causes me a lot of suspicion.
And I tell you, with the Chamber leaks problem that came
out a couple of years ago, where a couple of defense
contractors were making a proposal to the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce to use information gleaned from these processes that
they have developed to spy on and disrupt and destroy opponents
of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, I am concerned about that.
I am concerned about the recent USA Today situation where
reporters reporting on a defense contractor engaged in
propaganda actions. We are targeted by persons in that company,
in that defense company. Subcontractor.
Mr. Jaffer, how would you add to this.
Mr. Jaffer. Mr. Johnson, I think that you are absolutely
right to be worried about the way that these powers will be
used. If you look at the way that similar powers were used
before FISA was enacted, there were all kinds of abuses. There
were Members of Congress who were wiretapped. There were
journalists who were wiretapped. There were Supreme Court
justices who were wiretapped. There was a Member of Congress
whom the NSA sought to wiretap in 2006 or 2007. That is in the
same New York Times story that we referred to earlier.
I think that history shows us that these kinds of broad
surveillance powers can and will be abused, and that is part of
the reason why you need to set out limits now to make sure that
that doesn't happen.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
I want to follow up with the article. I must have missed
that one. You say it revealed that they had been listening in
on conversations of judges.
Mr. Jaffer. That Church Committee report--yes, the Church
Committee report goes into some detail about that. That was
back in----
Mr. Cohen. The '70's.
Mr. Jaffer. That is right.
Mr. Cohen. We don't have any knowledge of any current?
Mr. Jaffer. No.
Mr. Cohen. Okay. I tuned in a little late, and 40 years is
a long time.
Mr. Jaffer. No. The current evidence is of wiretapping a
Member of Congress, and all I know about that is from the Eric
Lichtblau story that several of us have already referred to.
Mr. Cohen. And who was the Member?
Mr. Jaffer. I don't know.
Mr. Cohen. What was revealed about the purpose of which
they wiretapped the individual or what they learned or was
anything revealed?
Mr. Jaffer. All I know is from that story. The story
reports that a Member of Congress was traveling overseas
somewhere in the Middle East and the NSA sought the authority
to wiretap the conversations of that Member. I don't know if
they actually got that authority. There are just three or four
sentences in the New York Times story.
Mr. Cohen. How much is available for us to know about the
dealings of the FISA Court as far as applications denied, basis
for denial? Is any of that available?
Mr. Jaffer. Almost nothing is available. The only thing
that is available is this raw number, number of applications
filed with the FISA Court and number of applications granted or
denied. And even that number doesn't break down between
traditional FISA and the FISA Amendments Act.
So you don't know how many programs of surveillance have
been authorized. You don't know how many have been approved by
the Court. You don't know how broad those programs have been.
You don't know how many Americans have been wiretapped as a
result. And you don't know what has been done with the
communications that have been acquired. So that all sorts of,
in our view, crucial facts are still being withheld at least
from the public.
And then, on top of that, there is this question of the
legal authority.
So this is a complicated statute, and there are legitimate
questions about how it ought to be interpreted. We don't know
how the Obama administration is interpreting this statute,
because it hasn't disclosed even in redacted form the Office of
Legal Council memos. And we don't know how the FISA Court has
interpreted the statute, because we don't have, even in
redacted form, the FISA Court's opinions.
I should have said this earlier, but there was a process
put in place a couple of years ago by the Obama administration
to declassify other FISA Court opinions, and there was a
recognition on the part of the Obama administration at that
time that more of these opinions needed to be released, that
the public had a right to know more about how that Court was
interpreting the law.
Two or 3 years later, the result of that process is the
release of no FISA Court opinions. We still don't have anything
out of that process, and it is not clear to us why nothing has
come out of that process. It might be something that the
Committee could consider looking into.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir.
I yield back the remainder of my time.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Before recognizing the gentleman from
South Carolina, I notice that the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee, was in the room and stepped out, and I will
recognize her following the conclusion of the gentleman from
South Carolina's questioning. But I intend to be the last
questioner, so I would ask the Democratic staff, if she wishes
to ask questions, to have her brought back in the room.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Jaffer, you made reference to the Clapper case. I don't
have my notes in front of me. What was the breakdown of the en
banc?
Mr. Jaffer. It was six-six on the en banc. In total, eight
judges agreed that our plaintiffs had standing, and six
disagreed. But two of the judges----
Mr. Gowdy. I thought it was six to six. It just threw me
off when you said the Second Circuit agreed with you. I thought
it was six to six, which some people claim ties as victories
and some people don't. I guess if you prevailed on the three-
judge panel then you are entitled to claim victory of a six-six
tie.
Mr. Jaffer. It was three-zero on the panel, and the full
Court decided not to rehear the case. There were actually eight
judges, though, who agreed with us of the full Court. Two of
them didn't participate in the en banc.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, let me see if you and I can agree on
something. Does the Fourth Amendment apply to foreign targets
in foreign lands?
Mr. Jaffer. I don't think that is the question presented
by----
Mr. Gowdy. No, no, no. That is my question. So I promise
you it is the right question, because that is my question. Does
it apply?
Mr. Jaffer. I don't think it does.
Mr. Gowdy. When you say you don't ``think'' it does----
Mr. Jaffer. Well, in the circumstances of this statute, I
don't think it does. We certainly haven't made the argument
that it does.
Mr. Gowdy. Does the Fourth Amendment--I am not talking
about a statute. I am talking about does the Fourth Amendment
apply to foreign nationals in foreign lands?
Mr. Jaffer. It does not.
Mr. Gowdy. Does the Second Amendment apply?
Mr. Jaffer. I don't know the law, but I think no.
Mr. Gowdy. The First? Eighth?
Mr. Jaffer. I think it would depend on the circumstances.
Mr. Gowdy. Women's suffrage? Does that apply?
Mr. Jaffer. No.
Mr. Gowdy. That is my point. They don't. So we are not
talking about surveillance of foreign nationals in foreign
lands, right? You don't think there is a constitutional----
Mr. Jaffer.--American communications----
Mr. Gowdy. That is my second point. If you will let me get
to it. If you will let me get to it.
Professor Rotenberg was quoted--and it would not be the
first time somebody's been quoted incorrectly, so I am going to
give you a chance to say if you were quoted incorrectly--that
there was a constitutional problem with monitoring foreign
targets, and I am trying to understand what that constitutional
problem might be of foreign targets in foreign land. Or the
third alternative is that you were quoted incorrectly.
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, Congressman, I am not quite sure of
the context, but I am sure the concern I have was the
constitutional problem was in the targeting of a foreign target
in a foreign land. You would also acquire the communication of
a U.S. Person.
Mr. Gowdy. Which leads to my next question. In a domestic
setting, Title III, where there is an unintentional
interceptee, does that unintentional interceptee have standing?
Mr. Rotenberg. Probably not. I mean, there certainly
wouldn't be a suppression motion if the person is not the
target. However--and this goes actually to my recommendation
before the Committee--you would have a great deal of
information about the percentage of communications in the
course of an investigation that were non-incriminating.
Mr. Gowdy. How do we handle the unintentional interception
of conversations with non-targets in the Title III arena?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, you do it both through minimization
and also through the reporting of non-incriminating
communications.
Mr. Gowdy. But they don't have standing--if it is an
American citizen who is intercepted unintentionally on a
domestic wire, they don't have standing to challenge.
Mr. Rotenberg. I take your question. It is an interesting
point. But you see, of course, if people in the United States
became concerned that their government was engaging in routine
surveillance of their private communications, they may well
take steps to try to protect themselves.
Mr. Gowdy. I am just asking you what the law is.
Mr. Rotenberg. I think you are asking a standing question.
Mr. Gowdy. And the answer is, no, they don't have standing.
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I am not sure the answer is no.
Mr. Gowdy. Has any court held that they have standing?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, I don't think a court has answered the
question.
I mean, the Second Circuit, to the extent that it found in
the Clapper case that there was standing based on the
possibility of injury and the steps that the plaintiffs had
taken to try to protect their communications, I think in fact
they did find they had standing.
Mr. Gowdy. I thought in the White case they found that
unintentional interceptees of domestic wires do not have
standing?
Mr. Rotenberg. I think in that case the parties did not
engage in any activity to try to prevent that type of
interception.
That is the problem here. The problem is the government
engaging in a surveillance activity with neither you nor me
knowing if in fact we are a target.
Mr. Gowdy. Which leads--Mr. Wainstein, you have been there
before. We can't make legislation by episode or anecdote. Is
the government routinely targeting American citizens in foreign
land and what protections are in place?
Mr. Wainstein. The answer is no. The statute says that the
government, if it is going to target a U.S. person in a foreign
land, based on the provision in the FAA for the first time the
government actually has to notify the FISA Court and get an
individualized FISA order.
There is also a provision in the FAA that says you can't
reverse target, which means you can't target somebody overseas
with the real purpose of trying to get the communications from
the person inside the United States that the person overseas is
talking to.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair, in the absence of the gentlewoman from Texas,
Ms. Jackson Lee, will recognize himself as the last questioner.
Mr. Wainstein, I think that we have already established
that the Fourth Amendment does not apply to foreign targets
overseas. You agree with that.
Mr. Wainstein. I agree with that.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. What is the difference between probable
cause as it applies to Title I for FISA and the requirements
for foreign surveillance approval in Title VII of the FAA?
Mr. Wainstein. Well, under FISA, regular FISA, traditional
FISA, you have to establish probable cause that the target is a
foreign power or an agent of a foreign power; and you have to
lay evidence of that out in an application to the FISA Court.
The FISA Court has to find probable cause of that showing,
which is different from the probable cause you have to show in
Title III criminal contacts.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. That was my next question, and you said
it is different.
Professor Rotenberg, I think as a goal we want to have more
transparency in all of the laws that we have except when you
are dealing with national security. If we have too much
transparency, then people who wish to do our country and its
citizens harm will end up being able to connect the dots and be
able to get away with a terrorist strike. And this is something
that this Committee has had to wrestle with really since FISA
but more acutely since 9/11.
Now, how are we able to make any sense if the law is
amended to require the government to release the numbers of
people who were incidentally monitored without identifying the
individuals that you don't want identified.
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I said, I think
statistical reporting, based on the current statute in Section
707, in fact, you do get numbers as to how many orders were
authorized under 702, 703. None of that information would
jeopardize any investigation to yield any activity.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay.
Mr. Rotenberg. I would also point out I think Mr. Jaffer's
suggestion that the legal reasoning of the FISA Court to the
extent that it can be released with appropriate sections
redacted would also be very helpful to make an effort to----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Now, following up on my question, say we
release the number of people who are incidentally monitored--
and you can pick a number from one to whatever--then how would
that number mean anything to the public if we don't release the
number of targeted individuals to compare it to?
Mr. Rotenberg. Well, you know, obviously, you would make
the decisions about what you think is appropriate to release.
But my own experience, having read these reports for many, many
years, is that it is actually quite helpful to evaluate trends
in the use of surveillance authority.
It was significant, for example, that in 2003 the number of
FISA warrants for the first time exceeded the number of Title
III warrants that were issued in the United States, and that
was a reflection of the changing character of investigations
within this country. I think that information would be helpful
not only to the Committee but also to the public.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Okay. Next question is that say we
release the actual number of people who were targeted. Does
that give the other side an indication as to the extent of the
operational strength of our national security agencies?
Mr. Rotenberg. You know, I don't see how it would. I
imagine someone could make the argument. But we are truly
talking about aggregate numbers, and you could choose, for
example, which numbers to disclose.
The main point, I think--and maybe there is agreement on
this point--the current numbers that are provided are simply
inadequate. You just don't know from the information that is
made available from the Court how this legal authority is being
used, and I don't think that is where you would want to leave
this as you are considering renewal of the Act.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. My guess is that, rather than playing
the numbers game either with the actual targets or the people
who were incidentally surveilled, perhaps decisions of the FISA
Court, particularly the review of the FISA Court appropriately
redacted, would be able to give us the answer to that question,
rather than saying there were X number of people who were
incidentally surveilled and Y number of people, you know, who
were actual targets. I have always been one that has favored
disclosure.
On the other hand, you know, I know that there is a danger
involved in that, particularly looking at what was disclosed
during the trial of the Twin Towers bombers that Michael
Mukasey as a Federal judge presided over. There was information
that was disclosed during that trial that was used by al Qaeda
to pull off 9/11, and I don't think we want to change the law
so that that happens ever again.
Well, my time is up.
I would like to thank the witnesses for appearing. This has
been a very useful hearing.
Let me say that Thursday of next week we will have a
classified briefing where many of the Members of this Committee
who have had questions can ask NDI Clapper and a yet-to-be
determined representative of the Justice Department whatever
they want. So that will be a classified briefing, and I would
encourage the Members to come to it and to re-ask the questions
that they don't think they got an adequate answer to today.
So, without objection, the hearing is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:30 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


