- U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 26, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-150

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
75-312                    WASHINGTON : 2013
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JARED POLIS, Colorado
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Richard Hertling, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on the Constitution

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Chairman

MIKE PENCE, Indiana, Vice-Chairman

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JERROLD NADLER, New York
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
STEVE KING, Iowa                     JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
Virginia

Paul B. Taylor, Chief Counsel

David Lachmann, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

JULY 26, 2012

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Trent Franks, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, and Chairman, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     3

WITNESS

The Honorable Thomas E. Perez, Assistant Attorney General, Civil
Rights Division, U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................    10

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York, and
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution...............     5
Material submitted by the Honorable Trent Franks, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Arizona, and
Chairman, Subcommittee on the Constitution.....................    34

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Post-Hearing Questions submitted to the Honorable Thomas E.
Perez, Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, U.S.
Department of Justice..........................................    48

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 26, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Constitution,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:38 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Trent Franks
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Franks, Chabot, King, Jordan,
Nadler, Conyers, and Scott.
Staff present: (Majority) Dan Huff, Counsel; Sarah Vance,
Clerk; (Minority) David Lachmann, Subcommittee Staff Director;
and Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Franks. Good morning, and we welcome you to this
Constitution Subcommittee Civil Rights Division oversight
hearing.
Without objection the Chair is authorized to declare a
recess of the Committee at any time.
Last year marked the 150th anniversary of the Civil War. It
was a chance not only to reflect on the horror of
institutionalized slavery, but a reminder to all free people
never to cast doubt on the humanity of any of our fellow human
beings. And to take solace in at least the redeeming
recognition that we fought our bloodiest war to end that
tragedy.
Today our soldiers again risk their lives for human freedom
beyond our borders. As election 2012 nears, the division's
voting section must ensure that those defending democracy
abroad can participate in it at home.
There are approximately two million military voters, many
in combat zones with limited access to ballots. Accordingly, in
2009, Congress passed the Military and Overseas Voter
Empowerment Act, the MOVE Act, which requires States to mail
absentee ballots to all military voters at least 45 days before
a Federal election. In an April 18 hearing before this
Subcommittee, the non-partisan Military Voter Protection
Projects expert testified that inadequate enforcement of the
MOVE Act in 2010 disenfranchised thousands of service members.
This year, it is imperative that the Justice Department
address violations early, negotiate strong settlements that
deter repeat offenses, and work with the Defense Department to
ensure military recruitment centers and bases offer
opportunities to register or request ballots, as required by
law.
Unfortunately, the Justice Department seems unconcerned
about low registration rates at military recruiting centers,
even though it has aggressively sued States it thinks registers
insufficient numbers of people at welfare offices. Similarly,
it must demand better results from voter assistance offices on
military installations.
In North Carolina, there are 110,000 active duty military
and spouses in the State, but only 1,860 requests for absentee
ballots have been processed. A hundred and ten thousand active
duty military spouses, but 1,860 requests for absentee ballots
have been processed. In Virginia, out of 140,000, there have
been only 874 requests processed. Either the military voting
rate averages 1 percent or there is a systemic problem evident
that almost certainly falls on the Civil Rights Division.
The Justice Department should also insist on express mail
where necessary to ensure military ballots are returned in
time. The voting section regularly imposes far heavier costs on
jurisdictions, for example, demanding bilingual ballots even
for naturalized citizens who identify speaking English well.
The voting section needs to make a first priority of protecting
service members' right to vote for those who have expressed and
demonstrate a first priority in protecting all of us.
Indeed, it is seeking headlines opposing voter ID laws that
an overwhelming majority of Americans support. The Civil Rights
Division is so desperate to block these laws, it has
embarrassed itself in court. DOJ's case against the Texas voter
ID law is based on data provided by a Democratic data firm,
whose stated mission is to cater to progressives. It seems
progressive means Democrat. Then at the trial, the judges
expressed shock that DOJ forbade its expert from counting
passports or military IDs in estimating how many Texas voters
lacked photo ID.
There is no excuse for failing to accept a government-
issued military ID, and the public deserves an answer for this
today.
Further, partisan bias is clear in the division's National
Voter Registration Act enforcement. It aggressively sues States
under the NVRA for not registering enough voters at welfare
offices, but it has not brought a single case to enforce NVRA's
requirement that States maintain accurate voter lists to fight
fraud.
When Florida tried to comply voluntarily by removing non-
citizens from its voter rolls, DOJ rushed to court to stop
them. DOJ, of course, lost. Over the local NAACP's objections,
DOJ forced Dayton, Ohio to lower the passing score on its
police recruitment exam to increase diversity, even though
Federal law explicitly prohibits altering the results of
employment-related tests on the basis of race. It appears the
division is breaking the law.
Further, the Civil Rights Division reads Section 4(e) of
the Voting Rights Act as requiring taxpayers to pay for costly
bilingual ballots, even though the legislative history is clear
that 4(e) merely exempts voters educated in Puerto Rico from
once prevalent literacy tests.
I guess I could go on, but I will stop there and look
forward to your explanation of why laws do not appear to be
faithfully executed at DOJ as required by law.
And with that, I would now yield to the Ranking Member for
his opening statement.
Mr. Nadler. I thank the Chairman. Today the Subcommittee
continues its oversight of the Civil Rights Division of the
Department of Justice. With the authority to enforce this
Nation's civil rights laws, the division is the guardian of our
fundamental values--freedom of religion, the right to be
treated fairly, the right to cast a vote in a free and fair
election, the right to a job, the right to a home, the right to
an education, and with the enactment of the Hate Crimes
Prevention Act, the right to live one's life free from the
threat of violent hate crimes.
It is especially auspicious that we are meeting today on
the 22nd anniversary of the enactment of the Americans with
Disabilities Act. That legislation was the result of a
bipartisan commitment to the rights of the disabled, and I am
pleased to note the work of the Disability Rights Section in
making the promise of the ADA a reality.
As our Subcommittee has documented, the division was deeply
troubled during the Bush years. As with other parts of the
Justice Department, career civil rights attorneys were
routinely overruled on legal matters by political appointees.
Hiring was illegally politicized. Enforcement was, in some key
areas, grossly neglected. And morale was as bad at any time
since the division's establishment. The loss of dedicated
career staff was alarming.
President Obama signaled a new era by appointing as
Assistant Attorney General Tom Perez. He is a career civil
rights lawyer, and he has been working hard to rebuild a
division that had lost many of its dedicated career attorneys,
and that had become dangerously politicized.
In addition to the historically challenging work of the
Civil Rights Division, he has been rebuilding a decimated and
demoralized office, and he has done so while dealing with such
monumental tasks as the decennial redistricting.
The division has an important story to tell, and I hope
that we will have the opportunity to review that work. Whatever
the politics, the career staff of the Justice Department has
worked hard to meet the civil rights challenges of today.
What is most distressing is that some of the same people
who undermined and discredited the Civil Rights Division while
they were there have now made a career of making false
allegations against the division. The allegations all have the
same subtext, that the division is being used to favor
minorities to the detriment of Whites. What they really mean is
that the division is now making an honest effort to enforce in
an evenhanded manner our civil rights laws, laws which they
really do not like. It is a Willie Horton campaign pure and
simple.
I am especially concerned about efforts around the country
to rob duly qualified Americans of their right to cast a vote
in a free and fair election and to have their vote counted. We
have seen the enactment of various devices having the purpose
and effect of preventing people from exercising their right to
vote under the pretext of protecting the integrity of
elections.
These efforts are not without precedent in our country. In
the past, literacy tests, grandfather clauses, and poll taxes
have been used to keep out of the polls citizens whose voices
those in power did not particularly want to hear. In our day,
purges of voter rolls, which include the removal of voters we
know for a fact are qualified, the requirement of particular
voter IDs that we know some segments of the population are less
likely to possess, and other such devices are being implemented
around the country.
The pretext, and there is no other word for it, that we are
interested in preventing fraud has never stood up to scrutiny.
Even now where a voter ID law is being challenged in
Pennsylvania, the State has already admitted in court that, and
I am quoting here, ``There have been no investigations or
prosecutions of in-person voter fraud in Pennsylvania. The
parties do not have direct personal knowledge of such
investigations or prosecutions in other States. The parties are
not aware of any incidence of in-person voter fraud in
Pennsylvania, and do not have direct personal knowledge of in-
person voter fraud elsewhere. Pennsylvania will not offer any
evidence in this action that in-person voter fraud has, in
fact, occurred in Pennsylvania or elsewhere. The Commonwealth
will not offer any evidence or argument that in-person voter
fraud is likely to occur in November 2012 in the absence of the
voter ID law.''
I ask unanimous consent to place the July 12, 2012
stipulation from Vivian Applewhite v. Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania into the record.
Mr. Franks. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Nadler. Thank you. So why have the voter ID at all? The
answer comes from the Pennsylvania House Republican Leader Mike
Turzai, who recently told the Republican State Committee to
raucous cheers that voter ID will allow Governor Romney to win
Pennsylvania. In rattling off a laundry list of accomplishments
made by the GOP run legislature, he said, ``Voter ID, which is
going to allow Governor Romney to win the State of
Pennsylvania, done.'' Can we go to the video, please?
[Video shown.]
Mr. Nadler. So I do not think it goes too far to demand the
Civil Rights Division give close and careful scrutiny to any
voting changes likely to or intended to disenfranchise votes.
There is clearly a national strategy to disenfranchise
voters for partisan political purposes, and it is the most
widespread and aggressive such campaign since the Jim Crow era.
If our civil rights laws mean anything, and I know that not all
Members joined the overwhelming bipartisan majority in voting
to extend the Voting Rights Act, then it must be that we have
an obligation to protect the right to vote. Too many Americans
have given their lives around the world and here at home for us
to allow it to be taken away.
I am also concerned about the use of police power in cities
around the country, including my own city of New York. The
police must use all the tools available to make our communities
safe, and I can report that New York's finest do an outstanding
job under sometimes very difficult circumstances. But they must
obey the law and the Constitution and respect the rights of the
communities they are sworn to serve.
Policies such as NYPD's stop and frisk policy would seem to
have crossed that line. The vast majority of individuals who
are stopped have done nothing wrong and are sent on their way.
These people are also disproportionately from communities of
color, and those communities now feel that they are under siege
rather than being protected.
I know that the Department of Justice just announced a
historic settlement with the New Orleans Police Department. It
is very much to the division's credit that it has seen this
important case through to its resolution. I hope to hear from
Assistant Attorney General Perez about the division's efforts
to ensure that those charged with enforcing the law all around
the country are themselves complying with it.
I am pleased to join you, Mr. Chairman, in welcoming
Assistant Attorney General Perez, and I look forward to his
testimony. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman. And without objection,
other Members' opening statements will be made part of the
record.
Assistant Attorney General Thomas Perez is here today to
testify before the Constitution Subcommittee, and, Mr. Perez, I
thank you for being here with us this morning.
Mr. Perez. It is an honor to be here.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Perez became the Assistant Attorney General
for the Civil Rights Division on October 8th, 2009. Prior to
becoming the Assistant Attorney General, he served as the
Secretary of Maryland's Department of Labor, Licensing, and
Regulation.
Mr. Perez has spent his entire career in public service,
serving as a career prosecutor in the Civil Rights Division,
and then as a deputy assistant attorney general for the
division. He went on to serve as director of the Office for
Civil Rights at the Department of Health and Human Services. In
addition to his extensive Justice Department service, he has
also served as special counsel to the late Senator Edward
Kennedy.
Mr. Perez is a graduate of the Harvard Law School and holds
a bachelor's degree from Brown University and a master's in
public policy from the Kennedy School of Government. He resides
in Maryland with his wife and 3 children.
Assistant Attorney General Perez, we look forward to
hearing your testimony today. And again, I welcome you to the
hearing.
Mr. Perez's written statement will be entered into the
record in its entirety. And I would ask you, Mr. Perez, to
summarize your testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help you stay
within that time, there is a timing light on your table. When
the light switches from green to yellow, you will have 1 minute
to conclude your testimony, and when the light turns red, it
signals that your 5 minutes have expired.
Before I recognize the witness, it is the tradition of this
Subcommittee that he be sworn. So if you would stand, sir, to
be sworn.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Franks. Thank you. Now I recognize Mr. Perez for 5
minutes, and do not forget that microphone button. Everybody
has trouble with that.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE THOMAS E. PEREZ, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL, CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Perez. Thank you very much, Chairman Franks, Ranking
Member Nadler, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
allowing me to come and testify before this Committee.
In the year since I last appeared before the Subcommittee,
the Civil Rights Division has continued our vigorous fair and
independent enforcement of civil rights law. It is indeed
fitting that I come to you today on the 22nd anniversary of the
ADA, a landmark law that represents a bipartisan tradition of
even-handed civil rights law enforcement. Twenty-two years ago,
I was proudly working in the Civil Rights Division as a career
attorney under Attorney General Thornburgh.
I want to thank the former Chairman of this distinguished
Committee, Chairman Sensenbrenner of Wisconsin, and his wife's
unwavering commitment to disability rights. I also commend him
for his leadership in the most recent reauthorization of the
Voting Rights Act.
Civil rights indeed has a strong bipartisan history and
tradition in this Committee, in this Congress, and across
America. Thanks to the talented career attorneys,
professionals, and support staff who work in the division, we
continue to achieve great successes in protecting the civil
rights of all individuals. And let me give you a few examples.
Two days ago in New Orleans, the AG announced the filing of
a compliant and consent decree in the most sweeping police
reform case in the department's history. This decree serves as
a comprehensive blueprint for a sustainable reform, and we are
handling more cases of this nature than at any time in our
history.
In the last Fiscal Year, the division filed hate crime
charges that resulted in the convictions of 39 defendants,
which was the largest number in more than a decade. In the last
4 Fiscal Years, we brought more human trafficking cases than in
any other 4-year period in the department's history. In the
last 4 Fiscal Years, our appellate section has filed more
amicus briefs than any other 4-year period that I am aware of.
We handled 27 new voting cases in the last Fiscal Year. We
have never handled more new cases in one Fiscal Year, that is
until this Fiscal Year, which is not yet done, in which we have
handled 36 new cases.
In the last 3 years, we participated in over 40 disability
matters in 25 States to assist people with disabilities to live
in community-based settings. We have worked with Republican and
Democratic governors in Georgia, Virginia, and Delaware to
dramatically expand opportunities for qualified individuals
with disabilities to thrive in community-based settings.
We achieved the department's largest recovery in a sexual
harassment lawsuit under the Fair Housing Act. In the last 8
months, the division has resolved the 3 largest residential
lending discrimination cases in the department's history,
including a $335 million settlement with Countrywide Financial,
a $175 million settlement with Wells Fargo, and a $21 million
settlement with SunTrust Mortgage.
We reached an agreement with Colorado to provide
interpreter services in court proceedings for individuals with
limited English proficiency so they can meaningfully access the
justice system. We are working with other States on this issue
as well.
We have protected the rights of individuals to worship and
assemble in accordance with their religious beliefs. Just last
week, we obtained a court order under the Religious Land Use
and Institutionalized Persons Act, or RLUIPA, directing
Rutherford County, Tennessee to allow a mosque in the city of
Murfreesboro to open. A few weeks earlier, a grand jury
indicted an individual for making a threat against that mosque.
We aggressively enforce laws that protect the rights of
service members. Since 2009, we filed 43 cases under the
Uniform Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act,
USERRA, which exceeds the 32 cases filed under the previous
Administration. And we obtained record relief under the Service
Members Civil Relief Act for service members who have been
victims of unlawful foreclosures.
We protected the voting rights of service members through
the enforcement of the MOVE Act and the Uniformed and Overseas
Citizens Absentee Voting Act (UOCAVA). We filed more cases in
the 2010 election cycle than any other time in the enforcement
of UOCAVA--14 matters, either lawsuits or settlements. This
year, we have already filed for more--Alabama, California,
Wisconsin, and Georgia--for noncompliance with the MOVE Act.
And we have legislative proposals that we have offered to
strengthen those protections.
I am very proud of these accomplishments which represent
only a small fraction of our work. These cases are about real
people and communities across this country who have been denied
access to equal opportunity.
It is about the students in Anoka-Hennepin School District
in Minnesota, or South Philadelphia High School, who were
victims of pervasive bullying. One of the basic rights of every
parent and student is that their student should be safe in
school and have a safe, nurturing learning environment. As a
result of our landmark agreement, these students who have been
subject to harassment can now feel safe and focus their
energies on learning.
It is about helping the worker who was fired after telling
her employer that it was wrong to deny jobs to U.S. citizens
and workers with permanent work authorizations and give those
jobs instead to people with temporary work visas. In some
cases, we expand opportunity for a few people, while in others
it may be hundreds, thousands, or even more. In all cases, we
enforce the fairly, independently, and even-handedly.
This job is a sacred trust, and I am exceedingly proud of
the work of the dedicated career professionals in the division.
We have made great strides in expanding opportunity in a number
of critical ways. Civil rights, however, remains the unfinished
business of America, and we will continue to use all the tools
in our arsenal so that all individuals enjoy the rights
guaranteed by the Constitution and laws of the United States.
Thank you for this opportunity to be here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Perez follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Perez, and I appreciate
your testimony.
I will now begin the questioning by recognizing myself for
5 minutes.
Protecting the right of those who protect us to vote seems
to be something that the American people strongly support. But
some States consistently fail to get ballots to deployed
military members in elections, systemically disenfranchising
military voters, breaking Federal law, and disenfranchising
again those who protect us.
In 2010, 14 States had counties that failed to get their
ballots out to their State's deployed military. New York alone
failed to meet their agreement deadline for 43,000 military
voters.
The settlements DOJ reached with some of these States for
these violations only perpetuated the problem since they did
not provide sufficient time for ballots to be received before
the election and mailed back in time. Worse, Mr. Perez, you
have opined that ballots filled out after the election, which
is when many military members receive their ballots under your
settlements, are invalid, ensuring that their vote is still not
counted.
This Administration's settlements continue to
disenfranchise voters. Is that perhaps because the military
tends to vote heavily Republican? I would think you would
suggest not. So what is your staff doing right now in July to
ensure that all States meet their deadlines for getting
deployed military voters their ballots in time to count.
Mr. Perez. Thank you for your question, Mr. Chairman. I
categorically disagree with your characterization of the work
that we have done. When the MOVE Act passed in 2009, we
immediately went to work working with States. And if you look
at the work that was done in the 2010 cycle, that was the most
aggressive enforcement of laws protecting military and overseas
voters in the history of the division.
There were 14 matters that we brought either through
lawsuits or through out of court settlements. Some cases, there
were dozens of people who were deprived. In New York, as you
correctly point out, there were tens of thousands. It did not
matter if it were dozens or tens of thousands. Every military
and overseas voter has the right to receive their ballot in a
timely fashion, and we were able to get that relief.
And we continued that work because this year we have
already filed 4 additional lawsuits, and we will continue to
aggressively enforce those laws.
And after the 2010 cycle, we had I think a very productive
hearing in another Committee of the House in which we debated
lessons learned from 2010.
Mr. Franks. So what commitment do you--forgive me. What
commitment can you give this Subcommittee that you are going to
take proactive actions against jurisdictions who fail to meet
their deadlines for getting ballots to the deployed service
members who request them and who are completely at the mercy of
the States to receive them? What commitment will you give us?
Mr. Perez. We have been working very proactively on that
issue, and we will continue to do so. And we will also work in
partnership with the FVAP Office, the Voter Assistance Program
in the Department of Defense, who plays a very important role
in ensuring that military and overseas voters can exercise
their right to vote.
I completely agree with what you said, Mr. Chairman. This
debate in this country--what we should be doing in this country
is continuing to have this debate about the soul and the future
of our Nation.
And then what we should be doing is making sure that every
eligible person has that right to vote. And that is why we have
put so much time into the MOVE Act enforcement, and that is why
when somebody says, well, someone might be a Republican or a
Democratic, that is offensive. That is irrelevant. And that
will never play into the work that we do.
Mr. Franks. But there is a systemic issue. So let me move
on here if I can in time here. I am going to read an opening
paragraph of a Daily Caller article from October 1st, 2011.
``Top Justice Department officials convened a meeting Wednesday
where invited Islamist advocates lobbied them for cutbacks in
terror funding, changes in agent's training manuals, additional
curbs on investigators, and a legal declaration that U.S.
citizens' criticism of Islam constitutes racial discrimination.
'The Department's ``civil rights lawyers'' are top of the line.
I say this with utter honesty. I know they can come up with a
way.'"
To redefine criticism as--I am sorry. ``To redefine
criticism as discrimination,'' says Sahar Aziz, a female
Egyptian-American lawyer. You then responded, 'We must continue
to have the open, and honest, and critical dialogue that you
saw in the robust debate.' Perez responded in an enthusiastic
closing speech minutes after Ms. Aziz made her demands at the
event. 'I sat here the entire time taking notes.' Perez said,
'I have some very concrete thoughts in the aftermath of this.'"
What were the concrete thoughts after the meeting with,
among others, a leader of an unindicted co-conspirator
organization in the largest terror finance trial in history,
after hearing a blatantly unconstitutional proposal to destroy
First Amendment free speech rights of Americans by outlawing
criticism of a religion? According to the article, no one at
Justice, including you, objected to this call to abrogate free
speech.
You know, Americans would be shocked to learn that their
Justice officials and unindicted co-conspirators in a terrorism
trial huddled together to discuss ways to take away Americans'
freedom of speech. Will you tell us here today--and I apologize
for having to hurry. Will you tell us here today that this
Administration's Department of Justice will never again
entertain or advance a proposal that criminalizes speech
against any religion?
Mr. Perez. Sir, I am not familiar with the context that you
described in the article. I have not seen that article.
Mr. Franks. You are not familiar with the meeting here at
all.
Mr. Perez. Pardon me?
Mr. Franks. You are not familiar with the meeting that the
article----
Mr. Perez. I would need to read the article in order the
context of the article. What I can tell you is that the
Department of Justice aggressively enforces all of the civil
rights laws, including laws that protect religious minorities.
And we will----
Mr. Nadler. Point of order, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. My time has expired.
Mr. Nadler. Point of order, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman will state his point.
Mr. Nadler. We have not seen that article either, and I
think it behooves us that before scurrilous accusations are
made or at least at the same time scurrilous accusations are
made, we see the article and the context so we know what we are
talking about.
Mr. Franks. Fair enough. I would place this in the record
without objection. The Daily Caller article that we mentioned,
I will place that in the record without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. And with that, my time has expired. Thank you,
Mr. Perez.
Mr. Perez. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Franks. And I now recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. Mr. Assistant Attorney General, the
New York Civil Liberties Union conducts an annual analysis of
the New York Police Department stop and frisk procedures. Last
year, the NYPD stopped and interrogated over 685,000 times, a
more than 600 percent increase in street stops since 2002 when
there were only 97,000 stops.
Nine out of 10 people stopped were innocent, meaning they
were neither arrested nor ticketed. About 87 percent of those
stopped were Black or Latino. Young Black and Latino men were
the targets of a hugely disproportionate number of stops.
Last month, a group of community advocates and elected
officials traveled from New York City to advocate for Federal
review of these practices. Can we expect some Federal review of
stop and frisk practices and of their alleged--and I would say
definite violations and systematic violations--of the civil
rights of people in New York City? Can we expect some Federal
review of these practices?
Mr. Perez. Ranking Member Nadler, we are certainly aware of
those allegations. I was in New York as recently as a week ago,
and we have received a number of requests to investigate this
matter. And we are in the process of reviewing those requests.
As I think you also know, we have a very active police
practices program. We have more civil police practices
investigations that are currently under way than at any time in
our division's history. I mentioned New Orleans, and we have
open matters north, south, east, and west.
Mr. Nadler. I noted you mentioned New Orleans. Last
December, 34 Members of Congress, myself included, wrote to the
Department of Justice urging an investigation. And do you have
any time frame as to when we may hear about that?
Mr. Perez. It remains under active review. I cannot give
you a specific response date. Obviously we have a lot of
components in the department with whom we are consulting.
Mr. Nadler. All right, thank you. A number of years ago, I
think it was 4 or 5 years ago, when Mr. Sensenbrenner was
Chairman of the Committee, we held I do not know, many, many
hours of public hearings on the question of renewal of the
Voting Rights Act, and specifically of Section 5 of the Voting
Rights Act. Some people said, and Congress decided to the
contrary, that Section 5 was no longer necessary because nobody
discriminated anymore. States and localities did not
discriminate. And that Section 5 was unfair in that it only
covered certain local jurisdictions based on their record of
discrimination prior to enactment of the Voting Rights Act, and
did not cover others, and that this was all ancient history and
of no current relevance.
I note that there are a number of people saying the same
thing again. And, of course, after those many hours of
hearings, we came up with voluminous evidence of current
discrimination and of current necessity for Section 5. And both
houses on a bipartisan basis passed a renewal, and President
Bush signed it.
Could you comment on the current necessity of Section 5? I
know there are some pending lawsuits against it. Could you
comment on the current necessity of it and on the fairness of
singling out some, but not all, jurisdictions?
Mr. Perez. Sure. Thank you for your question. And at the
outset of my testimony, I acknowledged on this anniversary of
the ADA the important contributions of the former Chair of this
Committee. As you know, Congressman Sensenbrenner, and I have
read his testimony in connection with the reauthorization of
Section 5. And if my memory serves me, he said something like
it was one of the voluminous records ever developed in his 25
plus year history in serving in the United States Congress.
And that record that the Congress so vigorously and
thoroughly developed is a record that continues to be borne
out. In short, Section 5 continues to be necessary. I look at
simply the period of time since last September where we have
interposed 14 objections, whether in the context of an
administrative review process or in the context of cases that
were filed before a three-judge panel. And some cases involved
statewide. In some cases they involve local jurisdictions. And
it continues to be necessary.
And the other thing, Congressman Nadler, that is very
important to underscore is that not only is it necessary, but
if there is a jurisdiction that believes that it should no
longer be----
Mr. Nadler. They can bail out.
Mr. Perez. There is a bailout. There have been 36 bailouts,
I believe, since 1984, 18 of which have been in the last 3
years.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I just want to have one more
question before my time expires. Today is the 22nd anniversary
of the enactment of the ADA, and I applaud the Disability
Rights Section for its tremendous work toward making the ADA's
promise of equality in access more of a reality.
In the past several Congresses, there have been proposals,
such as H.R. 3356, the so-called Access Act, in this Congress
that would require a private party to notify a public
accommodation before bringing a lawsuit under Title 3 of the
ADA.
What is the Department of Justice's position in requiring
pre-suit notification for Title 3, and what would the impact of
such a law be on compliance with and enforcement of the law, in
your opinion?
Mr. Perez. The department's position on that has been that,
obviously as you correctly point out, we are very committed to
protecting the rights of people with disabilities. However, in
those particular cases that are giving rise to that
legislation, we believe that it would burden people with
disabilities seeking full access to the courts.
Title 3 of the ADA is the public accommodation provision,
and we think that as currently written, it strikes the right
balance. And so this particular proposal is unnecessary.
Mr. Nadler. I thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Franks. And I now yield to Mr. Jordan.
Mr. Jordan. And I thank the Chairman. I would be happy to
yield to the Chairman. I have to get another venue.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Perez, I apologize. I am trying to beat the clock here.
And the last question I am afraid that I----
Mr. Perez. No, not at all.
Mr. Franks. So let me just recap here on that one. Will you
tell us here today simply that this Administration's Department
of Justice will never entertain or advance a proposal that
criminalizes speech against any religion?
Mr. Perez. Sir, as I said before, you referenced as context
for your question an article from----
Mr. Franks. Well, there is no context on this question. I
am just asking you----
Mr. Perez. Well, there actually was.
Mr. Franks. I am just asking you. Well, all right, let me
ask a new question. Will you tell us here today that this
Administration's Department of Justice will never entertain or
advance a proposal that criminalizes speech against any
religion?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, sir----
Mr. Franks. That is not a hard question.
Mr. Perez. Well, actually it is a hard question in the
sense that when you make threats against someone, I am going
to----
Mr. Franks. No, I am asking you here today, will you tell
us here today that this Department of Justice will never
entertain or advance a proposal to criminalize speech against
any religion.
Mr. Perez. Again, sir, if you have a proposal that you are
considering, we will actively review that proposal and offer
our----
Mr. Franks. Okay, here is my proposal. Here is my proposal.
I am asking you to answer a question. That is my proposal. I am
proposing that you answer this question. Will you tell us here
today that this Administration's Department of Justice will
never entertain or advance a proposal that criminalizes speech
against any religion?
Mr. Perez. Again, sir, if you give the context of the
question----
Mr. Franks. All right.
Mr. Nadler. Will the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Perez [continuing]. To conduct the----
Mr. Franks. I will not yield, but I will let----
Mr. Nadler. I think we can straighten this out.
Mr. Franks. I will not yield.
Mr. Nadler. Well, you are not interested in an answer then.
Mr. Franks. I have tried to get an answer 4 times.
Mr. Nadler. I rephrase the question, you may get an answer.
Mr. Franks. I appreciate that, but I am asking my own
questions. I will certainly allow you to ask yours.
Mr. Nadler. If the Chairman is taking a second round, could
I ask a question then of Mr. Perez?
Mr. Franks. If we take a second round.
Mr. Nadler. We just did.
Mr. Franks. No, we did not. I am yielded time.
Mr. Nadler. Oh.
Mr. Franks. Yeah. Anyway, I want to get an answer to a
fairly basic question here. If the Department of Justice cannot
even answer the question whether they will entertain or advance
a proposal that criminalizes speech against any religion, then
it is pretty late in the day.
So I am going to change questions here. Mr. Perez, this
House passed the Federal hate crimes legislation in October of
2009. How many hate crimes prosecutions has your division
brought since the passage of the Act 2 years ago?
Mr. Perez. Since the passage of the Act in 2009, 11 cases
have been brought involving 38 defendants under the Shepard-
Byrd law. Sixteen have been convicted; 22 are awaiting trial.
Mr. Franks. All right. That seems to contradict some
information we got from CRS.
Mr. Perez. I am happy to work with you to provide you the
specifics----
Mr. Franks. Could you give us your report showing the
numbers of cases and parties and courts for these cases that
were brought, including ongoing cases with docket numbers and a
short maybe one paragraph summary of each case?
Mr. Perez. I would be happy to do so.
Mr. Franks. And how soon could you get that to us?
Mr. Perez. We will do it as soon as possible.
Mr. Franks. Any estimation?
Mr. Perez. Again, we will do it as soon as possible, sir.
Mr. Franks. All right. Well, All right. I will just tell
you that our staff did contact CRS to call DOJ and to get this
information in advance of this hearing. And the DOJ rep told
CRS that there were approximately 300 hate crimes cases brought
in just 2 years, but they refused to give the information to
CRS. Now this, again, may be correct or incorrect information,
I do not know. But it is public record, that much I know. And
they urged us to file a FOIA.
Now asking Congress conducting oversight or CRS to file a
FOIA request to get public information seems outrageous to me.
Do you think this was an appropriate response to that request?
Mr. Perez. Again, sir, our staff, I am confident, would be
happy to work with your staff. The Hate Crimes Prevention Act,
the Shepard-Byrd law, is a critically important law. We welcome
congressional inquiries about the work we have done. We have
had many investigations. I have described the number of
prosecutions. We are very proud of those cases. And we would be
happy to work with your staff to get you the necessary
information so that you can make assessments based on the
facts.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you for coming, Mr. Perez, today.
Mr. Perez. Thank you.
Mr. Franks. And I will yield now to the Ranking Member of
the full Committee, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. Good morning.
Mr. Conyers. And I am very pleased that you are here, Mr.
Assistant Attorney General. I am going to yield the Ranking
Member of the Subcommittee, Jerry Nadler, briefly.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I will be very brief. I want to
rephrase question the Chairman asked a little differently.
First of all, hate speech and hate crimes are very
different topics. My question to you is, I assume that the
department would make a commitment that you are not going to
offer a proposal to criminalize protected speech, to
criminalize criticism of religion or of anybody else other than
in the context of a direct threat.
Mr. Perez. Right. We will do this work, as we always have,
in a way that is consistent with the Constitution.
Mr. Nadler. Which means you cannot criminalize----
Mr. Perez. Hate speech.
Mr. Nadler. Hate speech.
Mr. Perez. Correct. And we have----
Mr. Nadler. Other than with a direct threat of violence or
something like that.
Mr. Perez. And as a matter of fact, our hate crimes laws
say whoever by force or threat of force intimidates or attempts
to intimidate someone on the basis of race, color, all the
protected classes, will----
Mr. Nadler. So short of intimidation and threats of
violence and so forth, you are not endorsing a concept that
says you cannot criminalize--I am sorry. You cannot criticize
someone's religion or anything else.
Mr. Perez. We strongly support the First Amendment, and at
the same time we strongly support the prosecution of people who
use threats of violence to undermine and tear communities apart
on racial lines, sexual orientation lines, religious lines.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. And I yield back. And I thank the
gentleman.
Mr. Conyers. You are welcome. This is an important
discussion. And in a way, we sort of started off on this rapid
fire back and forth, and sometimes some of the finer and more
substantive parts of what we are talking about get lost.
I would like to talk with you about two areas in the few
minutes that we have. But for me, Mr. Assistant Attorney
General, this is an ongoing discussion that we are having. I am
not racing to get all my questions into you. Your office and
the whole department have been available to me, and I assume
other Members of the Committee for whatever purposes that we
want.
So this is not a race against the clock to see how many
questions and answers we can get in in a 5-minute period of
time, which is a little unrealistic when we are talking
constitutional rights.
My two subject matters are the voter protection issues and
the attempts at the State level on part of a number of States
about making voting more difficult. And I would like to get
your impression of what is going on in this climate leading up
to the important November vote of 2012.
Could we discuss that a bit, and give me an idea of how
your part of the department and the whole Department of Justice
is approaching this subject?
Mr. Perez. Sure. And, again, our philosophy and our
approach here has been very straightforward. We want to enforce
the laws, and we are enforcing the laws. And we are doing in a
fair and independent way. And I said to the Chair before, there
is obviously a robust debate in this country, and we welcome
that debate. That is the essence of democracy.
And what we think needs to happen is we continue to have
that debate, and then we make sure that we do our level best at
the department to ensure that every eligible voter on the first
Tuesday in November can cast his or her ballot and they have
access to the ballot. That is why we have done more work than
ever on behalf of military and overseas voters and will
continue to aggressively enforce that.
That is why when the facts call for them, we will interpose
objections on the voter ID laws in Texas and South Carolina,
because in our judgment the facts supported them.
I agree wholeheartedly with the views of former Attorney
General Mukasey, who talked about voter identification laws and
said earlier this year, ``The Supreme Court,'' referring to
Indiana, ``adopted the department's views that voter ID laws
are not facially unconstitutional. As the Supreme Court held,
such laws serve several compelling interests, including the
interest in preventing voter fraud and the interest in
safeguarding public confidence in representative government. At
the same time, the Court acknowledged the undeniable fact that
voter ID laws can burden some citizens' right to vote. It is
important for States to implement and administer such laws in a
way that minimizes that possibility. And it is important for
the department to do its part to guard against this
possibility. We will not hesitate to use the tools available to
us, including the Voting Rights Act, if these laws, important
though they may be, are used improperly to deny the right to
vote.''
That is not Attorney General Holder. That was Attorney
General Mukasey. And I completely and utterly agree with him.
And that embodies the approach we have taken, Congressman
Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. I will continue our discussion outside of this
important hearing. And I thank you for your coming.
Mr. Perez. Thank you for your time.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Scott, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Perez, in the 1960's in southern States, hospitals were
routinely segregated, and they were integrated because
President Johnson conditioned receipt of Medicare and Medicaid
on a policy of non-discrimination.
Is the policy of non-discrimination without exception as a
condition of receiving Federal money still a good idea?
Mr. Perez. Again, I am very familiar with Title 6, which
prohibits non-discrimination on the basis of race, color, and
national origin. And we have a section that aggressively
enforces Title 6.
Mr. Scott. What about religious discrimination?
Mr. Perez. As I think we have discussed before, the
Administration continues to be committed to ensuring that we
partner with organizations in ways that are consistent with
both the laws and our values. And we will continue to evaluate
issues that arise on a case by case basis.
Mr. Scott. From 1965 to 2001, there could be no religious
discrimination when you are receiving and spending Federal
money. Was that a good idea or a bad idea?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, we respect the judgments of
Congress, and we enforce the judgments and the laws and
regulations that are in place. And so that is the job of the
Department of Justice.
Mr. Scott. If Congress had said it is a good idea to be
able to discriminate, do you agree with that?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, as I said before, in the context--
and I think we have had this conversation a few times, and we
will continue to have this conversation--we will continue to
make sure that we enforce the laws in a manner that is
consistent with both the Constitution and our values. And we
will continue to evaluate these questions, and they are
undoubtedly important questions and challenging questions. And
we will continue to evaluate how the facts apply to laws in a
particular context.
Mr. Scott. If a faith-based organization were running a
government program, could they have as an articulated policy we
do not hire Catholics and Jews with the Federal money?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, we have had many conversations with
you about anti-discrimination laws. And we have enforced cases
involving discrimination based on religion in the employment
context and in other contexts.
We have a case actually in Arizona that we have brought
involving discrimination.
Mr. Scott. I am a little confused. Can an organization have
as an articulated policy we do not hire Catholics and Jews with
Federal money?
Mr. Perez. Again, we are having this conversation with you
about how to treat the issues of ensuring that we partner with
faith-based organizations in ways that are consistent with all
of our laws and all of our values. And we will continue to
evaluate----
Mr. Scott. Do the laws that you are enforcing prohibit
discrimination or allow discrimination with Federal money? I
mean, could an organization have an articulated policy we do
not hire Catholics and Jews with Federal money?
Mr. Perez. Again, every situation is fact specific. We
have, in fact, prosecuted--or not prosecuted. We have brought
civil suits in cases involving discrimination based on
religion, and we will continue to evaluate specific facts of
particular cases. And if the facts----
Mr. Scott. Well, I just gave you a fact situation. If a
faith-based organization is running a Federal program with
Federal money and has an articulated policy we do not hire
Catholics and Jews, can they get Federal money?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, we will evaluate the full context
of every case that we have, and we will make the appropriate
judgment. And when the facts demonstrate that there is, in
fact, discrimination occurring, we will not hesitate to take
appropriate action. And if you look at the cases----
Mr. Scott. Is it not true that your policy is that a faith-
based organization can, in fact, have an articulated policy we
do not hire Catholics and Jews, and still receive Federal
money?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, sir, we look at particular
situations, and we evaluate the specific facts in a particular
situation, and make the appropriate judgment as to the
application of the facts to the law in that particular case.
Mr. Scott. Are you ashamed of saying, yes, they can, in
fact, discriminate legally with the laws that you are
enforcing?
Mr. Perez. Every case is fact specific. Just as when the
Chairman asked me about threats cases, every threats case is
very fact specific.
Mr. Scott. What is the barrier to discrimination by a
faith-based organization? What law prevents them from
discriminating?
Mr. Perez. I am not sure I understand your question.
Mr. Scott. If a faith-based group is taking Federal money,
what law can you apply that prevents them from discriminating,
from having articulated policy we do not hire Catholics and
Jews?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, we would have to look at the
particular circumstances of a specific case to determine
whether there is either a reg from a department so that an
agency of that particular office might be able to take a look
at that, or whether there is a law of more general application.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Scott. And I recognize the
gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I recognize and appreciate the testimony, Mr. Perez. I
cannot help but reflect back on some dialogue that took place
in this Committee between a former Member of this Committee
from New York when he asked along the lines of the gentleman
from Virginia, is there a particular Christian way to ladle
soup. And I thought, yes, there is. That is ham and beans soup.
It is particularly Christian within the context of the
gentleman from Virginia's. And I know that in the vein that it
is delivered.
But I would like to take this to the opening video that you
viewed that was delivered by Mr. Nadler, another gentleman from
New York. And the statement that if there is voter ID, then
Romney wins the presidency. And make this point that what that
really says is if you have an election that is a legitimate
election, where you have a higher assurance that the people
going to the polls actually are American citizens and are
legitimate voters, then the Republican side of this wins, and
the Democrat side of this loses. That is how I heard and saw
that video.
That is my statement. I am not going to ask you to comment
on that. But I would ask you to comment on something else that
we have seen, and that is the video of the young gentleman
going into the polls in Virginia and asking for the Attorney
General's ballot. And did you see that video, Mr. Perez?
Mr. Perez. No, I have not. I read about it in the
newspaper, but I have not seen the video.
Mr. King. Does it trouble you?
Mr. Perez. Again, first of all, I believe it is in the
District of Columbia. I think the Attorney General lives in the
District of Columbia. You referenced Virginia.
Mr. King. I am happily corrected with that detail. Does it
trouble you that a young man, I think 23 years old, could walk
in and be offered the ballot of the Attorney General of the
United States? Does that trouble you?
Mr. Perez. What is interesting about that is the individual
did not vote, and really the question presented is, what is the
extent of voter fraud in the United States? I can tell you,
Congressman----
Mr. King. If I could just ask a question. My time is----
Mr. Perez [continuing]. That in the context of the
litigation--and I comment too much other than what is in the
public record--in South Carolina----
Mr. King. Let me point out that we know why the individual
did not vote is because he did not want to break the law.
Mr. Perez. And that is why voter fraud----
Mr. King. And so my point is that there are a lot of
individuals out there that do not mind breaking the law. They
maybe do not even understand it does violate the law. They are
offered a motor voter sign up here and a little checkbox, are
you a citizen. Maybe they cannot even read that in English.
Maybe they cannot even understand it in whatever language it is
offered in. But it is offered to them, and we are seeing voter
registration fraud, and we are seeing voter fraud.
In fact, we know that ACORN admitted to at least 440,000
false or fraudulent voter registrations. So that is pretty
prevalent out there, and I cannot imagine that none of those
440,000 actually went and voted. And we have evidence to the
contrary.
So one more point. Do you know Donna Brazile?
Mr. Perez. I am sorry?
Mr. King. Do you know Donna Brazile?
Mr. Perez. I do not know her personally. I know of her.
Mr. King. You know of her, and know that she was managing
Al Gore's campaign in the year 2000?
Mr. Perez. I do not recall that, but----
Mr. King. I just say that is my recollection. And recall
this statement when it was pointed out to her that her campaign
was four and a half points down in the polls. And this is from
memory, so it could be refined to precision. Her answer to that
was, I am not worried about being down four and a half points
in the polls. I can pick up 6 points on the street.
I happened to think of that when I saw the gentleman from
New York's video that he put out here. He sees the world from
an entirely different view than I do, at least on this subject.
And so we are interested legitimate voters, and I would make
the point to you that there is a bedrock underneath our
Constitution, and that is America's confidence in legitimate
elections. It really is not whether or not we have legitimate
elections. If they believe they are legitimate elections, then
they will have confidence in them, and they will accept the
decisions made by their elected officials with this
constitutional republic that we have.
And we have secretaries of state around the country that
are working to try to clean up the voter registration rolls,
and they have had great difficulty in getting access to the
SAVE Act, the Systemic Alien Verification Entitlement, that is
by law to be provided to them. And they are looking to Justice
for recommendation, particularly Iowa. And I would ask if you
are prepared to make that list available to the Secretary of
State Matt Schultz, who has been working diligently to have
legitimate voter registration rules in Iowa, as you for a
recommendation.
Mr. Perez. As I understand it, DHS is working with the
Secretary of State. And DHS----
Mr. King. But asking you for a recommendation. They have
kicked it off to you. They pass it over to----
Mr. Perez. No, actually I believe, as I understand the
program, it is a DHS decision, and DHS will indeed make that
decision.
Mr. King. DHS has announced--if you do not mind, the clock
is running down. But DHS has announced that they are looking
for guidance from DOJ. Is that not you?
Mr. Perez. Well, I would love to see that reference that
they are looking from DOJ. I can tell you that in the State of
Arizona, we pre-cleared an arrangement, I think 6 years ago, so
that the State of Arizona is actually making use of the SAVE
database in their verification process.
Now, of course, if in the course of making use of that SAVE
database they do so in a manner that impacts or implicates the
voting rights laws, then we would step in.
Mr. King. Okay. But Iowa is not a covered district.
Mr. Perez. Arizona is, in fact, doing that.
Mr. King. So could you list any reason that in Iowa that
does not have a covered district in it, that simply wants to
use the SAVE list in order to clean up their voter registration
rolls to provide legitimate elections, can you imagine any
reason why DOJ would recommend to the Department of Homeland
Security not to provide that list?
Mr. Perez. Well, again, as I understand that process, the
SAVE database, the key thing--and Arizona does that, as I
understand it--is you have to have the requisite underlying
data, including alien registration numbers of the individual.
If you are not collecting the requisite underlying data, then
the SAVE database will not be helpful. The State of Arizona has
done it that----
Mr. King. Could you cite the statute that prohibits that?
Mr. Perez. Pardon?
Mr. King. Could you cite the statute that prohibits?
Mr. Perez. Again, the Department of Homeland Security, sir,
is the Department that administers the SAVE database.
Mr. King. I understand, and they look to DOJ for
recommendations.
Mr. Perez. Well, again, the Department of Homeland Security
is the entity that administers that database. And as I
understand it, if you do not collect the requisite data, then
the database is useless. Arizona collects the data.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman can finish the answer. Go ahead.
You are finished on that?
Mr. Perez. Yes.
Mr. Franks. Okay, all right.
Mr. King. In which case then, Mr. Chairman, I would just
point out that this has been passed back and forth between DHS
and DOJ for too long. And it is time to get a resolution to
this matter. And I would yield back.
Mr. Franks. I thank the gentleman. And without objection,
all Members will have 5 legislative days to submit to the Chair
additional written questions for the witnesses, for the witness
in this case, which will be forwarded. And we will ask the
witness to respond as promptly as he can so that the answers
may be made part of the record.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
And with that, Mr. Perez, thank you and those that have
attended you today for coming to the hearing. And thank the
Members and observers.
And this hearing is now adjourned.
Mr. Perez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 10:35 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Post-Hearing Questions submitted to the Honorable Thomas E. Perez,
Assistant Attorney General, Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of
Justice*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The Subcommittee had not received a response to its questions by
the time this hearing record was submitted for printing on February 4,
2013.


