- DEFENDING MARRIAGE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DEFENDING MARRIAGE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 15, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-36

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-746                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
[Vacant]

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on the Constitution

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Chairman

MIKE PENCE, Indiana, Vice-Chairman

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JERROLD NADLER, New York
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
STEVE KING, Iowa                     JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
Virginia

Paul B. Taylor, Chief Counsel

David Lachmann, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

APRIL 15, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Trent Franks, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, and Chairman, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     5
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution........    13
The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......    19

WITNESSES

Maggie Gallagher, Chairman of the Board, National Organization
for Marriage
Oral Testimony.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    27
Carlos A. Ball, Professor of Law, Rutgers School of Law
Oral Testimony.................................................    35
Prepared Statement.............................................    37
Edward Whelan, President, Ethics and Public Policy Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    46
Prepared Statement.............................................    49

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Trent Franks, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Arizona, and
Chairman, Subcommittee on the Constitution.....................     3
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York, and
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution...............     9
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, Ranking
Member, Committee on the Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on
the Constitution...............................................    14
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative
in Congress from the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    21

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Mike Quigley, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Illinois, and
Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution.......................    79
Post-Hearing Questions submitted by the Honorable Robert C.
``Bobby'' Scott, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Virginia, and Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution
Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Maggie Gallagher,
Chairman of the Board, National Organization for Marriage..    82
Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Carlos A. Ball,
Professor of Law, Rutgers School of Law....................    83
Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Edward Whelan,
President, Ethics and Public Policy Center.................    84
Material submitted by Bill Duncan, Marriage Law Foundation
Egale Canada Inc., et al v. Metropolitan Community Church of
Toronto, B.C.J. No, 1995 (S.C.) (2001), Affidavit of Steven
Lowell Nock................................................    85
Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. United States Department of
Health and Human Services et al., Brief of Amicus Curiae,
Representative Lamar Smith in Support of Defendants-
Appellants and Reversal....................................   166
Joshua Baker and William C. Duncan, Legal Analysts, iMAPP
Research Brief, Institute for Marriage and Public Policy,
``American Courts on Marriage: Is Marriage Discrimination?
2000-2011'' (Vol. 4, No. 1, January 2011)..................   207
Application for Permission to File Brief Amici Curiae; Brief
Amici Curiae of James Q. Wilson, et al., Legal and Family
Scholars in Support of the Appellees.......................   216
Submission titled ``What is Marriage?'' Harvard Journal of
Law & Public Policy........................................   308
Submission titled ``Is DOMA Defensible? A Survey of American
Courts on the Definition of Marriage,'' iMAPP Research
Brief......................................................   351
Submission titled ``Prepared Statement of Maggie Gallagher,''
Drake Law Review...........................................   357
Submission titled ``(How) Will Gay Marriage Weaken Marriage
as a Social Institution: A Reply to Andrew Koppelman,''
University of St. Thomas Law Journal.......................   372
Submission titled ``Do Mothers and Fathers Matter?'' iMAPP
Policy Brief...............................................   411
Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. United States Department of
Health and Human Services, et al., Brief of Amicus Curiae,
National Organization for Marriage, in Support of
Defendants-Appellants and in Support of Reversal...........   416
Article titled ``Can We Please Just Start Admitting That We
Do Actually Want To Indoctrinate Kids?'' Daniel Villareal,
Queerty.com................................................   447
Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. United States Department of
Health and Human Services, et al., Brief of Amici Curiae,
U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops; National Association
of Evangelicals; The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints; The Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the
Southern Baptist Convention; The Lutheran Church-Missouri
Synod; The Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of
America; The Massachusetts Catholic Conference; The
Brethren in Christ Church; The Christian and Missionary
Alliance; The Conservative Congregational Christian
Conference; The Evangelical Free Church of America; The
Evangelical Presbyterian Church; The International Church
of the Foursquare Gospel; The International Pentecostal
Holiness Church; The Missionary Church; Open Bible Churches
[USA]; The United Brethren in Christ Church; The Wesleyan
Church, in Support of Defendants-Appellants and in Support
of Reversal................................................   449
Commonwealth of Massachusetts v. United States Department of
Health and Human Services, et al., Brief of Amici Curiae,
the States of Indiana, Colorado, Michigan, South Carolina,
and Utah in Support of Defendant-Appellants and in Support
of Reversal................................................   507
Hearing Transcript for the High Court of Zappone and Gilligan
v. the Human Rights Commission No. 934/04 JR hearing held
on Tuesday, October 10, 2006...............................   533
Prepared Statement of Charles A. Donovan, Senior Research Fellow,
The Heritage Foundation........................................   565
Material submitted by the Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a
Representative in Congress from the State of New York, and
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the Constitution
Letter dated June 21, 2004, from Douglas Holtz-Eakin,
Director, Congressional Budget Office, U.S. Congress to
Rep. Steve Chabot, Chairman, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...............................................   571
Article titled, ``DOMA Is Unconstutional,'' by Geoffrey R.
Stone, HuffPost Social News................................   582
Article titled ``No defending the Defense of Marriage Act,''
by Bob Barr, latimes.com...................................   585
Article titled ``The DOMA Decision,'' by Walter Dellinger,
The New Republic...........................................   587
Letter from the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU)............   590
Prepared Statement of Joe Solmonese, President, Human Rights
Campaign.......................................................   594
Material submitted by the Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders
(GLAD)
Letter from the Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders..........   597
Submission entitled ``DOMA Damages Same-Sex Families and
Their Children'' by Mary L. Bonauto, Director, Civil Rights
Project, Gay & Lesbian Advocates & Defenders (GLAD)........   607
Affidavits of Plaintiffs in Gill v. OPM......................   615
Affidavit of Michael Lamb in Gill v. Potter..................   684
Perry v. Schwarzenegger, Expert Reports of Nancy F. Cott,
Ph.D.......................................................   711
North Coast Women's Care Medical Group, Inc. v. San Diego
County Superior Court......................................   768
Newspaper Articles

GArticle titled ``Archdiocesan Agency Aids in
Adoptions by Gays; Says It's Bound by Antibias Laws,'' by
Patricia Wen, Boston Globe, 2005...........................   779

GArticle titled ``Gay Adoption Issue Puts Heat on
Gov,'' The Boston Herald, 2006.............................   781

GArticle titled ``Church Reviews Role in Gay
Adoptions,'' by Patricia Wen, Boston Globe, 2005...........   782

GArticle titled ``Bishops to Oppose Adoption by
Gays,'' by Patricia Wen and Frank Philips, Boston Globe,
2006.......................................................   784

GArticle titled ``Seven Quit Charity Over Policy
of Bishops,'' by Patricia Wen, Boston Globe, 2006..........   787

GArticle titled ``Conscience Wins Out for This
Catholic,'' by Peter Meade, The Boston Herald, 2006........   790

GArticle titled ``Catholic Charities Stuns State,
Ends Adoptions,'' by Patricia Wen, Boston Globe, 2006......   791

DEFENDING MARRIAGE

----------

FRIDAY, APRIL 15, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Constitution,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Trent
Franks (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Franks, Smith, Nadler, Quigley,
Conyers and Scott.
Staff Present: (Majority) Holt Lackey, Counsel; Sarah
Vance, Clerk; (Minority) Heather Sawyer, Counsel; and Veronica
Eligan, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Franks. Good morning, and welcome to this hearing of
the Constitution Subcommittee. The title of today's hearing is
Defending Marriage. The reason that we are here is that the
Obama administration recently announced that it would no longer
defend marriage.
Specifically, on February 23, 2011, the Attorney General
sent a letter to congressional leaders explaining that the
President had concluded that the Defense of Marriage Act's
definition of marriage as meaning, ``only a legal union between
one man and one woman as husband and wife,'' violated the
Constitution. Accordingly, the President and Attorney General
are no longer defending that law in court.
For decades, Administrations of both parties have followed
a policy of defending every Federal law for which a reasonable
argument can be made. This policy of defending laws respects
Congress' role as the makers of the law and the courts' special
role in addressing the constitutionality of Federal laws.
When the President unilaterally declares a duly enacted law
unconstitutional, he cuts Congress and the American people out
of the lawmaking process, and such heavy-handed Presidential
actions undermine the separation of powers and the principle
that America is a constitutional Republic predicated on the
rule of law. This is why legal scholars of both parties agree
that Presidents should presume that statutes are constitutional
and give great deference and consideration to the views of the
Congress that enacted the law in the first place.
As liberal constitutional scholar and then head of the
Office of Legal Counsel, Walter Dellinger advised President
Clinton, ``A President should proceed with caution and with
respect for the obligation that each of the branches shares for
the maintenance of constitutional government.''
President Obama's edict that the Defense of Marriage Act is
unconstitutional fails to show the caution and respect for
Congress and the courts that Professor Dellinger counseled. Far
from cautious and deferential, the President's decision was a
badly opportunistic attempt to free himself from a political
dilemma. The President and the Administration had a duty to
defend the Defense of Marriage Act, but powerful constituencies
of the President did not want the President to defend it, and,
unfortunately, politics trumped duty.
Now, it is true that past Presidents have declined to
defend certain statutes that they in good faith determined were
unconstitutional, but never has a President refused to defend a
law of such public importance on a legal theory so far beyond
any court precedent--and so clearly and transparently for
political reasons. The President's decision to ignore his duty
threatens both the structure of our Republic and the time-
tested structure of family itself.
The arguments in favor of the Defense of Marriage Act are
reasonable and right, and they have repeatedly prevailed in
court: Children need a mother and father committed to staying
together as a family. With all of its challenges (and they are
many) and the attacks brought against it, traditional marriage
has proven to be the most successful institution in humanity's
history for the propagation and preparation of the next
generation. The traditional family has proven to be the best
Department of Welfare, the best Department of Drug Prevention,
the best Department of Education, the best Department of Crime
Prevention, and the best Department of Economic Security that
there has ever been.
By any accurate measure, traditional marriage gives
children the very best chance of being raised in the most
stable and loving family environment possible. By any measure,
children raised in families with a married mother and father on
average are healthier and happier than children raised in less
ideal circumstances. For centuries governments have passed and
maintained marriage laws to protect this vital societal
interest.
Marriage is more than just an agreement by, between and for
two adults. Marriage is a promise that two adults make to their
fellow human beings to form a family committed to the well-
being of any children that may come from their union. It is an
institution that has formed a primary building block of
successful societies and nations for thousands of years, and to
casually discard it places our children and future generations
at risk.
I am encouraged that the House is now intervening to fill
the void left by the Administration's abdication of its duty to
defend the laws of the land. Marriage deserves to be defended,
and today's hearing is an important step in that defense. I
look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Franks follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee Mr. Nadler for his opening statement.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing is entitled Defending Marriage. And my
colleagues in the majority undoubtedly will criticize the Obama
administration for deciding that section 3 of the 1996 Defense
of Marriage Act, or DOMA, is unconstitutional and cannot be
defended in certain court cases.
The argument that the Administration has somehow acted
inappropriately is a red herring, an effort by DOMA supporters
to distract from the real question here, which is whether
anyone should be defending this abhorrent and immoral law. The
Administration has decided that, at least in certain cases, it
should not. The Attorney General followed the procedure that
Congress established, codified at 28 U.S.C. Section 530(d), for
exactly this situation. And there are numerous notable examples
of prior Administrations that, having determined that a law is
unconstitutional, have either refused to defend it or
affirmatively attacked it in court.
In the 1990 case of Metro Broadcasting v. FCC, for example,
then-Acting Solicitor General John Roberts in the Bush
administration, now Chief Justice of the United States, argued
that a statute providing for minority preferences in broadcast
licensing was unconstitutional. Despite Supreme Court precedent
applying a more permissive standard of review, he argued that
strict scrutiny applied. Senate legal counsel appeared as
amicus in the case defending the law, which was upheld.
Clearly, there were reasonable arguments that could have
been made in defense of the law. Should we now excoriate Chief
Justice Roberts' efforts as purely political and worthy of
punishment? His view was not vindicated in that case by the
Court, but may ultimately have resulted in a shift of the law,
which makes it additionally clear that what the President has
done here is neither unprecedented nor inappropriate.
What we should be exploring in this hearing, and before the
House of Representatives engages in time-consuming and costly
litigation, is how anyone can justify prolonging the life of
this harmful and immoral law. Speaker Boehner has announced his
intent to do so. And before the House charges to DOMA's
defense, we should understand the arguments the Speaker
believes support his cause and why he disagrees with the
decision of the President, the Attorney General, and Federal
Judges Joseph Tauro and Stephen Reinhardt, who have considered
the question carefully and with the benefit of extensive legal
and factual briefings.
On April 4, several of us wrote to Speaker Boehner asking
for a briefing regarding his planned defense of section 3 of
DOMA. I now ask the Chair of the Subcommittee and full
Committee, the gentleman from Arizona and the gentleman from
Texas, to ask the Speaker to address the Committee and answer
questions Members on both sides of this question may have.
In ruling that section 3 of DOMA cannot survive even
rational basis review, the most permissive review, Judge Tauro
pointed out that in 1996, when this Committee and the Congress
considered DOMA, we did not bother to obtain testimony from
historians, economists, or specialists in family or child
welfare who might have informed our decision regarding the
Federal interests at stake and how DOMA would affect Federal
programs. Now, however, the executive branch and the courts
have done that job for us. At a minimum, we should consider
their factual findings carefully before we insist that this law
is worthy of the time and expense of the House defense.
In ruling that section 3 is unconstitutional, Judge Tauro
considered and rejected the justifications that Congress gave
when it passed DOMA as well as any post hoc rationalizations
given to support the law. For example, he rejected the argument
that section 3 of DOMA is justified by an alleged interest in
encouraging responsible procreation, finding that there is no
credible support for the notion that gay and lesbian parents
are not as capable as their heterosexual counterparts, and that
excluding the gay and lesbian families from the Federal
protections of marriage does nothing to promote the stability
of heterosexual parents and marriages.
Equally important for the purposes of DOMA, Judge Tauro
found that this type of interest is properly a State, not a
Federal, concern. The Federal Government has historically had
no role in setting the rules for marriage or, for that matter,
for divorce; and, therefore, the Federal Government has no
equivalent interest in regulating the underlying criteria for
marriage.
My colleagues who have claimed to be staunch defenders of
states' rights should be alarmed by DOMA's unprecedented
meddling in the States' affairs of marriage. DOMA denies
certain legally married couples, legally married under the laws
of their States, denies to them access to Federal laws that
factor in marital status, including Social Security and health
care programs, which secure citizens' health and well-being.
The exclusion of any married couples from these programs would
defy logic. That section 3 carves out an entire class of
married citizens based on sexual orientation also violates
constitutional equal protection guarantees.
Even under rational basis review, the law cannot survive.
It certainly cannot survive more searching review, which the
Attorney General and the President have concluded is the
appropriate level of scrutiny for laws that discriminate
against gay men and lesbians.
Facing lawsuits in a jurisdiction with no statements on the
question of the appropriate standard of review, Attorney
General Holder applied the factors that the Supreme Court has
considered when determining whether heightened review is
warranted, and concluded that the criteria had been met. While
critics may disagree with his conclusion, it cannot credibly be
argued that either he or the President have done anything
remotely unprecedented and nothing that warrants or calls for
impeachment or reduced funding for the Department of Justice.
Nor can anyone who has looked at DOMA's legislative history
credibly claim that this law should enjoy the same presumption
of validity as most acts of Congress.
The Congressional Record makes perfectly clear that DOMA is
intended to express moral disapproval of gay men, lesbians, and
their families. Representative Henry Hyde, then-Chairman of
this Committee, for example, declared that ``most people do not
approve of homosexual conduct, and they express their
disapprobation through the law.''
During floor debate, Members repeatedly voiced disapproval
of homosexuality as immoral or depraved, and argued that
allowing gay and lesbian couples to marry would demean and
trivialize heterosexual marriage and might prove to be the
``final below to the American family.''
This evidence of the intent of the law, being to
discriminate against a specific group of people based on
prejudice against them, or disapproval of that group based on
pure animus, is presumptive evidence of denial of equal
protection and of the need for heightened scrutiny. The
Administration so concluded, and that conclusion compelled the
determination that the law could never survive heightened
scrutiny and, therefore, could not be defended as to its
constitutionality.
In 1996, of course, gay and lesbian couples could not marry
anywhere in the world. Now they can marry in five States and
the District of Columbia, couples like Jen and Dawn
BarbouRoske, who have been together for more than 20 years. In
July they will celebrate their second wedding anniversary as a
legally married couple in their home State of Iowa. They are
raising two wonderful daughters, McKinley and Brianna, who are
with their parents here today.
Or Edie Windsor and Thea Spire, who began dating in 1965,
got engaged in 1967, and finally married in 2007. Thea passed
away 2 years later after the couple had loved, lived with, and
care for each other for more than four decades, and after, as
Edie, who is a constituent of mine, put it, sharing all the
joys and sorrows that came their way.
Far from demeaning, trivializing, or destroying the
institution of marriage, these couples have embraced this time-
honored tradition and the commitment and serious legal duties
of marriage.
Rather than defending DOMA in court, Congress should be
working to repeal it. There is no redeeming moral value to a
law whose sole goal and sole effect is to persecute a group of
people for no reason and no benefit to anyone else.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Nadler follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. Now I would yield to the distinguished former
Chairman Mr. Conyers for 5 minutes for an opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Franks. I ask unanimous
consent to put my statement into the record.
Mr. Franks. Without objection.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]

__________

Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir.
The thing that bothers me at this hearing of the
Subcommittee is that the Department of Justice is not present,
and I am informed that they were not invited. And could I ask
the Chairman why that is? We have one of the leaders in the
country, Ms. Gallagher, who has raised hundreds of thousands of
dollars against judges who have opposed her position, as the
lead witness, but there is nobody here from the Department of
Justice. And I would yield to my friend.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Conyers, I understand that there is going
to be an oversight hearing in May where the Department of
Justice would be invited to come.
Mr. Conyers. Well, then why are we starting--if the
Department of Justice is coming, what are we doing here with
this wonderful panel of friendly people, of course? But why do
we start off with the chairmen of organizations that are--and
she has written books against this position. We have another
hostile witness to this. And you tell me that next month we
will be getting the Department of Justice to find out where
they stand.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Conyers, I would just suggest to you that
the makeup of the witnesses here is no different than most
other hearings like this. You have people on both sides of the
issue that are known for their advocacy or dissent on a
particular issue. We have the same makeup of the witnesses.
Professor Ball will be a witness for your perspective. And let
me just say to you we have tried to make it essentially the
same as we have always done.
Mr. Nadler. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Franks. I would like to go ahead and ask you to finish
your opening statement.
Mr. Nadler. Would the gentleman yield?
Mr. Conyers. Yes.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
I would just point out that normally if the subject of a
hearing is criticism of a decision of Department, you would
invite the Department to be criticized and to answer for their
position.
I yield back. I thank the gentleman for yielding.
Mr. Conyers. I have got a statement to make, but it follows
along very closely with Ranking Member Nadler's. But I am not
pleased that we will finally, sometime in the future, hear from
the Department of Justice that is being roundly criticized by
you.
And I happen to be aware of some of your remarks earlier,
Chairman Franks, about what ought to happen, and I think there
is a political tone in this hearing that I want to try to
diminish as much as possible as we begin this. And I want you
to know that this follows much of the rhetoric that has come
out of the Congress and in the public on this for many years,
this antiactivity.
The first witness is probably the lead person in the
country on this subject, and is certainly entitled to her
opinions, and I can't wait to hear them. But the fact of the
matter is that this is not the regular order, and I did not
approve of the way that we are starting off this subject. And I
happen to know of some of the personal animosity that exists in
the Congress on this subject, and so it is not like we come
here pretending that it doesn't exist. It does.
And so it is with that concern--and I am glad that you
allowed me to make it, Chairman Franks--that I raise these
questions of procedure. And I yield to the gentleman from
Illinois Mr. Quigley.
Mr. Quigley. Mr. Chairman, could I have 1 minute, please? I
know he yielded. I am not sure he has any time.
Mr. Franks. We have our Chairman here, and I would yield to
him here. And I would just briefly suggest to the former
Chairman that there is no animosity in my heart toward anybody
here whatsoever. I can't speak for others. But my concern is
just as I stated in my opening statement.
And I will now recognize the distinguished Chairman of the
full Committee Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Today's hearing concerns two issues critical to the future
of our country. The first is the importance of protecting the
institution of marriage.
For thousands of years, the union of a man and a woman has
formed the cement of civilizations and provided the stability
to societies in all parts of the world. It is time tested.
Until the last decade, no society had ever made same-sex
relationships equivalent to a marriage between a man and a
woman. This is because marriage is the means by which societies
encourage mothers and fathers to form stable families to raise
children. But the trend over the past half century has been to
neglect children's interests in stable families and think of
marriage's only purpose as making adults happy. The movement
for same-sex marriage is a part of this trend.
If we tamper with the definition of marriage, harmful
unintended consequences could follow. The ability of religious
institutions to define marriage for themselves and promote
their sincerely held beliefs could be threatened. The role of
marriage in society is too important to dilute the long-
standing and widely accepting standard that it is a union
between a man and a woman. We cannot know all of the
consequences that might follow from such a radical experiment,
but we do know that government cannot change the definition of
marriage without changing its meaning.
The second issue raised by this hearing is also important:
Who in our system of government has the power to decide
fundamental questions like what marriage means; unelected
judges, or the people?
The American people's preference for a traditional
definition of marriage as one man and one woman cannot be
seriously questioned. Forty-five States limit marriage to one
man and one woman. Thirty States have amended their State
constitutions in recent years to include the traditional
definition of marriage in their fundamental law. In several
States in which judges tried to impose gay marriage, the people
have reasserted the traditional view of marriage. Hawaiian and
Californian voters amended their constitutions to overrule
activist decisions by their State supreme courts. Iowans
opposed their supreme court's judicial activist creation of gay
marriage by voting out every incumbent justice on the ballot in
the 2010 elections.
The will of the American people is clear: They want their
government to defend the traditional institution of marriage,
and judges should respect the will of the people. No one can
seriously believe that the Constitution's authors intended to
create a right to same-sex marriage.
Unfortunately, the President appears to want courts rather
than the democratic process to define marriage in America. By
refusing to defend the Defense of Marriage Act against legal
challenges, the Administration has invited courts to overrule
that popular law.
The President recognized the political reality that most
American people disagree with him and claimed to support
traditional marriage during his run for the White House. The
Administration has still not directly advocated gay marriage.
Instead, the Administration devised an indirect strategy to
advance gay marriage without political accountability. By
trying to lose in court, the Administration invited courts to
do the controversial work of imposing gay marriage for them.
The Administration tried to lose in court first by refusing
to argue that traditional marriage fosters responsible
procreation, an argument for traditional marriage that has
prevailed in court. The Administration's efforts to lose in
court reached their peak with the February 23, 2011,
announcement that the Administration would no longer defend
DOMA.
The policy of defending Federal laws, which Attorney
General Holder promised to follow at his confirmation hearing,
protects our constitutional system. By abandoning this policy.
The Administration has reversed the normal roles of the
three branches of government. It has shirked the executive
branch's responsibility to enforce the law, undermined
Congress' role in making law, and invited courts to make
policies that should be made by the elected branches of
government.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this hearing, and I
will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Smith.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. We have a very distinguished panel of witnesses
today, and each of the witnesses' written statements will be
entered into the record in its entirety. And I ask each witness
to summarize his or her testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help
you stay within that time, there is a light on your table. When
the light switches from green to yellow, you will have
approximately 1 minute to conclude your testimony. When the
light turns red, it signals that the witness' 5 minutes have
expired.
Our first witness is Ms. Maggie Gallagher. Ms. Gallagher is
chairman and cofounder of the National Organization for
Marriage, which the Washington Post described as the preeminent
national organization fighting to protect marriage as the union
of a husband and wife. A veteran of public debates over family
fragmentation and the importance of marriage for child well-
being, she is a nationally syndicated columnist and the author
of three books on marriage, including most recently The Case
for Marriage: Why Married People Are Happier, Healthier, and
Better Off Financially, which she coauthored with University of
Chicago professor Linda Waite. Her book, Debating Same-Sex
Marriage, coauthored with Professor John Corvino, is
forthcoming from Oxford University Press.
Our second witness is Mr. Carlos Ball, professor of law,
and Judge Frederick Lacey Scholar at Rutgers Law School.
Professor Ball studies, writes, and teaches in the field of
sexual orientation and the law, and he is the author of several
books on sexuality and the law.
Our third witness is Mr. Edward Whelan. Mr. Whelan is
president of the Ethics and Public Policy Center, and the
director of EPPC's program on The Constitution, the Courts, and
the Culture. Mr. Whelan served as Principal Deputy Assistant
Attorney General in the Office of Legal Counsel in the George
W. Bush administration. Previous to his stint at OLC, Mr.
Whelan served as a law clerk to Justice Antonin Scalia and as a
senior staffer to the Senate Judiciary Committee.
It is the custom of this Committee to swear in the
witnesses. So if you will stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Franks. I now recognize our first witness Ms.
Gallagher. Ms. Gallagher, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF MAGGIE GALLAGHER, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD, NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR MARRIAGE

Ms. Gallagher. Thank you very much, Chairman Franks, for
holding this hearing and for inviting me to participate in it.
I also thank you particularly, Representative Conyers, for
your remarks on the importance of tone, because I do thinks it
is extremely important that we demonstrate respect to each
other in the middle of this issue, which can be passionate on
both sides.
I am going to let Mr. Whelan explain the history of the
Department of Justice's failure to defend DOMA, and I would
like to do two big things today very briefly: One, explain the
value of protecting marriage as the union of one man and one
woman, which is, of course, not only the Federal policy under
the Defense of Marriage Act, but is also the law and the policy
of 45 States. And, secondly, I want to address briefly some
Federalist concerns that have been raised by Congressman
Nadler, among some others.
Marriage is the union of a husband and wife for a reason.
These are the only unions that can create new lives and connect
those children in love to their mother and father. This is not
necessarily the reason why individuals marry. This is the great
reason, the public reason, why government gets involved in the
marriage business in the first place, because, let us face it,
the idea of a government license to be in a romantic
relationship is a somewhat odd idea. What makes sense of it in
our Anglo-American tradition is the recognition that there is
something special about unions of husbands and wives, and that
there is a unique public interest involved in bringing together
male and female to make and raise the next generation.
How does marriage protect children? I think it is important
to note that it is not the case that there is a package of
legal benefits that protect children and improve their well-
being. From what we know from the social science evidence,
marriage protects children to the extent that it increases the
likelihood they are born to and raised by their own mother and
father in a low-conflict, enduring relationship. We know this
because, frankly, children do not do better when their
parents--under remarried parents than they do with solo mothers
on average, which means that it is not simply a set of legal
benefits that we can transform. It is the extent and way to
which marriage as a legal and public institution helps to
protect this particular kind of family that it helps to protect
children or fails to protect children.
This deep orientation of marriage to what we now call
responsible procreation is not only the consensus of most of
human history. Marriage is a virtually universal human social
institution. It changes in a lot of ways, but virtually every
known human society has recognized that there is a unique need
and a special interest in bringing together men and women as
husbands and wives to make and raise the next generation. It is
also deeply embedded in U.S. law.
You know, we can go back to where the Supreme Court said in
1888 that marriage is the foundation of the family and of
society, without which there would be neither civilization nor
progress, right up through one of the four rationales for the
Defense of Marriage Act, which President Obama's Department of
Justice specifically rejected, exercising in effect the kind of
line-item veto over the law retrospectively. But Congress, in
passing DOMA, said that civil society has an interest in
maintaining and protecting the institution of heterosexual
marriage because it has a deep and abiding interest in
encouraging responsible procreation and child-rearing.
If we accept, as DOMA explicitly does, that this is a core
public purpose of marriage, then treating same-sex unions as
marriage makes little sense. If, in fact, marriage as a public
and legal institution, as the majority of courts have
recognized, is oriented toward protecting children by
increasing the likelihood they have a mother and father, then
same-sex couples do not fit. And conversely, if same-sex
couples fit the public definition of marriage, then marriage is
really no longer about responsible procreation in the sense
same-sex marriage cuts marriage off as a public idea from these
deep roots in the natural family, and over time will reeducate
the next generation that these ancient and honorable ideals
underlying marriage no longer apply. Both gay marriage
advocates and opponents have recognized that same-sex marriage
will change the public meaning of marriage.
I would like to add, what about other families? Marriage
has never been the only root to a family in our culture, and I
believe we have an obligation to help children in all families,
regardless of family forms. But we cannot help children by
ripping up the roadmap laid down by history, common sense, and
the collective wisdom of human experience by redefining
marriage.
I believe that gay marriage will not only--same-sex
marriage will not only redefine marriage as an institution, it
will redefine the relationship between traditional-faith
communities and the American tradition as well. The heart of
the idea driving same-sex marriage is that there is no
difference between same-sex and opposite-sex unions. And if you
see a difference, there is something wrong with you. You are
somehow akin to a bigot opposed to interracial marriage. That
idea, if it is embraced by law, particularly through the
courts, will have consequences for religious liberty that are
profound.
How do we treat bigots who are opposed to interracial
marriage in this country? Well, we don't--I am sorry, I am out
of time.
Mr. Franks. Actually, Ms. Gallagher, the light
malfunctioned there. It went from green to red. It wasn't
supposed to do that. But if you will just conclude your
remarks.
Ms. Gallagher. I will briefly wrap up.
If you follow that analogy, you will see the profound
consequences.
The Federal Government frequently defines marriage, parent,
family, and domestic relations differently than some States.
Federalism works both ways. And if we were to say there was a
problem with the Federal definition of marriage as one man and
one woman on Federalist grounds, we would also have to accept
that four judges in Massachusetts could force the Federal
Government to acknowledge polygamist marriage as well.
Thank you very much.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Ms. Gallagher. And I am sorry about
the malfunction of the clock there.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Gallagher follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. Professor Ball, thank you for being here, sir.
You are recognized for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF CARLOS A. BALL, PROFESSOR OF LAW, RUTGERS SCHOOL
OF LAW

Mr. Ball. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for inviting
me to speak to the Subcommittee today.
It seems to me that a good place to begin in assessing the
President's decision to no longer defend the constitutionality
of DOMA is with another Federal statute, 28 U.S.C. 530(d). That
law requires the Attorney General to report to Congress when
the Department of Justice decides not to defend a particular
law.
The existence of that statute, it seems to me, is a
recognition by the Congress of the reality that the executive
branch sometimes decides in rare cases not to defend the
constitutionality of a law. The executive branch, as a coequal
branch of government, has the authority and obligation to make
independent determinations regarding a law's constitutionality.
Indeed, every Administration in the last 30 years, both
Democratic and Republican, has refused at some point to defend
laws that it believed were unconstitutional.
In my written statement, I provided the Subcommittee with
the details of those six lawsuits in which an Administration
refused to defend a Federal law in the courts. Congressman
Nadler referred to one of them, the Metro Broadcasting case.
The Department of Justice in that case, it seems to me, made a
good-faith, independent determination that the statute was
unconstitutional.
The Obama administration has done the same thing with DOMA.
Some may disagree with one or both of those decisions, but that
is a different question from whether the executive branch had
the constitutional authority to make the decision.
It is also crucial to keep in mind the context in which
President Obama made his decision. The Department of Justice
was confronted with litigation challenging DOMA in a circuit
that has never addressed the question of whether sexual
orientation classifications are entitled to heightened
scrutiny; yet the Administration had to make a decision on that
question, and I believe it made a proper one.
Critics of the President's decision would like you to
believe that it is well-settled law that only rational basis
review applies to sexual-orientation classifications and that,
therefore, the only thing the Administration had to do was to
offer the courts a rational justification for the enactment of
DOMA. But, in fact, the level of judicial review that should be
applied in lawsuits alleging unconstitutional discrimination on
the basis of sexual orientation is not well settled. The
Supreme Court has never addressed the question, and what the
Supreme Court has done in the last 15 years is to rule
emphatically that the rights of privacy and equality that
lesbians and gay men enjoy under the Constitution impose
limitations on governmental action.
In determining whether heightened scrutiny applies, courts
have sought to answer questions such as whether lesbians and
gay men have suffered a long history of discrimination, and
whether sexual orientation affects the ability of individuals
to contribute to society. It seems to me entirely appropriate
for an Administration to make its own judgment on these issues,
especially when there is no binding case law in the circuit in
question.
Furthermore, not only was the President entitled to make a
decision on the question of heightened scrutiny; that decision
that he made was the correct one. There has, in fact, been a
long history of discrimination in this country on the basis of
sexual orientation. To argue otherwise is to turn a blind eye
to the long list of ways in which governments at every level,
private employers, and others have discriminated for decades
against gay people.
As to the ability to contribute to society, we all know
that there are lesbians and gay men in this country who are
doctors, lawyers, scientists, engineers, and even Members of
Congress. It is simply not credible anymore to argue that
sexual orientation affects the ability of individuals to be
useful and productive members of society.
On the particular question of marriage, there are those who
argue that sexual orientation is still relevant because
marriage is supposedly only about procreation in what some
believe is the optimal setting for the raising of children. But
procreation, as Justice Scalia noted in his dissenting opinion
in Lawrence v. Texas, cannot be the basis for excluding gay
people from marriage because those who are sterile and elderly
are allowed to marry.
And on the issue of child rearing, it is indisputable that
a wide consensus has emerged among experts in this country that
what matters when it comes to the well-being of children is not
the sexual orientation of the parents, but is instead the
quality of the relationships and the amount of care, love, and
support that parents provide their children.
Furthermore, the procreation and child-rearing arguments
seem especially ill-suited in the context of the DOMA
litigation. To see why this is the case, we need to look no
further than the case of Edie Windsor, which Congressman Nadler
mentioned in his opening remarks. Edie and her partner Thea
were together for 44 years. Their 2007 Canadian marriage was
recognized by the State of New York, but the IRS refused to
recognize their marriage because of DOMA. So when Thea passed
away in 2009, her estate had to hand over $350,000 to the
Federal Government in estate taxes.
Edie is now 81 years old. What do procreation and child
rearing have to do with a rational reason for denying Edie
money that she needs in order to live comfortably in her old
age? Is the idea to encourage Edie to marry a man? Is it the
idea that more heterosexuals will marry if they can rest
assured that Edie's marriage, which is recognized by New York,
cannot be recognized by the Federal Government under DOMA? Of
course not. In the end, there is no rational reason to impose a
huge tax obligation on Edie that is not imposed on other New
York widows. And that is just one example of why DOMA is
unconstitutional.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Professor Ball.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ball follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. Now we will recognize Mr. Whelan for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF EDWARD WHELAN, PRESIDENT,
ETHICS AND PUBLIC POLICY CENTER

Mr. Whelan. Thank you very much, Chairman Franks and
Ranking Member Nadler. Thank you as well, Judiciary Committee
Chairman Smith, and to the other Members of the Subcommittee,
for their interest in this important matter.
The Obama administration's decision to abandon its defense
of DOMA, or more precisely to abandon its charade of pretending
to defend DOMA, departs sharply from the Department of
Justice's longstanding practice. Attorney GeneralHolder's
explanation of that decision cannot be taken seriously on its
own terms.
As the Administration's broader sabotage of DOMA litigation
makes clear, the Obama administration has subordinated its
legal duty to its desire to please a favored and powerful
political constituency, and is eager to obscure from the
American public its stealth campaign to induce the court to
invent a constitutional right for same-sex marriage. Let me
briefly amplify these points.
With the exception of laws that intrude on executive branch
power, the longstanding practice of the Department of Justice
is to vigorously defend the constitutionality of any law for
which a reasonable defense may be made. This reasonable
standard sets a very low bar. It basically means that the
Department will defend a Federal law when it can offer
nonfrivolous grounds in support of the law; in other words,
when the law is not patently unconstitutional.
As Clinton administration Solicitor General Drew Days has
explained, this reasonable standard affords Congress the
respect to which it is entitled as a coordinate branch of
government, and prevents the executive branch from using
litigation as a form of postenactment veto of legislation that
the current Administration dislikes.
Attorney General Holder claims to have acted consistent
with this standard, but his claim is clearly wrong. Any
competent lawyer could present plenty of reasonable arguments
that DOMA shouldn't be subjected to heightened scrutiny.
Indeed, all 11 Federal circuit courts to address the question
have determined that classifications based on sexual
orientation are subject to rational basis review. Any competent
lawyer could likewise present plenty of reasonable arguments
that even if heightened scrutiny were to apply, DOMA would
satisfy that standard.
For all its flaws, the Obama administration's decision to
abandon its former defense of DOMA has a modest virtue of
making overt a far greater scandal that the Obama
administration has been attempting to obscure; namely, that the
Department has only been pretending to defend DOMA while it, in
fact, has been actively sabotaging it.
Most starkly, in 2009, in what a supporter of same-sex
marriage aptly described as a gift to the gay marriage
movement, the Obama administration affirmatively repudiated the
argument that DOMA is rationally related to legitimate
governmental interests in responsible procreation and child
rearing. Never mind that these grounds have proven successful
in previous litigation against DOMA and have been invoked by
Congress when it enacted DOMA. Not surprisingly, the lone judge
to rule against DOMA relied heavily on the Department's
concession.
Last fall, Assistant Attorney General Tony West admitted
that the Department was modifying and diluting its legal
arguments in DOMA cases to comport with what he called the
Obama administration's policy values. According to a
sympathetic account of his remarks, Assistant Attorney General
West also disclosed that the Department is working with
its``liaison to the gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender
community to make sure that future briefings don't advance
arguments that they would find offensive.''
In other words, a senior DOJ official was conceding that
the Department was allowing the sensitivities of a favored
political constituency to have extraordinary influence over how
the Department defended or pretended to defend DOMA.
In sum, far from providing the vigorous defense of DOMA
that it promised, the Obama administration undermined that
litigation for the obvious purpose of pleasing a particular
political constituency.
President Obama won election to his office maintaining that
he opposes same-sex marriage and keeping contrary evidence
buried. Even now, he and his Administration are attempting to
obscure that his position that DOMA is unconstitutional clearly
means that he also believes that traditional marriage laws are
unconstitutional.
Given the Obama administration's dereliction of duty, the
decision by the House of Representatives to step in to defend
DOMA is entirely warranted. Indeed, that decision should be
supported as a matter of principle by all House Members,
whether or not they support DOMA.
The Department's irresponsible course of action is fully to
blame for the House's need to incur legal fees in defending
DOMA. Thus, although it is refreshing to witness concerns of
fiscal frugality from some Members of the House not ordinarily
associated with such concerns, those concerns are misdirected
if they are deployed to question or oppose the House's
retention of counsel. A far more sensible course is for the
House to make clear that the sum to be appropriated for the
Department will be reduced by the sum expended on legal fees in
defense of DOMA or, better yet, by some healthy multiple of
that sum.
Thank you.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Whelan.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Whelan follows:]

__________
Mr. Franks. There were questions earlier as to why the
Department was not invited here. Just for the record, the
Department did write a letter to us outlining their position,
and we used that as a basis for that. The minority had the
opportunity, if they chose, to choose a witness from the
Department if they felt like further clarification beyond the
letter was significant. And I just wanted to put that on the
record.
I will now begin my question--the questioning by
recognizing myself for 5 minutes.
Mr. Whelan, the President has a constitutional obligation
to ``take care that the laws are faithfully executed.'' And he
swears an oath to faithfully execute his office. Do these
constitutional obligations, in your mind, require that
decisions not to defend a law must be based on sincere legal
analysis rather than a political calculation?
Mr. Whelan. Absolutely. And further, they require that that
legal analysis, not only that it be sincere, but be very
carefully considered and responsible.
Again, the point I would emphasize here is that putting
aside questions of constitutional authority, the very basis on
which Attorney General Holder has attempted to defend this
action, the notion that this is consistent with the standard of
defending any time there are reasonable arguments to be
offered; in fact, it is clear that is not the case here.
Mr. Franks. So I guess the follow-up question is do you
believe the President's actions meet the Constitution's
faithfulness standard?
Mr. Whelan. No, I don't.
Mr. Franks. Do you view the present Administration's
actions in the DOMA litigation as an improper politicization of
the Justice Department?
Mr. Whelan. I do. And again, as I have outlined and
detailed more extensively in my written testimony, I think we
see the whole track record of undermining this litigation, as
well as the Don't Ask, Don't Tell litigation, which I have
addressed in separate writings.
Mr. Franks. Ms. Gallagher, virtually every known society,
as you mentioned in your testimony, since the beginning of
history has had some form of marriage. There have been some
cultural differences in the meaning of marriage among various
societies, but what elements of marriage have been universal?
Ms. Gallagher. Would you forgive me if I just made a brief
remark on the politicization thing and then answer your
question?
Mr. Franks. Certainly.
Ms. Gallagher. Thank you.
For me, the context of this last decision to refuse to
defend DOMA, you have to look at the history of this. When DOMA
was first challenged in the first circuit, a career Justice
Department lawyer submitted a brief in that case similar to the
briefs that had won in other litigations. There was a huge
outcry from an important member of President Obama's political
base. That brief was publicly withdrawn, and then a new brief
repudiating the purposes of DOMA was resubmitted.
And so I just wanted to add that, in addition to--when you
are evaluating President Obama's Justice Department's decision
now on whether it is politicization, I think you have to see it
in the context of the very public way in which the Justice
Department's actions were publicly politicized. Its legal
strategies were shifted in response to politically expressed
outrage.
And now I will let lawyers handle those questions.
There is a basic shape to marriage in virtually every known
human society, and it varies a lot. It is not unchanging. But
it is always a public union, not just a private personal and
intimate union; it is a sexual union, it is not some other kind
of union, in which the rights and responsibilities--between a
man and a woman, I should say. At least between one man and one
woman. Because polygamy is, frankly, fairly common in--
especially in small tribal societies, in which the rights and
the responsibilities of the man and the woman toward each other
and toward the children their sexual unions naturally produce
are publicly defined and supported, which means we don't the
just leave it up to a bunch of adolescents in the middle of
their psychological dramas to figure out on their own what this
whole big dimension of human experience means.
Virtually every society has recognized you need a public
institution that is dedicated to the idea that children need a
father as well as a mother, and that, you know, brings the two
sexes together into a union that protects the children that
their bodies make together.
Mr. Franks. So do you agree or disagree with the
Massachusetts Supreme Court's holding that government creates
marriage?
Ms. Gallagher. The very worst part of the Goodrich decision
is the one line--well, there are a lot of parts I disagree
with, but it is the line that essentially what we have here is
a licensing scheme, right? As if the Legislature of
Massachusetts just sat around and dreamed up this idea called
marriage.
I think that government has a role in recognizing marriage
because it is so important to the common good, but I do not
believe that government invented marriage and has the right to
redefine it, a moral right.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Ms. Gallagher.
I guess I am about to lose my time here, so I will now
recognize Mr. Nadler.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Ms. Gallagher, how would you explain to children like
McKinley and Brianna, who are here with us with their parents
today, that their family is not deserving and should be
excluded from the protections and benefits of marriage,
including the important confirmation that the Federal
Government considers them a family? Would you consider these
children expendable?
Ms. Gallagher. I think no children is expendable. And, by
the way, this is a question that has been answered about the
ideal of marriage. Gay people have families that are not
marital families, but they are families. I myself was an unwed
mother, so I have firsthand experience with being in a family
that is not a marital family.
I don't think that you need to have a message of
stigmatization and exclusion to protect an ideal which is
important to the whole of society.
Mr. Nadler. That is the whole point of DOMA, to stigmatize
and exclude.
Ms. Gallagher. Well, that is your opinion, with all due
respect. It is not my opinion, nor, I think, what was expressed
by Congress in 1996 or by----
Mr. Nadler. Excuse me. I have the time. How does excluding
these people help protect marriage?
Ms. Gallagher. Well, the way that I think that the majority
of Americans who disagree with you understand it is that these
are not marriages. So it does not make sense because----
Mr. Nadler. I didn't ask that question. I asked, how does
excluding these people from marriage help protect heterosexual
marriages?
Ms. Gallagher. Because including same-sex unions as
marriages denies at a public level that marriage is about, in
an important way, bringing together mothers and fathers for
children.
Secondarily, it is based on the idea that it is immoral and
abhorrent to have a----
Mr. Nadler. In other words, we need to exclude----
Ms. Gallagher.--dedicated to bring around----
Mr. Nadler. In other words--excuse me.
Ms. Gallagher. I am trying to answer the question.
Mr. Nadler. Yes. But you are answering it at length
greater. I only have 5 minutes.
Ms. Gallagher. I apologize.
Mr. Nadler. Now, you spoke exhaustively about a supposed
politicization of the Justice Department under this
Administration. Your organization, which is based in New
Jersey, spent nearly $650,000 on a campaign to unseat Iowa
Supreme Court Justices because of their decision that gay and
lesbian couples should be able to marry in Iowa.
Do you think that judges should decide cases based on
political concerns or they fear for their jobs? And, if so, how
does the judicial branch differ from the legislative branch?
And what is the purpose of the legal protection clause?
Ms. Gallagher. The National Organization for Marriage is a
political advocacy organization, so I think it is appropriate
for us to be politically involved in a way that the Department
of Justice is not supposed to be politicized.
Mr. Nadler. No. But are judges supposed to decide cases on
that basis?
Ms. Gallagher. Secondly, I think there is an argument about
whether judicial elections are a good idea. But what I don't
think you can say to the people of Iowa is if--you have an
election for judges, but you are not allowed to vote no because
you disagree with their decision on----
Mr. Nadler. So you think judges should be in a position
where they have to take into account the popularity, not just
the justice, of what they are about to decide.
Ms. Gallagher. Well, I think there is an argument about
whether judicial elections are a good idea, and I have not
expressed--I don't actually have a informed opinion on that.
But I do believe----
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Professor Ball, would you comment on Mr. Whelan's comments
on the lack of any legal justification for the Department of
Justice's decision on defending section 3 of DOMA?
Mr. Ball. Yes. I completely disagree.
Mr. Nadler. Could you turn on the mike, please?
Mr. Ball. It is on on. I am sorry, it is probably not close
enough to my mouth.
I completely disagree with that characterization. It seems
to me that the Obama administration has done a careful and
thorough job looking at the arguments in favor of DOMA, and
they have decided that, in fact, there is no rational reason to
deny couples who are already married under their State laws of
the hundreds and hundreds of Federal benefits that are based on
marriage.
It is important in understanding the Obama administration's
decision that marriage, family law, domestic relations, has
always been a matter of State jurisdiction. So in that context
I think the Obama administration's decision here is the correct
one.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
And finally, what is your response to Mr. Whelan's claims
that all 11 Federal circuits that have addressed the question
have determined that rational basis review is the proper basis
to apply to laws that discriminate against gay men and
lesbians?
Mr. Ball. Well, I can see that in the 1980's and 1990's,
there were a handful of circuit courts relying on Bowers v.
Hardwick, which is no longer a good law----
Mr. Nadler. No longer good law because it was explicitly
overruled by the Supreme Court.
Mr. Ball. Exactly. Correct.
They did conclude that lesbians and gay men's sexual
orientation classifications were not entitled to heightened
scrutiny.
What has happened, of course, as you mentioned, is that
that case has been overturned, and what we have had in the last
few years is some circuits citing to those old cases whose
legal reasoning is no longer valid without engaging in the
appropriate analysis of whether a particular classification
merits a heightened scrutiny. So I disagree with that legal
conclusion.
Mr. Nadler. And you would say that in light of Romer v.
Evans and in light of Lawrence, two Supreme Court cases, that
courts would be compelled to decide that there is a heightened
scrutiny requirement?
Mr. Ball. Absolutely. I mean, because of Romer, because of
Lawrence, because of the long history of discrimination,
because of the fact that sexual orientation has nothing to do
with the ability of individuals to contribute to society, which
make therefore suspect government classifications based on
sexual orientation.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Nadler.
I hope we can be as respectful to the witnesses as we
possibly can.
Mr. Conyers, I will recognize you, sir, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
Was Mr. Nadler correct when he said your organization
raised sums of money against judges in more than one State?
Ms. Gallagher. I believe the only judicial election we were
involved with was last November's in Iowa, where for the first
time in history the people of Iowa voted down all three judges
who were up for judicial retention election, yes. And I am
under oath, so I don't know if it was 600,000 or 650,000, but
it was on that order of expense we spent in media, informing
the voters that these judges had voted for gay marriage, yes.
Mr. Conyers. What about in Maine, your organization in
Maine?
Ms. Gallagher. We were not involved in judicial retention
elections in Maine. We have been politically involved in a
number of States.
Mr. Conyers. I am talking about repealing a law allowing
gay and lesbian couples to marry.
Ms. Gallagher. Yes, we were responsible for getting Prop 8
only the ballot and were probably the lead organization in the
Maine case.
Mr. Conyers. And is it true that your organization may have
spent $1.9 million in that campaign?
Ms. Gallagher. I don't have those figures in front of me,
but we certainly were involved. That is probably on the order
of correct again. I didn't really come prepared to testify in
detail on those questions, but that is--I am sure that if that
is what you are told, it is on that order.
Mr. Conyers. That is a lot of money.
Ms. Gallagher. Well, last year we raised and spent $13
million, to the best of my recollection. So in 3 years we have
grown from zero to that. We have 50,000 donors and about
800,000 people actively involved.
Mr. Conyers. So you plan to raise even more money. It keeps
getting larger and larger?
Ms. Gallagher. Well, until we win the fight to protect
marriage as one man and one woman, we will try to raise as much
money as we can. It will be a long time until we are as big as
the Human Rights Campaign, but that is our goal.
Mr. Conyers. Well, if, as you contend, the will of the
people on this issue is so clear, why do you have to raise more
and more amounts of money?
Ms. Gallagher. Well, do I really have to explain to a
Congressman that it is important to raise money to get your
message out? I think that is the way politics works. One of the
reasons I founded the National Organization for Marriage is
that I realized that social conservatives--and not everybody
who agrees with us would call themselves a social
conservative--but that we relied too much on spontaneous mass
uprisings of the people, and that, in fact, you know, we needed
to be politically organized.
I have to say, I learned a lot by watching how effective
the gay rights political organizations are about what needed to
be done if we are going to have two teams on the field on this
issue.
Mr. Conyers. Well, I can see why you were invited here. I
still am going to consult with the Chairman of the Committee
about the letter that is now contended that we should have
invited the Attorney General if we wanted him so badly, but yet
we are going to have the Attorney General next month after we
have gone through all of this.
Mr. Whelan, you said that this was obviously politically
motivated by the President, by his conduct in not defending
these cases. Are you aware that he campaigned against DOMA even
before he was elected President?
Mr. Whelan. I am aware that he has taken the position----
Mr. Conyers. I said you are aware of that, aren't you?
Mr. Whelan. As a matter of policy, yes.
Mr. Conyers. All right. And that the issue that we have
been really going over here today is not about whether he was
going to--whether he is for it or against it. The issue is
whether the Department of Justice should defend the case. Isn't
that what really the finer issue is about?
Mr. Whelan. Whether the Department will abide by its long-
standing practice of vigorously defending Federal laws for
which reasonable defenses may be offered, yes.
Mr. Conyers. Well, what about all of the Bush-era decisions
of which we are told it is several hundred, some have said as
high as 750, in which he declared laws that he was signing were
unconstitutional, and he wasn't going to enforce them? Has that
ever come to your attention as a scholar?
Mr. Whelan. Absolutely, and indeed I addressed that in my
testimony. And as I make clear, the source of the President's
authority to decline to defend a Federal law is exactly the
same as the source of his authority to issue constitutional
signing statements, a practice that President Obama, over no
one's objection, has continued. The question is whether in any
particular instance the exercise of that authority is sound or
not.
Mr. Conyers. Well, you mean sound in terms of whether you
agree with it or not?
Mr. Whelan. I mean sound in terms of good constitutional
judgment, sound--and I mean--in particular here, I mean sound
in terms of the rationale that the Administration has offered.
Mr. Conyers. The President, sir, not only is a lawyer, but
he taught constitutional law. He was a United States Senator.
And I am sure your opinion about what is sound or not is as
good as anybody else's, including mine, but why do we have to
gather here today to question whether it is sound or not? It is
going to be tested in the courts, as you well know.
Mr. Whelan. Well, the fact that President Obama has the
strong background that you identify in constitutional law makes
it all the more implausible to think that suddenly he has
discovered simply because a case has been filed in the Second
Circuit, that his understanding, his longstanding
understanding, that DOMA was constitutionally permissible but
bad policy was wrong, and indeed that DOMA and marriage laws
throughout the country are somehow unconstitutional. It simply
isn't plausible that----
Mr. Conyers. What is so implausible about it?
Mr. Whelan. The filing of a case, the filing of two cases
in the Second Circuit, that triggers this complete 180-degree
turn and Barack Obama's understanding of the constitutional
status of same-sex marriage? As I document in detail in my
testimony, I think one would have to be very naive to think
that it is anything other than a stealth strategy of step by
step by step the Administration is doing whatever it can to
promote same-sex marriage and to induce the courts to adopt
that approach.
Mr. Conyers. I am totally confounded by you and I admit
that he is a good lawyer, he was a Senator, he is a law school
scholar, he has taught law, and now you say it is perfectly
naive to think that there was anything other than a political
motive for him to do what he did.
Mr. Whelan. Let me put it this way----
Mr. Conyers. Wait a minute----
Mr. Whelan. May I respond to that?
Mr. Conyers. Just a moment. Yes, I should let you do that.
Mr. Whelan. The matter would have been quite different if
President Obama when running for President had said, I believe
there is a constitutional right to same-sex marriage. I believe
that the Defense of Marriage Act is unconstitutional. It would
have been entirely different if from the outset the Department
of Justice, rather than pretending to defend these cases, had
said, we are not going to have anything to do with them. We are
following what our President says. We are going to let other
people step in and offer an effective defense.
Instead they pretended to defend them, undermining those
cases in the process. That whole course of conduct, more than
this particular decision in February, is the real scandal.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Conyers, I think they are going to call a
vote here pretty quickly, so I want to try, if we can----
Mr. Conyers. Thank you for your generosity and the time,
Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Franks. I would now quickly, related to political fund
raising, I am understanding Mr. Obama intends to raise about $1
billion this next time, and if he is convinced that he has got
the will of the people, perhaps he should just forego that.
Mr. Scott, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Professor Ball, does DOMA prohibit gay marriage in States
if States want to do it?
Mr. Ball. Absolutely not.
Mr. Scott. Does it deny gay couples the right to have or
raise children?
Mr. Ball. No, it does not.
Mr. Scott. If the State recognition of gay marriages in
other States, if the full faith and credit clause of the
Constitution doesn't require it, what is the effect of the law?
Mr. Ball. If the Constitution doesn't require it, then that
part of DOMA--are you referring to section 2, Mr. Congressman?
Mr. Scott. The part that allows the States not to recognize
an out-of-State gay marriage.
Mr. Ball. Yes. You know, the issue of whether or not a
marriage recognized in one State is constitutionally--that
there is a constitutional obligation to recognize that
marriage, it is a complicated one, and what exactly the statute
adds to that is not entirely clear, but I think----
Mr. Scott. Because if it has to recognize that the statute
is unconstitutional and meaningless, if it doesn't require it,
then it wasn't needed to begin with.
Mr. Ball. That is correct. It is part of the problem with
DOMA, that it was never needed to begin with. Neither section 2
nor section 3 were needed.
Mr. Scott. Ms. Gallagher, you started to mention something
about antimiscegenation laws. I know Virginia was the case in
Loving v. Virginia. We had a law since 1691. Sixteen other
States had laws that were overturned by the by the Loving case.
We have heard a lot about letting the democratic process
deal with this, but it was those, I think they are they are
called lifetime activist liberal Federal judges violating the
will of the people overturned those laws. Was that a good idea
to allow those judges to impose their will on the people, or
should we have relied on the democratic process to change those
laws?
Ms. Gallagher. I believe that the constitutional
protections for race are extremely important, are properly
enforced by the courts. In fact, it took an entire Civil War in
which 600,000 people died in order to get the equal protection
clause, which specifically refers and clearly forbids racial
classifications.
Mr. Scott. So it was a good idea to override the will of
the people in that case and not to allow the judicial process
to consider gay marriages?
Ms. Gallagher. Well, I have never argued that people don't
have a right to litigate. I think that that is a basic civil
right. But what I have argued is that the traditional
understanding of marriage is the union of husband and wife is
not at all akin to interracial marriage and should not be
treated by the courts in the same way.
Mr. Scott. Well, since 1691, the definition of marriage in
Virginia, my home State, was that it could not include Blacks
and Whites.
Ms. Gallagher. And we totally agree about that, that that
was a good thing to do. What we are disagreeing about is
whether there is any analogy to be drawn between interracial
marriage and defining marriage as the union of husband and
wife, and we probably just substantively disagree about that.
I raised it in the context of pointing out if you really
believe that, that people who think like me and the millions of
Americans who think like me, that we are like bigots who
opposed interracial marriage, the government is going to
intervene very strongly to affect those people's lives in areas
from professional licenses, the tax-exempt status of
organizations.
We are already seeing, in fact, the beginnings of the
impact on individuals who belong to traditional-faith
communities of the idea that these views are akin to racial
bigotry. I have seen people losing their jobs. I have seen
licenses threatened. We are seeing people kicked out of
graduate school programs. And, you know, I have a serious
concern that there are people who really do believe it is like
interracial marriage and that the government and the courts----
Mr. Scott. Well, Ms. Gallagher, remind me what churches
were saying about interracial marriages before 1967.
Ms. Gallagher. Well, actually, I am a Roman Catholic, and I
would argue that the dominant Christian tradition, as practiced
not only in the United States but across centuries in history,
that there is no grounding for that as a deep Christian idea.
But certainly people made arguments from the Bible. You know,
the devil can quote Scripture for his own purposes. There is no
question about that.
Mr. Scott. Are you telling me the churches in Virginia----
Ms. Gallagher. You are stretching my knowledge to go back
to the churches in Virginia in the 18th and 19th century. But
certainly having looked at it, it is quite probable that there
were churches that made that argument.
Mr. Scott. My time has expired. I just want to remind
people what Professor Ball pointed out, that failure to
recognize other States' unions gets you into all kinds of
problems with estate tax, real estate and other things that
actually make no sense. And I thank him for bringing that up.
I yield back.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
I now recognize Mr. Quigley for 5 minutes.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, you are right, we should treat our witnesses
with respect. This is a very passionate issue, and sometimes
that makes it difficult for folks to talk. We talk past each
other. The law has been talked about a lot here, and it becomes
an emotional issue.
So I haven't done this yet, but, you know, for me, the
issue of how this relates to parenthood has been paramount.
This Sunday my youngest turns 21, and my kids have been
different and different challenges, as every parent can say. I
would like to think I have been a good parent. Only time will
tell. My parents probably felt the same way. So I am no expert
on it.
But wouldn't you agree it is such a personal issue? It is
so close. For those who want government to stay out of people's
lives, what could be more personal than the decision on who you
should love or can love and how to express that love in raising
children?
You have seen the commercials about adoption. They say you
don't have to be perfect to be a parent. It has nothing to do
with orientation, but you get the flavor of it. I am not
perfect. You talk about as it relates to being able to
procreate, stability, that you need a father as well. You
recognize that it is probably the minority of straight couples
have that kind of situation right now, but we don't tell those
folks that they can't be married, or, if that is the end of it,
they can't.
I will let you go. If it is just a personal thing, and I
actually think that hinges a lot of public opinion, I am no
expert, but I think it has more to do with whether or not I was
a good parent, or you or anybody else here, more to do with
being willing to wipe noses, deal with skinned knees, teach how
to ride a bike, teach how to read, be patient, loving, pretend
to know something about girls' fashion. You get a sense of
that.
I don't think in the moments of being a parent that you are
thinking what your orientation is, and I sure as heck don't
think your kids do either.
Ms. Gallagher. You know, we would agree on so much if we
weren't in a hotly contested political arena where it is not--
somehow it is not in anyone's interest to agree.
Mr. Quigley. I just want this one time we don't talk past
each other.
Ms. Gallagher. I honestly believe 90 percent of what you
said. I believe there are gay people who are wonderful parents.
And it is interesting to me that no matter how I try to avoid
it, that people interpret what I say as a condemnation of gay
people and their parenting skills, because that is not my
intent.
What I really do believe, however, is that we have an
enormous problem in this country. It wasn't caused by gay
people, and it can't be cured by them, but it is entirely about
how serious we are, not about marriage as an expression of
romantic love, which is doing fine in Hollywood, right, but
whether marriage as a social institution is going to fulfill
its role of bringing together mothers and fathers and keeping
them together in the same loving family for the sake of the
children.
And I wish I believed, as you do apparently, that same-sex
marriage is just going to be about including a few more people
in the same institution. What I really do believe is that the
founding ideas driving the social institution have big
consequences, and the heart of the gay marriage idea is that if
you think it is ideal for a child to have a mother and father
and that marriage is about this, there is something wrong with
you, you are being mean to gay people. That may not be your
view, but it is the dominant idea expressed now.
If you just go out in the public square and you say--this
happened to me in Maine. I was on a radio show, and I said,
well, you know, marriage deserves its unique status because
children need a mother and father. And the host turned to me
and said, I cannot believe I am hearing such hatred and
bigotry.
You know, I understand that some people hear it that way.
It saddens me. But it also persuades me that we are in a real
fundamental question about what marriage is supposed to mean.
Mr. Quigley. But if your concern is to defend marriage,
don't you see greater threats being infidelity, domestic
violence, alcoholism, drug use? Those are the things that drive
families apart.
Ms. Gallagher. I spent about 20 years in the family
fragmentation debate, working on the issues of divorce and
unmarried childbearing, and I still actually devote some of my
time to that. But I do see a need. I wouldn't say--if I could
wave a magic wand and eliminate divorce and have gay marriage,
I might wave that magic wand. But that is not the way it works.
You know, just as in the 1970's when I was a child, I was
told that the no-fault divorce revolution wouldn't affect
marriage because it would only affect bad marriages. And I
think that turned out to be wrong. I think it affected
everyone's marriages by changing the sense that marriage is a
permanent commitment. And in the same way, I think same-sex
marriage is going to eventually affect everyone's marriage, not
mine because I am old, but by changing the public understanding
of what this institution is and what it is for, and by branding
people who hold my views of marriage, which, again, are very
powerfully related to its role in protecting children by
regulating family structure--by branding people like us as
motivated by animus and hatred, and it is going to be hard to
sustain that idea if the law adopts that point of view toward
the people who hold it.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I guess what divides us is that this is a very personal
issue. And you can have your views, but when you do what you
do, you limit what others can do to express theirs.
Ms. Gallagher. This goes to the oddity of having a personal
intimate decision to invite the government in to regulate your
relationship through law. And it is law.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
Ms. Gallagher, I might just say that many of us wish, in
your response to Mr. Quigley, wish we could articulate our
position as well as you did. I wish I could say it that well.
I would like to thank our witnesses today for their
testimony, each one of them.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit to the Chair additional written questions for
witnesses, which we will forward and ask the witnesses to
respond to as promptly as they can so that their answers may be
included in part of the record and made part of the record. So,
without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
within which to submit any additional materials for inclusion
in the record.
With that, again, I sincerely thank the witnesses, and this
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:20 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________

__________


