- IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR AND MARITIME TERRORISM AGREEMENTS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR AND MARITIME TERRORISM
AGREEMENTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

OCTOBER 5, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-71

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-575 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr., Wisconsin, Chairman

LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas, Vice-Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        Virginia
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TED POE, Texas                       HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                   Georgia
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JUDY CHU, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           TED DEUTCH, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MARK AMODEI, Nevada                  MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
[Vacant]

Caroline Lynch, Chief Counsel

Bobby Vassar, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

OCTOBER 5, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr., a Representative in
Congress from the State of Wisconsin, and Chairman,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........     1
The Honorable Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Virginia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........     2

WITNESSES

Thomas M. Countryman, Assistant Secretary of State for
International Security and Nonproliferation, U.S. Department of
State
Oral Testimony.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
Brad Wiegmann, Deputy Assistant Attorney General, U.S. Department
of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    17

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Letter from Andrew M. Semmel, former Deputy Assistant Secretary
of State for Nuclear Nonproliferation Policy and Negotiations..    32
Letter of Support................................................    33
Letter of Support from William H. Tobey..........................    35
Letter from Ambassador Linton F. Brooks, Independent Consultant
on National Security...........................................    36
Response to Hearing Questions from Ronald Weich, Assistant
Attorney General, Office of Legislative Affairs, U.S.
Department of Justice..........................................    37

IMPLEMENTATION OF CERTAIN INTERNATIONAL NUCLEAR AND MARITIME TERRORISM
AGREEMENTS

----------

WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 5, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
and Homeland Security,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable F.
James Sensenbrenner, Jr. (Chairman of the Subcommittee)
presiding.
Present: Representatives Sensenbrenner, Goodlatte, Gowdy,
Adams, Scott, Johnson, and Jackson Lee.
Staff Present: (Majority) Caroline Lynch, Subcommittee
Chief Counsel; Arthur Radford Baker, Counsel; Lindsay Hamilton,
Subcommittee Clerk; (Minority) Bobby Vassar, Subcommitte
Counsel; Aaron Hiller, Counsel; and Veronica Eligan,
Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The Subcommittee will be in order.
Without objection, the Chair will be authorized to declare
recesses during votes today, which I do not expect, and the
Chair yields himself 5 minutes for the purpose of an opening
statement.
Today's hearing examines the important international
agreements that improve our efforts to protect the United
States from terrorist attacks and specifically against attacks
utilizing weapons of mass destruction or the destruction of
ships and maritime platforms. Full implementation of the
treaties discussed today will not be achieved unless Congress
amends existing criminal provisions of the U.S. Code.
This hearing will focus on four agreements, two of which
concern nuclear and radiological materials, the sabotage of
nuclear facilities and the protection of nuclear fatalities and
the materials used for peaceful purposes. The other two
treaties relate to the use of targeting of a ship or maritime
platform as a part of a terrorist attack, the transporting of
certain materials by ship for terrorist purposes, and the
transport of terrorists by ship, among the other things.
Now, it may seem odd that we need new legislation regarding
terrorist acts against ships or the smuggling of nuclear
materials; and a logical question would be, don't we already
have laws that prohibit this kind of activity? Existing law may
cover certain aspects of these treaties, but, in order to
comply fully and ultimately ratify the treaties, parties to the
agreement are required to criminalize certain offenses as well
as comply with extradition requirements and other obligations
relating to international cooperation.
The treaties themselves were modified to cover gaps in
their original drafting. For example, one of the treaties we
will hear about today concerns the physical protection of
nuclear materials which originally only covered protection
during international transport. An amendment to that treaty now
also requires protecting domestic nuclear facilities and
materials.
There are many reasons why it is important that we ratify
these agreements. Doing so keeps the United States at the
forefront of global counterterrorism and counterproliferation
efforts. Also, these measures are consistent with our domestic
efforts to protect our homeland, and ratifying these treaties
will encourage other nations to follow suit, which further
helps protect the United States.
I look forward to hearing more about these proposals
advanced by the Department of Justice for implementing the
treaty requirements and how these matters are important to our
national security, and I want to thanks the witnesses for
participating in today's hearing.
It is now my pleasure to recognize for his opening
statement the gentleman from Virginia and Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning. I thank the Chairman for scheduling this
hearing.
When the Department of Justice proposes legislation to
change our criminal laws, this Subcommittee benefits from the
opportunity to hear testimony about why the Department believes
that it is necessary and what its impact will be. Today we will
discuss proposals to enact criminal offenses related to
treaties signed by the United States related to international
efforts to fight and prevent terrorism, certainly a laudable
cause.
At the outset, it is important to distinguish between the
four treaties at the heart of our discussion and the
legislation that has been proposed by the Administration to
implement the treaties.
The treaties themselves are the cornerstone of an important
effort to update international law for the post-9/11 era. Two
of the treaties, the International Convention for the
Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism and the Convention for
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, require party
nations to better protect nuclear materials and to punish acts
of nuclear terrorism. The two other treaties, the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for Suppression of
Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed Platforms, address
the use of ships and fixed platforms in terrorist attacks, as
well as the transport of weapons, weapons delivery systems, and
terrorist fugitives by sea.
The United States signed these treaties in 2005. The Senate
passed a resolution of advise and consent for all four in 2008.
In an era where increasingly we rely on our allies to combat
terrorism, these new treaty obligation also are plain
commonsense, and I hope we find a swift path to total
ratification.
I am still not convinced, however, that the implementing
legislation before us today is the best path forward. The fact
is that existing statutes already cover most of our obligations
under these new agreements. One proposal suggests creating a
new Federal crime prohibiting the possession or use of a
nuclear explosive device in an act of terrorism, but this
conduct is already illegal, and 18 U.S.C. 832(c) prohibits the
possession or use of a radiological weapon. 18 U.S.C. 2332(h)
prohibits an unlawful possession and use of a weapon or device
designed to release radiation. Section 831 and Section 2283
prohibit the unlawful transport of these materials. Why is it
then that we need to invent a new crime?
If our new treaty obligations create a gap in existing
statutes, then the Committee should address those gaps. But we
need to be convinced that there are in fact gaps; and if there
are gaps in existing statutes, we should close them in a manner
that simplifies the criminal code, rather than complicates it.
The legislative proposals raise similar questions where the
Administration has clearly asked for more than is necessary to
implement these treaties. Why should we add to the list of
wiretap predicates? Why should we give the Attorney General the
authority to board ships when the U.S. Navy and Coast Guard
already have broad authority to conduct such boardings? Why
should Congress preauthorize the President to conduct
additional international agreements? The legislation would
expand the scope of conduct subject to the death penalty, but
how many times do we need to be able to execute an individual
for a crime of terrorism?
When we have answered these questions to our satisfaction,
I suspect that we will have arrived at a simpler legislative
proposal that fully honors our new commitments. I look forward
to hearing from our distinguished witnesses and discussing with
them these issues.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Scott.
It is now my pleasure to introduce today's witnesses.
Thomas Countryman is currently serving as the Assistant
Secretary for International Security and Nonproliferation in
the Department of State. He has been with the State Department
for almost 30 years. Mr. Countryman has served with distinction
in a variety of assignments, including as the Principal Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Political Military Affairs, Deputy
Assistant Secretary for European Affairs, Deputy Chief of
Mission at the U.S. Embassy in Athens, and Administrator
Counselor for Political Affairs at the American in Rome. He has
also worked as a Director of the Office of South Central
European Affairs, Director for Near East and South Asian
Affairs at the National Security Council, and as a counselor
and political officer in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, and in the
Department's Office of Eastern European and Yugoslav Affairs
and Office of Counterterrorism. He graduated from Washington
University in St. Louis with a degree in economics and
political science and studied at the Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard.
Brad Wiegmann has served as Deputy Assistant Attorney
General for National Security with the Justice Department since
March, 2009. He has been a career government attorney for the
past 15 years, having previously served in legal position at
the Departments of Defense and State and with the National
Security Council.
Before joining the government, Mr. Wiegmann worked at Shay
& Gardner in Washington where he focused on civil litigation
and served as clerk for Judge Patrick Higginbotham on the
United States Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit. He is a
graduate of Duke University and Harvard Law School.
Both witnesses' statements will be entered into the record
in their entirety. I ask that each witness summarize his
testimony in 5 minutes or less.
I now recognize Mr. Countryman. Please go ahead.

TESTIMONY OF THOMAS M. COUNTRYMAN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AND NONPROLIFERATION, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Mr. Countryman. Good morning and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Scott----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Could you pull the mike a little bit
closer to you.
Mr. Countryman. Good morning and thank you, Mr. Chairman,
Ranking Member Scott, for the honor of being able to discuss
with you today implementing legislation for these four
multilateral counterterrorism treaties.
The International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism addresses a critical category of terrorist
activity, the nexus between terrorism and nuclear weapons and
other radioactive materials and devices such as dirty bombs.
The amendment to the Convention on Physical Protection of
Nuclear Material addresses the physical protection of nuclear
material used for peaceful purposes and domestic use, storage,
and transport, in addition to that in international nuclear
transport, and the physical protection of nuclear facilities
used for peaceful purposes. And the Protocol to the Convention
for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation and the Protocol to the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed
Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf, the 2005 SUA
protocols, address the potential use of maritime vessels and
platforms as a means of conducting or enabling terrorist
activity and the unlawful transport of WMD and related items
via commercial ships.
These four treaties are key tools in the international
fight against terrorism and the proliferation of WMD. The
criminal offenses covered under these treaties are serious
offenses involving nuclear terrorism, WMD proliferation,
maritime terrorism, and unlawful maritime transport of WMD and
their delivery systems. Each treaty fills a gap in the existing
international regime.
In 2008, the Senate provided advice and consent to ratify
all four of these treaties. The ratification is critical for
several reasons.
First, joining these treaties will enhance U.S. national
security. Terrorism and weapons proliferation do not recognize
international boundaries. To combat these threats effectively,
we need not only a complete domestic legal framework but also a
broad international legal framework to facilitate international
cooperation. These treaties help achieve that goal.
Second, the treaties bolster other U.S. Government
counterterrorism and nonproliferation policy priorities such as
the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism, the
Proliferation Security Initiative, and the Nuclear Security
Summit. They also further the objectives and support
implementation of international obligations like United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1540. The SUA protocols in
particular help to promote implementation of U.N. sanctions on
Iran and North Korea.
Third, U.S. ratification of these treaties will encourage
widespread ratification and implementation by other countries.
For many years, the United States, both the Congress and the
executive branch, have been and will remain the international
leader in counterterrorism and nonproliferation efforts; and
passage of this legislation will reinforce our leadership.
Mr. Chairman, earlier this year, my colleagues from Justice
submitted to Congress the draft implementing legislation that
will enable us to ratify these key treaties. I will let my
colleague speak about the specific provisions within the draft
legislation, but just two more brief points regarding the
relationship between the proposed legislation and these
treaties.
First, the proposed implementing legislation will ensure
that the U.S. complies with our obligations which we have
assumed under each treaty to criminalize certain terrorism-
related conduct, and it will establish criminal jurisdiction
over that conduct. This will fill gaps in current U.S. law and
facilitate international cooperation in the framework of these
treaties.
Second, and finally, the proposed legislation is modeled
after legislation approved by Congress to implement earlier
counterterrorism treaties. Most recently, in 2002, Congress
passed legislation to implement treaties related to terrorist
bombing and terrorist finance. The proposed legislation tracks
that which has been successfully used in the past.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Countryman follows:]

__________

Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wiegmann.

TESTIMONY OF BRAD WIEGMANN, DEPUTY ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Wiegmann. Chairman Sensenbrenner, Ranking Member Scott,
thank you for inviting me to testify today regarding two
important legislative proposals: first, a proposal to implement
two international conventions concerning nuclear terrorism and
nuclear proliferation; second, a proposal to implement two
international protocols on maritime terrorism and the maritime
transportation of weapons of mass destruction. The Department
of Justice strongly supports enactment of the legislation
needed to implement these four treaties, which we believe
strengthen national security and enhance multilateral efforts
to combat terrorism and proliferation.
In 2008, the Senate gave its advice and consent to
ratification of all four treaties, but the United States will
not be in a position to ratify them until the implementing
legislation is in place. We submitted the necessary
implementing legislation in 2008, again in 2010, and most
recently in April of this year. Today, I am going to briefly
describe what the implementing legislation does, why it is
necessary, and then I would be happy to take your questions.
The four treaties, as Assistant Secretary Countryman has
explained, are the Nuclear Terrorism Convention, an amendment
to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, and the two SUA protocols adopted in 2005, one on the
safety of maritime navigation and the other on the safety of
fixed platforms on the Continental Shelf. All four treaties
establish specific criminal offenses related to terrorism and
proliferation that state parties are obliged to include in
their criminal codes.
Our proposal would accomplish this by creating one new
section in Title 18 of the U.S. Code and amending three others.
The new section is 2332(i) governing acts of nuclear terrorism
related to possession or use of a nuclear weapon or device or
radioactive material, as well as sabotage of nuclear
facilities.
Section 831 of Title 18 would also be amended to cover
nuclear smuggling; i.e., intentionally transporting nuclear
material into or out of a country without lawful authority.
The maritime terrorism offenses required by the two SUA
protocols are reflected in amendments to 18 U.S.C. 2280 and
2281. As amended, those provisions would address terrorism
involving ships and offshore platforms, transportation of
weapons of mass destruction and related materials, and
transportation of terrorist fugitives.
Now, while the United States already has an array of
criminal offenses in these areas, there are some gaps between
what the treaties require and what U.S. law currently covers.
These gaps are both substantive and jurisdictional, and they
are the reason why this implementing legislation is needed.
Although my time is limited today, I would like to mention
briefly a few examples of such gaps, as I did in my written
testimony.
First, let's consider the issue of sabotage of a nuclear
facility. Existing U.S. law already prohibits a person from
destroying or damaging a nuclear facility, but the current
statute, 42 U.S.C. 2284, does not cover threats of sabotage as
required by the nuclear treaties and as our proposed
legislation would do.
Second, 18 U.S.C. 2283 already prohibits the transport by
vessel of biological agents, chemical weapons, and radioactive
or nuclear material with the requisite intent. However, the SUA
protocol and, hence, our legislative proposal also covers the
maritime transport of equipment or technology that contributes
to the design, manufacture, or delivery of a nuclear,
biological, or chemical weapon. So there is the gap.
Third, each of the four treaties require us to be able to
prosecute an individual who is found in the United States if we
do not extradite him, regardless of the connection of the
offense to the United States. The relevant provisions of
existing U.S. law addressing illicit nuclear activities, such
as 18 U.S.C. 2332(h) and 42 U.S.C. 2284, lack this bound-in
jurisdiction, and there would be no basis for us to assert
jurisdiction over the required offenses in the absence of
implementing legislation.
Fourth, there is no real analog in U.S. law that addresses
shipboard transportation of terrorist fugitives, particularly
those who may not have committed offenses against U.S. law.
So these are just a few examples of the types of gaps this
legislation is designed to fill.
In addition to addressing these gaps, the implementing
legislation contains procedural and investigative provisions
that, although not required by the treaties, will help ensure
the United States is able to implement effectively U.S. law.
Examples include designating these offenses as wiretap
predicates and designating them as predicate crimes under the
material support statute, 18 U.S.C. 2339(a).
Thank you again for inviting me to this hearing. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wiegmann follows:]

__________

Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much, Mr. Wiegmann.
The Chair yields himself 5 minutes to begin the
questioning, and I don't think it will take that much.
Mr. Wiegmann, you heard the litany of complaints that the
Ranking Member gave during his opening statement. If we
accepted all of these complaints, would we be in violation of
the terms of the treaty?
Mr. Wiegmann. Well, we think that the package we put
forward is necessary to implement the treaty, if that answers
your question.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. No, it doesn't.
Maybe you would like to send a letter to be included in the
record when you review the complaints that Mr. Scott had in his
opening statement on which would put us in violation of the
treaty and which would not.
Mr. Wiegmann. Sure.
Obviously, there are different ways of implementing the
statute. We think the manner in which we crafted it is the
simplest way.
Just to give you a few reasons for that, the reason why we
have implemented other previous terrorism-related treaties is
putting all the legislation in one place as opposed to trying
to put it in different scattered sections of the U.S. Code
where it would be hard to figure out.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, I support that, even though I got
a lot of grief for moving Senator Leahy's National Security
Letters into the PATRIOT Act. People blamed me for the NSLs,
rather than him.
Mr. Wiegmann. Right. And while there is some overlap, there
is also some benefits in terms of extradition so we don't
confront cases where other countries can't tell how we have
implemented the treaty and we have dual criminality issues.
So there is a variety of issues why we have crafted it the
way we have.
There certainly are gaps. As I mentioned in my opening
remarks, we can't rely on existing provisions, which I admit do
cover some of this conduct, but they don't cover all of it. So
without the implementing legislation, we won't be in a position
to implement the treaties.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
In follow-up to the question from the Chairman, are there
provisions in the bill that are not necessary for ratification?
Mr. Wiegmann. Yes, there are. I am going to give you a
couple of examples.
One is a forfeiture provision that allows assets that are
used in the commission of these offenses to be forfeited to the
U.S. Government. That is something that we think is good
practice. It is consistent with other parts of U.S. law where
we do that. So we think it is appropriate here, but it is
really a matter of domestic law and not required by the treaty.
Mr. Scott. Can you give us a list for the record of the
provisions that are not necessary?
Mr. Wiegmann. We could do that.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Countryman, the vote in the Senate to ratify
all four of these treaties, was there any opposition?
Mr. Countryman. I am not sure, Congressman. I will get you
an answer to that as soon as possible.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Scott. I don't suspect there was. I think we all want
to ratify these, so that is not the question before us. The
question is whether these proposals are necessary.
The Attorney General's statutory authority to board ships,
the Coast Guard and the Navy have that authority and know how
to do it. Does the Department of Justice have that expertise,
Mr. Wiegmann?
Mr. Wiegmann. We have, I believe, conducted such boardings
in the past, yes.
Mr. Scott. And is this specific authority necessary?
Mr. Wiegmann. Again, not strictly necessary. We believe we
already have the authority without the statute, but we think it
is prudent to codify that to make it clear.
Mr. Scott. You have in the bill preauthority to the
President to enter into international agreements. Mr.
Countryman, is there precedent for that?
Mr. Countryman. I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Scott. The Safety of Maritime Navigation Act would give
the President authority to conclude additional agreements with
other countries to further the underlying treaties. Is it
unusual for the President to have preapproval to enter into
agreements? Is there precedent?
Mr. Countryman. My belief is that it is not, but if I could
get a more complete answer to that question from our legal
advisors, I will do that.
Mr. Wiegmann. I can help on that.
There is a precedent for that in the counternarcotics
context, and the provision that we have here is based on that
context, whereby we do have similar agreements that the
executive branch has with other countries to work on
counternarcotics interdiction and so forth. So this is modeled
on that provision.
We do already have in the executive branch agreements under
the Proliferation Security Initiative that we have been doing
under our own authority in the executive branch. But, again, we
think it is prudent for Congress to endorse and kind of codify
our authority to enter into those agreements.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
One particular provision, the bill would enhance the
application of the death penalty. Is that needed to ratify
these treaties?
Mr. Wiegmann. Again, it is not required, but we think that
the death penalty, for example, is already provided for in the
existing SUA protocol offenses. So in the amendments to those
offenses, where the conduct is similar and related, we think
would be anomalous not to have the death penalty for the new
offenses when we have it for the existing SUA offenses.
Mr. Scott. But you don't need it----
Mr. Wiegmann. It is not required by the treaty. That is
right.
Mr. Scott. I think your answers to questions for the record
will satisfy the other questions I have. Thank you.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs.
Adams.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Countryman, I was just looking at this. If I understand
it correctly, one requirement is to criminalize the possession
of radioactive material other than nuclear material. Could you
explain and give an example of radioactive material that would
fall under this category? Are you talking about a dirty bomb
scenario?
Mr. Countryman. Yes, that is correct. There are a variety
of uses for nuclear material in medicine, in industry. All of
those require effective handling and disposal after they are
done. These new requirements in the treaties impose additional
obligations upon countries to protect that material so that it
can't fall into the hands of a terrorist who could use it to
build a radiological dispersion device or dirty bomb.
Mrs. Adams. Could you elaborate on how the SUA protocols
would enhance overall the maritime security?
Mr. Countryman. I think, in brief, the amendments to the
SUA protocols are intended to expand the protection offered.
The first protocols essentially provided or created obligations
to prevent criminal attacks against ships and fixed platforms.
The recognition of what terrorists are capable of doing caused
the international community to say we also need measures to
prevent ships and fixed platforms from becoming the base or the
platform for terrorist attacks. The specific measures that are
included in the new protocols should enhance the security not
only of the ships and platforms themselves but of anybody going
near those ships and platforms.
Mrs. Adams. This is my first year in Congress, so how many
different attempts have been made by State and Justice to get
support in Congress for implementing legislation, not counting
this year, and what is the time span of these efforts?
Mr. Countryman. The implementing legislation was first
proposed in 2008 following the Senate's advice and consent on
the treaties. It was resubmitted last year, in 2010, by the
current Administration. And the most recent proposal you have
before you closely tracks those previous proposals submitted.
We look forward to working with Congress in these coming weeks
so that this can be the year that this legislation is passed
and we are able to complete ratification of the treaties.
Mrs. Adams. And if you would, I would like to ask you,
aside from treaty ratification, what gaps are there in the
current U.S. law that will be closed by implementing these
treaties?
Mr. Wiegmann. Yes, I talked about some of those in my
opening remarks. There are I would characterize it as modest
differences between what existing U.S. law covers and what the
treaties require us to cover. These can be jurisdictional in
nature.
For example, I mentioned the found-in jurisdiction. Again,
each of the treaties sets up essentially an extradite or
prosecute regime, wherein you either have to prosecute the
individual or extradite him to a foreign country. Sometimes
there will be an individual here who has violated maybe foreign
law but hasn't violated U.S. law, and his only connection to
the U.S. Law would be that he is present in the United States.
We are obliged to either extradite or prosecute under the
treaties an individual who is here so he doesn't have refuge in
the United States, And other counties would have the same
obligation to extradite or prosecute to us. The existing
jurisdictional provisions don't provide for found-in
jurisdictions.
That is an example. There are a bunch of different examples
I could raise for you today. I mentioned some of them in my
opening statement. But there are jurisdictional and substantive
gaps.
Mrs. Adams. Can you explain the significance of your
proposal for granting the Attorney General foreign ship
boarding authority under the SUA protocols? I mean, are these
for consensual boardings or----
Mr. Wiegmann. Not necessarily. This could include, again,
law enforcement boarding a ship to investigate criminal
activity with a search warrant, et cetera, to board a vessel in
U.S. waters to, let's say, search for a terrorist fugitive, or
where we have reason to believe there is contraband, prohibited
material on board. That is the type of thing we would be
talking about.
Mrs. Adams. And you would seek a warrant?
Mr. Wiegmann. That is right.
Mrs. Adams. I yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Under current law, the relevant statutes contain a bar to
prosecution which prevents Federal prosecutions where the
underlying conduct is related to a labor dispute and is a
felony under State law. Your proposals would exempt the new
criminal offenses from this bar to prosecution. Can both of you
explain why?
Mr. Wiegmann. Yes, I can take that one.
We could not envision any scenario under which one of these
very serious terrorism offenses would be involved as part of a
labor dispute. My understanding of the existing labor bar is
that in the event of a strike or other similar activity the
Federal Authorities would not prosecute the activity. It would
be left to the States where they could criminalize the activity
for violence or whatever occurred as part of a strike.
We think that these terrorism offenses involving vessels
and platforms and nuclear materials couldn't be really part of
a legitimate labor dispute; and, in any event, that there is a
strong Federal interest in having the Federal Government
prosecute serious offenses like nuclear terrorism and so forth
and not leave it to the States. So that is why we thought it
appropriate not to have that bar applicable in this context.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Countryman?
Mr. Countryman. Nothing further to add, sir.
Mr. Johnson. Why would we bar the bar for labor disputes or
anything that could--in other words, you are telling me that
you can foresee no dispute that would be a labor dispute, you
can see no labor dispute that would generate a prosecution
under the statute, and I am wondering what is the harm in
letting the bar to prosecution in labor disputes remain?
Mr. Wiegmann. Again, in our view, in the extraordinarily
unlikely event that one of these terrorism offenses would be
part of a labor dispute, we think there is a sound interest in
the Federal Government being able to investigate and prosecute
that activity and not leaving it to the States. Because it is a
Federal terrorism offense which is likely to be not something
we would want to leave to State authorities.
Mr. Johnson. All right, thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr.
Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for calling
this very important hearing.
I want to thank both of our witnesses for sharing their
insights and expertise. They have done a remarkable job of
answering the questions that I had, Mr. Chairman; and I would
yield back the balance of my time to the distinguished
gentleman from Wisconsin for him to use as he sees fit.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, the way the gentleman from
Wisconsin will use it as he sees fit is by saying, without
objection, the hearing is adjourned.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Oh, the gentlewoman--I didn't see or
hear you. The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
To the witnesses, we have several matters that we are
engaged in, so let me start out with a question.
Under the DOJ proposals, the Safety of Marine Navigation
Act would give the Attorney General the general authority to
board ships while investigating the violations of 18 U.S.C.
2280 and ultimately authorize the President to conclude
additional relevant agreements with other nations to further
the aims of the treaty. While this has precedence, it is
unusual to grant the President carte blanche authority to enter
into agreements without consulting the Senate. How would this
change preserve the constitutional role of the Senate in giving
its advice and consent?
If both of you would answer those questions, I would
appreciate it--answer that question. Thank you.
Mr. Countryman. Thank you very much, Congresswoman.
There is precedent for authorization for the President, as
we have just heard explained in counternarcotics legislation,
to enter into these agreements to further the purposes of the
treaty. We have a range of agreements with various countries
under the Proliferation Security Initiative in which the United
States and partners pledge to work together to interdict
weapons of mass destruction and their precursor materials that
are bound either for states or for non-state actors, that is,
terrorists. These agreements serve us well, and we consult and
inform the Congress regularly about these agreements.
I think I may want to ask my colleague from the Department
of Justice to talk about the larger issue that you have raised,
how it connects to the larger treaties and conventions that the
United States enters into.
Mr. Wiegmann. Yes. There is a complex body of law about
what things you have to do by treaty and what things you can do
by executive agreement. It was included in the nature of these
agreements, which are essentially law-enforcement-related
agreements about ship boarding and so forth. That is both based
on history and precedent and the relevant constitutional
analysis that these are things that could be done by executive
agreement.
They are provided to the Senate and I think the House after
they are entered into; and, as Assistant Secretary Countryman
said, I think we do have more than a dozen at least, maybe
several dozen of these agreements already. I am not aware of
any objection that the Senate has asserted to the executive
branch's authority to enter into these agreements as executive
agreements. Nonetheless, we think it is useful for Congress to
be on record to kind of codify the executive branch's authority
to enter into these agreements.
Again, it is not strictly necessary, but we think it is
useful to have this type of provision so that we kind of have a
clarity on the relevant authority there.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do any of these agreements or present
implementation reflect the different climate that we are now in
with respect to the, some would say, proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction of the different independent or smaller
countries that now pose, to some extent, international threat?
Does this have any impact on the wave of piracy, for example,
which one doesn't necessarily associate with weapons of mass
destruction but certainly has troubled the waters in places
beyond our immediate boundaries? To both of you.
Mr. Countryman. On the first point, it certainly is related
to the overall climate, the overall trends that we see in
attempts by both states and non-state actors to acquire weapons
of mass destruction. What the convention seeks to do and what
the implementing legislation seeks to do is to ensure that we
are closing every legal gap that we believe that terrorists
will exploit.
I expect as both technology and ingenuity advances there
will be further need in the future for additional changes in
these protocols. These are not intended to address the
phenomenon of piracy that is now a problem off the coast of
Somalia. There may be a marginal effect, but that is not the
intention of either the treaties or the legislation.
Ms. Jackson Lee. To the DOJ, does this help us move quickly
under this structure of treaty, that we can implement or move
more quickly than we might ordinarily need to do?
Mr. Wiegmann. I think it does. I think in cases where we
would be extraditing someone for one of these offenses, this
will make it easier. It will make it so we make sure that our
foreign partners have the same laws on the books that we have
on the books, eliminate disputes as to whether, again, as I
mentioned earlier, for dual criminality that that offense is
extraditable and will enhance and speed that procession.
There are also other provisions of the treaties that I
think require other sorts of law enforcement cooperation.
So, yes, we fully support the treaties for those reasons.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Now, without objection, the Subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 10:40 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


