- NEW JOBS IN RECESSION AND RECOVERY: WHO ARE GETTING THEM AND WHO ARE NOT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

NEW JOBS IN RECESSION AND RECOVERY:
WHO ARE GETTING THEM AND WHO ARE NOT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
IMMIGRATION POLICY AND ENFORCEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 10, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-11

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-077 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement

ELTON GALLEGLY, California, Chairman

STEVE KING, Iowa, Vice-Chairman

DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        ZOE LOFGREN, California
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TED POE, Texas                       MAXINE WATERS, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           PEDRO PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
DENNIS ROSS, Florida

George Fishman, Chief Counsel

David Shahoulian, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 10, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Elton Gallegly, a Representative in Congress from
the State of California, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Immigration Policy and Enforcement.............................     1
The Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Immigration Policy and Enforcement.............................     2
The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......    41
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................    41

WITNESSES

Steven A. Camarota, Ph.D., Director of Research, Center for
Immigration Studies
Oral Testimony.................................................    45
Prepared Statement.............................................    48
Rakesh Kochhar, Ph.D., Associate Director for Research, Pew
Hispanic Center
Oral Testimony.................................................    68
Prepared Statement.............................................    70
Greg Serbon, State Director, Indiana Federation for Immigration
Reform and Enforcement
Oral Testimony.................................................    87
Prepared Statement.............................................    89
Heidi Shierholz, Ph.D., Economist, Economic Policy Institute
Oral Testimony.................................................    93
Prepared Statement.............................................    95

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement.............     4
Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative
in Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Immigration Policy and Enforcement.............     7
Prepared Statement of Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................    43

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Press Release from the American Immigration Lawyers Association
(AILA).........................................................   112
Submission from the Center for the Study of Immigrant Integration
(CSII).........................................................   113
Letter from John L. Ghertner, MD.................................   122
Prepared Statement of the National Immigration Forum.............   123

NEW JOBS IN RECESSION AND RECOVERY: WHO ARE GETTING THEM AND WHO ARE
NOT

----------

THURSDAY, MARCH 10, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Immigration
Policy and Enforcement,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:13 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Elton
Gallegly (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gallegly, Smith, Gohmert, Poe,
Conyers, Lofgren, and Pierluisi.
Staff present: (Majority) George Fishman, Subcommittee
Chief Counsel; Marian White, Clerk; and Tom Jawetz, Minority
Counsel.
Mr. Gallegly. Six years ago, the Subcommittee held a
hearing entitled ``New Jobs in Recession and Recovery: Who Are
Getting Them and Who Are Not.'' At that time, Chairman
Hostettler, the former Chairman of the Subcommittee, stated
that, ``There is a sense among many Americans that the job
opportunities they and their parents once enjoyed are no longer
available to them and their children.''
We will hear from the authors of two studies that have both
concluded that all of the increase in employment in the United
States over the last few years has been attributed to large
increases in the number of employed immigrants, while the
number of employed natives have actually declined.
Six years later, we are again in a ``jobless'' recovery.
And we again hear about the studies finding that all the net
new jobs created are going to immigrant workers.
Anyone who knows me knows I am a strong proponent of legal
immigration. I am equally a strong opponent of illegal
immigration. We are a Nation of immigrants. We are also a
Nation of laws.
Many of the studies we are going to hear about today do not
make that distinction because the methodology and data to do so
does not exist. But I ask the panelists, whenever possible, to
make that distinction. It is really an important distinction
between illegal and legal immigration.
For instance, the Center for Immigration Studies has found
that in 2008 and 2009, over 2 million new immigrants settled in
the United States. At the same time, over 8 million jobs were
lost. What the study doesn't note is that of the 2 million new
immigrants, at least one-third illegally entered the country as
illegal immigrants.
The Center for Labor Market Studies at Northeastern
University has found that between 2008 and 2010, the average
number of employed persons in America decreased by over 6
million, while over a million immigrants who arrived between
2008 and 2010 were able to find jobs.
The center has also found that the percentage of teenagers
employed has plummeted so far so fast that last June less than
30 percent were employed for the first time in the post World
War II era. Many of those jobs that students used to work in--
in the fast food and landscaping industry, for example--are now
held by illegal immigrants.
We in Congress have an obligation to look after the well-
being of American workers. We have a special obligation to look
after the most vulnerable American workers, those with lower
levels of education who have borne the brunt of today's harsh
job market.
Therefore, we must ask what is the driving force here? Is
there a connection between the loss of jobs by natives and the
increasing number of employed immigrants, particularly illegal
immigrants?
At today's hearing, we will look at these issues. We will
evaluate the reasons why the employment of American workers
keeps decreasing in the midst of ever-increasing numbers of
immigrant workers. We will examine the roles of the American
immigration policy and immigration enforcement practices and
the way they play in this outcome.
We certainly don't want to be here 6 years from now and,
again, asking why there are fewer and fewer jobs for American
workers.
That is our focus on today's hearing. And now I would yield
to my good friend from California, the Ranking Member, Ms.
Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I make my opening statement, I wanted to make a
comment about the so-called Northeastern report that has been
discussed at several hearings and referenced again this
morning.
At the Subcommittee's first hearing, Mark Krikorian cited
to a ``report'' several times in support of his arguments. And
when I questioned him about it, he made clear that he had never
seen the report and had not analyzed it. He said he had tried
to get it, but he didn't think it was publicly available.
Then at our last hearing, last week, Frank Morris also
discussed this report. And I asked him if he had seen the
report and if he would share it with us, and he said he would.
And I am sure the Chairman recalls my dialogue with Mr. Morris,
where he promised to send it to us.
We have not received anything from Mr. Morris. But the
majority has provided us with a sheet of paper with three
tables that they received from a researcher at Northeastern. We
understand this is all that the majority has. And clearly, this
is not a report.
So I asked my staff to contact the center to see what they
would give us, and my staff spoke directly to Andrew Sum, the
director of the center. According to Mr. Sum, there is no
report at this time, and there never was a report.
A report of some kind may be issued one day in the future.
But until now, it has not been published, and it is not
available for peer review or critique. Once it is published, of
course, I expect many bright minds will review the data and the
conclusions.
Just to be sure, I had my staff send the page of tables we
got from the majority to several economists. Each of those
economists expressed serious concerns with the methodology
apparently used by the author. I say ``apparently'' because the
tables did not provide enough information for accurate
analysis.
In any event, the economists believe that Mr. Sum may have
juxtaposed two different methodologies, leading to a distorted
view of reality. Now, again, they can't say that this is what
actually happened because neither the data, nor the analysis of
the data, is being made publicly available. And without that, I
can't see how we can justifiably rely on this.
I raise this because I certainly do not accuse the
witnesses or the majority with deception, but I think there was
testimony provided to the Committee that was false. And I don't
think it was knowingly false. I don't mean to say that. But I
think it is important that we correct the record that there is
no report that has been cited to us in two hearings and ask
that this ``nonreport'' not be cited again in the future.
And I would ask unanimous consent to add this statement,
along with the analysis, to the record.
Mr. Gallegly. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Immigration Policy and Enforcement

__________

Ms. Lofgren. Thank you.
Now, rather than actually attempting to fix our broken
immigration system, we are now holding the fourth hearing in a
row on the exact same topic. Each of these hearings seems to
have the same goal--to convince us that immigrants, both legal
and illegal, are bad for our economy.
I say ``convince'' because the actual research in this area
clearly shows that immigration is a net boon to our economy and
to American workers. Let me say that again. Whatever you may
hear from the other side of the aisle, independent economists
agree that immigration has generally improved the wages and job
opportunities of U.S. workers.
There is some disagreement on the effect on a small segment
of the lowest-skilled workers. But there is no disagreement on
immigration's positive effect on the vast majority of U.S.
workers. We can't just ignore that.
Nor can we ignore what we have known for years, that
immigrants can help our economy create huge numbers of jobs. It
is widely known that they create jobs in the technology sector.
I come from Silicon Valley, where more than half of the
startups have at least one immigrant as a key founder.
But this sort of entrepreneurship is not limited to high-
skilled immigrants. On Monday, the Wall Street Journal reported
on a new report by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, which
found that immigrants are creating new business ventures at
unprecedented rates.
Critical for today's hearing is the report's conclusion
that `immigrants were more than twice as likely to start
businesses each month in 2010 than were the native-born.''
I would ask unanimous consent to enter the article and the
report into the record, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gallegly. Without objection.
[The information referred to follows:]
Material submitted by the Honorable Zoe Lofgren, a Representative in
Congress from the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Immigration Policy and Enforcement

__________

Ms. Lofgren. Completely ignoring these facts, some have
tried to paint a very different picture of immigrants in
America. The last hearing was particularly contentious because
it pitted immigrants, both lawful and unlawful, against
American minorities. Rather than focusing on the real issues
that are weighing down those communities, the hearing sought to
simply blame immigrants.
This week, we again seem to be pitting one group against
another, placing the foreign-born against the native-born. By
focusing on the foreign born writ large, my colleagues on the
other side of the aisle are no longer confining their argument
to the undocumented.
When we discuss the foreign born in today's hearing, we
must keep in mind that 44 percent of them are U.S. citizens. An
additional third are lawful permanent residents and other legal
immigrants, most of whom are on track to become U.S. citizens
in the near future.
By pitting the foreign born against the native born, we are
largely pitting one group of citizens against another. That is
a dangerous place to go.
Today's hearing comes as our country is facing its greatest
economic challenge since the Great Depression. People are right
to be concerned about the pace of economic recovery and high
unemployment rates, but we need to focus on facts and actual
solutions, not sound bites.
It is obvious to everyone that our immigration system is
broken. And because the laws don't work, we are left with two
entirely unsatisfactory immigration systems--the laws on the
books and the reality on the ground.
We can keeping ignoring that duality. My colleagues
continue to argue that if we simply step up enforcement by
stepping harder on the gas, we will somehow fix our broken
system and cure the rest of society's problems. But let us be
honest. You can't keep enforcing a broken system without doing
real and lasting damage.
This Subcommittee has already covered in great detail the
incredible damage that we would inflict on the American economy
if we simply removed 11 million consumers, homeowners, renters,
employers, and entrepreneurs from this country. We agree that
we need to end illegal immigration, but we disagree on how to
accomplish that.
My colleagues on the other side of the aisle think we can
do that with increased enforcement and without otherwise
reforming our immigration laws. I fundamentally disagree. I
think the American people disagree. Enforcement without reform
won't work, but it will do lasting damage to our economy.
But let us put that aside for the moment. Illegal
immigration is not the only problem in our current immigration
system. Our current legal immigration system should be designed
to respond to the needs of our economy and American workers,
but that isn't the case. And enforcement alone will not fix
that.
Economic experts agree that immigration is a net positive
for our country, but they also agree that it would be a much
greater asset if it were designed to actually adjust to our
economic needs. Right now, in spite of a massive 20 percent
unemployment in construction, our legal system permits
employers to bring in foreign construction workers on H-2B
visas. That doesn't make any sense at all. And no amount of
enforcement will fix this.
Even if we can't agree on what to do with the undocumented,
we should be able to agree that H-2B visas in the construction
industry should not be available when we have 20 percent
unemployment in that very industry.
My colleagues have also pointed out in the last few
hearings that if we simply reduce immigration, both legal and
illegal, employers would be forced to pay higher wages to
attract U.S. workers. But I am not sure how to reconcile that
with repeated efforts on the other side of the aisle to lower
wages for legal foreign workers, which makes it easier to
undercut American workers.
I must point out that it was the Bush administration that
dramatically lowered wages and protections in the H-2A and H-2B
programs, and it was the Obama administration that has been
reversing those changes since taking office.
In any event, everyone seems to agree that we need to
protect American workers. So let us focus on changes that we
should all be able to agree on.
I introduced a bill in the last Congress that would have
reformed the H-2B program to prevent employers from
undercutting U.S. workers with H-2B workers. No one on the
other side of the aisle joined me then, but perhaps we can
agree to work on this bill again. I will be introducing a
similar bill in this Congress.
I look forward to hearing from the witnesses today, and I
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gallegly. I thank the gentlelady.
At this time, I would yield to the Chairman of the full
Committee, my friend from Texas, Mr. Smith?
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There is no more important issue this Subcommittee can
address than that of preserving jobs for American workers.
The threshold question is how can we best align our
immigration policy with the needs of American workers? How can
we best meet the needs of those workers who are unemployed or
underemployed? The answer is not to keep adding to the supply
of low-skilled workers during a severe recession and its
aftermath.
The combined rate of joblessness and underemployment for
native-born teens is over 40 percent. The rate for native
workers without a high school degree over 32 percent. For
native-born workers with no more than a high school degree over
20 percent.
How often do we read about the long-term unemployed or the
working poor or single mothers with no mention of the serious
impact of immigration on their employment, wages, and working
conditions? We cannot ignore the adverse impact of mass low-
skilled immigration and the lack of enforcement of our
immigration laws.
At the Subcommittee's last hearing, we focused on the
negative effects of cheap foreign labor on American minorities.
Let me mention another group of Americans who are especially
hard hit--teenagers. In June of 2000, a majority of the
Nation's teens were employed. Ten years later, in June of 2010,
less than 29 percent of the Nation's teens were employed.
Mr. Chairman, we need to protect the jobs and wages of
struggling Americans and legal immigrants. This includes
teenagers new to the workforce and seasoned workers with years
of valuable experience. We should design our immigration policy
so that it enhances, rather than diminishes, opportunities for
American workers.
Mr. Chairman, I look forward to today's hearing and yield
back.
Mr. Gallegly. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from Michigan, the Ranking Member, my good
friend, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Gallegly.
I have a statement I will put in the record. But Chairman
Smith raised to me the most significant question that has to
guide all of us in all the Committees. What can we do to create
jobs and keep wages up for all citizens in the country? And on
that, Lamar, I couldn't agree with you more.
The one thing we could do here is to get the Patent and
Trademark Office rolling, where the innovation that is so
remarkable in the American system, functioning so that it
doesn't take years to get a patent. Because many of the smaller
inventors end up going out of business while waiting to get the
protection that they need.
And so, the other body, I am told, has done that for the
PTO, and I think we will be looking at it carefully since our
Committee on Judiciary has worked together throughout the last
three Congresses on putting out a bipartisan bill in that
regard. So I join you with this.
But as we have had three hearings on essentially the
immigrant issue, and there is a certain nagging feeling that we
are, either by implication or inadvertently, pitting immigrants
against American workers, non-immigrants in this examination of
how we fight joblessness. And what gets mixed up in it is the
fact that we further subdivide the legal immigrants from those
who are foreign born and are not legal.
But the whole thing comes down as somehow the immigrants
are responsible in some part for the high unemployment rate.
And I hope we examine that as carefully and fairly as we can.
Because even this morning, in another Committee, there is a
hearing that is quite undisguised in its objective, going right
on at the same time as this one, which claims to examine the
radicalization of American Muslims, and that has created quite
a ruckus. And it ends up with the worst of the things that I
fear may be inadvertently going on with this fourth
Subcommittee hearing on immigration and unemployment.
Now we don't have direct jurisdiction over unemployment.
And so, that is why all the Members will get shortly the bill
that goes to the Education and Labor Committee as an answer to
this problem more directly, and that is the revised Humphrey-
Hawkins Act that has been introduced that creates a way of
triggering Government hiring when the unemployment hits roughly
over 10 percent, training and hiring for direct employment. And
I would bring that to the attention of my colleagues.
With that, I will introduce the rest of my statement, and
thank you, Chairman Gallegly.
[The information referred to follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative
in Congress from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee
on the Judiciary

__________

Mr. Gallegly. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
This morning, we are fortunate to have four very
distinguished members of the panel as our witnesses. And for
the record, each of the witnesses' written statement will be
entered into the record in its entirety.
The four witnesses come from different parts of our
society, and I am anxious to hear their testimony. The first is
Dr. Steven Camarota. Dr. Camarota is director of research at
the Center for Immigration Studies. He has been with the center
since 1996, and his area of expertise is economics and
demographics.
Mr. Camarota has often testified before Congress and has
written numerous published articles on the impact of
immigration. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Virginia
in public policy analysis and a master's degree in political
science from the University of Pennsylvania.
Our second witness is Dr. Rakesh Kochhar. He is an
associate director of research at the Pew Hispanic Center. Dr.
Kochhar's work at the center focuses on the labor market
outcomes of Hispanic workers. His study on the wealth of
Hispanic households, ownership among minorities and immigrants,
and the trends in the income and employment of Latino workers
have received widespread coverage in the media.
He received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the
University of Delhi, India, and completed his doctoral studies
in economics at Brown University.
Our third witness is Greg Serbon. He is State director of
the Indiana Federation of Immigration Reform and Enforcement.
He has served as a union pipefitter since 1988. Prior, he was a
Teamster. He was elected as an Indiana Democratic State
delegate in 2010.
And our fourth witness this morning is Dr. Heidi Shierholz.
She is an economist at the Economic Policy Institute. In 2007,
she previously worked as assistant professor of economics at
the University of Toronto. Her areas of expertise include labor
markets, economic inequality, and minimum wage. She earned her
Ph.D. in economics and master's in economics from the
University of Michigan.
I think we have a very distinguished panel. I look forward
to your testimony. We will start with you, Dr. Camarota.

TESTIMONY OF STEVEN CAMAROTA, Ph.D., DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH,
CENTER FOR IMMIGRATION STUDIES

Mr. Camarota. I would like to thank the Committee for
inviting me to talk about this extremely important topic.
Obviously, we talk about this topic not to pit immigrants
and natives against each other but to figure out what has been
the impact of past immigration so that then we can see what we
might want to do in the future. That is the only really tool we
have.
So when we try to think about who to allow in, what
numbers, we have to look at what has been happening in the
past. And then we also have to think about what has been
happening if we want to decide what to do about the illegal
immigrants here.
Now I would like to start my comments by pointing out
something everybody knows. Everyone agrees the last recession
was extremely hard on American workers. The dearth of jobs has
been enormous. Unemployment, nonwork have become extremely
common in a way that they haven't for basically any other
period in the post war era.
But something was happening even before the current
recession in the U.S. labor market that is very troubling. And
my testimony will focus on what can only be described as an
astonishing decline in work among native-born Americans over
the last decade, not just the last few years.
The bar chart to my right here shows this extraordinary
development. The green bars in the figure show the native and
the immigrant share of population growth among potential
workers. That is the 18- to 65-year-old population. The figures
show that about a third, or 34 percent, of the increase in the
number of 18- to 65-year-olds in the United States was among
immigrants.
But what the bar chart on the right shows--or the figure,
the bar on the right shows, the black bar, is that all of the
growth in employment between 2000 and 2005 went to immigrants,
even though they were only one-third of the increase in the
number of potential workers. This is extraordinary.
Looking at the numbers between 2000 and 2010, the number of
immigrants holding a job increased by 4.5 million, while the
number of natives holding a job actually declined by 1.1
million. Even though the native-born population grew
dramatically by nearly 14 million people, there were actually
fewer of them working by the end of the decade.
Now all of this means that the share of native-born people
holding a job has declined significantly. Again, focusing on
the working-age population, 18 to 65, or we could say the adult
working-age population.
What we see in the line charts here, and it is also Figure
4 in my testimony, is that the share of native-born Americans
18 to 65 holding a job declined dramatically throughout the
decade. But it didn't happen for the immigrants in the same
way. Their rate held roughly constant at around 70 percent, but
the share of natives holding a job went from 76 percent to 69
percent, really a dramatic change.
Now the question is, is this just the recession? Is this
just a statistical artifact of what has happened, say, since
2007 when the economy went into recession? But we find that,
no, that is not the case.
When we look at the period between 2000 and 2007, the share
of native-born Americans holding a job actually declined as
well. Now that, since 2007 is a peak year, that shouldn't have
happened if we compare it to a peak year of 2000. Now, among
immigrants, the share holding a job actually went up, and I
have the figures in my report.
So, basically, we are at a situation where the share of
working-age Americans who hold a job is now at historic lows,
and the number not working is at historic highs.
If we wish for the share of native-born Americans to get
back to where it was in, say, 2000, we would need to add 12
million new jobs for the native born. And the situation is
actually much worse for those with relatively little education.
And again, starkly, their labor force participation was
actually lower in 2007 than it was in 2000, quite a bit lower,
and it is in Figure 7 of my report.
And we see that for Americans without a high school
education. We see that for Americans who have only a high
school education, and we see it for American-born teenagers.
Now let me add something about the decline in teenagers'
work. It is very troubling, and it is long term. And it is
troubling because there is a lot of research showing you need
to work as a teen often to develop the skills necessary to hold
a job gainfully later in life.
Now there are a number of studies that have found that
immigration has reduced labor market opportunities for the
native born. A 2006 study published by the National of Bureau
of Economic Research by Borjas, Grogger, and Hagan, showed
that--I should say Hanson--showed that immigration declined for
about 20 to 60 percent--I am sorry, 25 percent of the work
among less-educated Black men.
A 2010 paper by Federal economist Christopher Smith
suggested a third or half of the decline in teenage work is due
to immigration. And another study by Andrew Sum, not the one
that you were talking about before--this is a 2006 study, it is
available at our Web site--also found, using multivariate
analysis, immigration has a very significant negative impact on
workers under the age particularly of 25 who don't have a lot
of education.
Now, given the abysmal labor market situation for American
workers, it is very difficult to justify the continued high
level of legal unskilled immigration and allowing all the
illegal immigrants to stay in the country. Now, obviously,
there are many things to consider. But given this situation and
given a reasonable amount of evidence that immigration is
hurting the least educated in particular, we might want to
consider our current course of action.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Camarota follows:]

__________

Mr. Gallegly. Thank you, Mr. Camarota.
And I appreciate you recognizing the light. We really have
a lot of folks who want to ask questions and a limited amount
of time. And any additional statement you have will be made
part of the record of the hearing. Dr. Kochhar?
And please pronounce your name for me. I know I am not
doing it right.

TESTIMONY OF RAKESH KOCHHAR, Ph.D., ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR FOR
RESEARCH, PEW HISPANIC CENTER

Mr. Kochhar. No, you are doing great. The trouble is my
name has two sounds that don't exist in English. So you are
doing great.
So, Chairman Gallegly, Ranking Member Lofgren, and Members
of the Committee, thank you for the invitation to testify at
this hearing.
I am here today as the principal author of a report the Pew
Hispanic Center released in October 2010, entitled ``After the
Great Recession: Foreign Born Gain Jobs; Native Born Lose
Jobs.'' My testimony summarizes and updates some of the key
findings of our report. The Pew Hispanic Center, a project of
the Pew Research Center, does not take positions on policy
issues.
The 2010 report focused on the period from the second
quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2009, when most of the
job losses during the great recession occurred, and the period
from the second quarter of 2009 to the second quarter of 2010,
the first year of recovery from the recession.
We found that in the year following the official end of the
recession, in June 2009, immigrant workers, who make up about
16 percent of the labor force, gained 656,000 jobs while
native-born workers lost 1.2 million. As a result, the
unemployment rate for immigrant workers fell from 9.3 to 8.7
percent, while for native-born workers, it rose from 9.2 to 9.7
percent.
Now, because 5 months have passed since the release of our
report, I have taken this opportunity to update the results
through the fourth quarter of 2010. The updated results show
that the economic recovery is now offering more widespread job
opportunities for both native-born and foreign-born workers.
More specifically, in the 1-year period from the fourth
quarter of 2009 to the fourth quarter of 2010, immigrants
gained 657,000 jobs and native-born workers gained 685,000
jobs. The unemployment rate dropped for both groups during this
period. For immigrants, it fell from 10.1 to 9.9 percent, and
for the native born, it decreased from 9.5 to 9.0 percent.
The fourth quarter of 2010 is the first period since the
middle of 2008 that native-born workers have experienced
positive jobs growth. For immigrants, the fourth quarter of
2010 marks the third successive period of jobs growth. Thus,
the economic recovery now appears to be benefiting all workers,
although the gains to native born have been a bit later in
coming.
But the jobs recovery has been far from complete for either
group of workers. From the beginning of the recession in the
fourth quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2010, native-
born workers have lost 6.1 million jobs, and foreign-born
workers lost 262,000 jobs. The unemployment rate for the native
born is up from 4.6 to 9 percent, and for immigrants, it is up
from 4.5 to 9.9 percent.
The reasons that the initial stage of the recovery has
proceeded differently for native-born and foreign-born workers
are not entirely clear. I will summarize some possible reasons
and expand on each later in response to questions that you may
have.
One factor might be greater flexibility on the part of
immigrants. Research by others suggests that immigrants are
more mobile than native-born workers, moving more fluidly
across regions, industries, and occupations.
But the flip side of flexibility can be jobs instability
and a loss in earnings. And we have observed some of that
happening.
Another reason might be that we are simply observing the
greater volatility that typifies the employment patterns of
immigrants. That means they are subject to greater extremes,
both good and bad, registering sharper losses in the early
stages of recessions but rebounding quicker in the recovery.
The downward trajectory of job losses during this recession
was steeper for immigrants, and now they are seemingly on a
steeper climb out of the recession.
Demographic changes, both short term and long term, might
also be a factor. The ebb and flow of immigration is sensitive
to the business cycle, with economic expansions tending to
boost inflows. A recent report from the Pew Hispanic Center
found that the number of unauthorized immigrants in the United
States fell during the recession, but that the decline seems to
have stopped during the economic recovery.
As economic volatility diminishes, longer-term demographic
trends are more likely to reassert themselves in the jobs
market. The immigrant share of the U.S. working-age population
has been on the rise for several decades.
Because the immigrant population has been growing faster
than the native-born population, the number of immigrants in
the labor force and the number employed have tended to rise
faster than for the native born. The observed pattern during
the current recovery is consistent with the long-run
demographic trend.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kochhar follows:]

__________

Mr. Gallegly. Thank you very much, Dr. Kochhar.
Mr. Serbon, or it ``Ser-bone''?
Mr. Serbon. Serbon.
Mr. Gallegly. Serbon. Thank you.
Hit your button there. No, on the microphone, please. There
we go.

TESTIMONY OF GREG SERBON, STATE DIRECTOR, INDIANA FEDERATION
FOR IMMIGRATION REFORM AND ENFORCEMENT

Mr. Serbon. There we go.
Thank you, Congressman, for giving me the chance to speak
on behalf of the working-class Americans.
A lot has changed since the last time I spoke before some
of you in 2007. In 2007, we had plenty of jobs, the housing
market was booming, and it seemed Americans were happy and
working for the most part. Fast forward to today with
unemployment or underemployment numbering as high as 20 million
Americans, and the immigration floodgates are still wide open.
Being a union member and an immigration activist, I am in a
unique position because I travel to many different job sites
and have the opportunity to speak with coworkers about
immigration, legal and illegal.
We are creating a permanent underclass in our country
driven by immigration and the people who are supposed to
represent the American citizens first, in my opinion. How many
poorly educated, or even highly educated, do we allow into our
country while millions of our citizens languish on
unemployment? I think it is 99 weeks at the present time. It
could be more.
While I was doing some research for this hearing, I
discovered we have at least 29 visa programs we give non-
immigrants to come and work in America. At this point in time,
40 percent of illegal immigration in our country occurs when
these non-immigrant visa holders overstay their visas.
The visa programs you created are too numerous and too
fraud laden, yet this issue is not being addressed properly, in
my opinion. We have IT workers out of work, yet we issue around
85,000 I believe they are H-1B visas to these high-tech
workers.
The son of one of our members is an IT worker and couldn't
find a job for a year. This person possesses an MBA and had
plenty of experience. Nobody wanted to pay him what he was
worth because they know that cheaper labor is a visa away.
I have personally witnessed immigrants being put in
dangerous situations at the work sites I have been on. I have
watched as employers had immigrants use power tools--such as
saws, chipping hammers--without any eye or face protection. One
occasion, take notes, OSHA came out to the job site for an
inspection, and most of the immigrants left until the
inspection was completed.
Now I had to stop and think. Why would they leave a job
site when only a safety inspector was present? Was it because
the employer didn't want to take a chance that they might
perform a task unsafely or maybe without their required safety
equipment, thereby causing a fine for the employer?
On construction sites, where communication is critical and
a safety issue, I have run into people on the job who couldn't
speak a word of English. I worked at a factory in late fall of
'99. The building had no heat, and the women that I saw working
there were dressed in winter clothing.
The only people in the factory that spoke English were the
supervisors, and of the 30 or so workers, maybe one or two
spoke some broken English. I had to find an interpreter while I
am at work from time to time just to keep the workplace safe,
and this is not the way it should be.
It has become increasingly difficult to find a job, and
there are many good people I have worked with over the years
who have not worked for months. We need an immigration time-
out. The people calling for more immigration do not care one
iota about the working person in this country.
The founder of the AFL, Samuel Gompers, wrote a letter to
Congress in 1924 concerning immigration. In that letter, Mr.
Gompers stated, ``America must not be overwhelmed.'' As far as
I can see, the employers want cheap and subservient labor, and
it would be fair to say we are giving it to them.
Now some of the job sites that I am on. They use the I-9 or
the E-Verify programs to make sure their workers are legal
citizens or are able to work in the country legally. And you
will find that the amount of immigrants drops significantly on
these job sites that use these two programs. So I am saying we
need to make E-Verify mandatory for everybody.
And also, I see a lot of numbers thrown out around here by
economists, but they are all working. So it is hard to say when
you are on the other end of the deal, ``Look at this number,''
while you have got someone that is maybe in their 98th week of
unemployment? I mean, something is not jiving here, you know?
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Serbon follows:]

__________
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you, Mr. Serbon.
Dr. Shierholz?

TESTIMONY OF HEIDI SHIERHOLZ, Ph.D., ECONOMIST, ECONOMIC POLICY
INSTITUTE

Ms. Shierholz. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Lofgren, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee.
I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to
share my views.
As we all know, over the last 4 years, this country has
faced and continues to face a labor market crisis like nothing
we have seen since the Great Depression. In this environment,
all demographic groups have seen substantial increases in their
unemployment rate.
The latest aggregated labor market data available from BLS
came out last Friday. So we now have employment and
unemployment numbers by nativity for last month. What the data
show is that both immigrants and native-born workers saw their
unemployment rates more than double since the start of 2007--or
more than double, excuse me, between the start of 2007 and the
end of 2009. And both have seen only modest improvement since
then.
Last month, the unemployment rate of immigrant workers was
9.8 percent, up 5 percentage points from where it was 4 years
ago. Native-born workers have fared just slightly better, with
an unemployment rate of 9.5 percent, up 4.6 percentage points
over the last 4 years.
Okay. That is unemployment. But what about jobs? Using the
same BLS data, we find, like Dr. Kochhar, that while immigrants
and native-born workers have experienced somewhat different
timing of employment changes brought on by the great recession,
their broad experience of breath-taking job deficits has been
remarkably similar.
Last month, immigrants and natives earned roughly the same
place, with immigrant employment 4.3 percent below where it was
4 years ago, and native-born employment 4.4 percent below where
it was 4 years ago. So that answers the larger question of how
native-born and immigrant workers are doing relative to each
other in this national calamity of the great recession and its
aftermath.
But I would also like to step back and answer the broader
question of what is known in general about the effect of
immigration on the labor market outcomes of native workers.
While Mr. Camarota clearly documented the decline in native
employment over the last 10 years and the increase in immigrant
employment over the last 10 years, we, of course, know that two
trends happening at the same time does not mean that one caused
the other.
So, first and foremost, I think it is important to point
out that in the ongoing debate on immigration, there is broad
agreement among academic economists who research this that in
the long run, immigration has a small, but positive impact on
the labor market outcomes of native workers.
Let me say that again. There is broad agreement among
researchers who study this that in the long run, immigration
has a small positive effect on the labor market outcomes of
native workers.
The real debate is around whether, within that overall
positive effect, certain groups are harmed, in particular
native-born workers with low levels of education. Importantly,
the most recent work on the effect of immigration on wages,
which updates and refines some of the methodology that had
found sizable negative effects of immigration on native workers
with low levels of education, now finds extremely modest
effects.
One report I would like to highlight is a 2010 paper by
Giovanni Peri that addresses an issue that is particularly
important to keep in mind today. Peri finds, consistent with
the literature, that in the long run, immigrants do not reduce
native employment rates. But he finds that in the short run,
immigration may slightly reduce native employment rates because
the economy takes time to adjust.
Importantly, this effect varies according to the broader
economic environment. When the economy is strong and the labor
market is adding jobs, new immigration creates enough jobs,
even in the short run and even for less-educated workers, to
cause no harm to the employment of native-born workers.
But during downturns, things don't adjust as quickly. When
the economy is weak, new immigration has small negative impacts
on the employment of native-born workers in the short run.
This finding underscores the fact that the U.S. could
benefit enormously from an immigration system that is more
responsive to economic conditions. In our current immigration
system, legal immigrant flows are essentially unresponsive to
the business cycle. In particular, Congress has set a yearly
limit on the number of new immigrants who may enter the country
legally in order to work.
These limits don't fluctuate based on the state of the
labor market. As Ms. Lofgren pointed out, in 2010, the
unemployment rate in construction was 20 percent. But the
Department of Labor, nevertheless, certified thousands of H-2B
visas for construction workers.
To remedy this logic-defying situation, an independent
Federal agency could be established to evaluate U.S. labor
markets and annually make recommendations to Congress on the
levels of permanent and temporary immigrant labor. This would
better allow the U.S. economy to respond to the needs of
employers during expansions while avoiding the potential
crowding out of native-born workers in the short run when the
unemployment rate is high.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Shierholz follows:]

__________

Mr. Gallegly. Thank you. Thank you very much Dr. Shierholz.
Before I ask a couple of questions of the witnesses, I
would just like to respond to a comment that my good friend Mr.
Conyers, the Ranking Member and former Chairman of the full
Committee, who has been my neighbor and a man, as I have said,
I have great respect for. And that will not change.
But one of the things that goes on around here is we do
have differences of opinions from time to time, and I think
that is healthy. I would just like to remind the Ranking Member
that for the past 4 years when the minority was in the
majority, you had a different approach to dealing with
immigration. And while I disagree with it, I respected that
right to disagree.
And in 4 years, the issue of illegal immigration and
immigration in general did not change any for the better. We
have been here for 2 months, and we have taken a little
different approach. I happen to believe that our approach will
be more effective. Only time will tell.
But give us a chance. We have only had 2 months, and I
would really like to work with you.
Having said that, now I would like to ask Mr. Serbon a
question. You obviously have a different background, and you
have been in the trenches. You work shoulder-to-shoulder with
the people that have been dramatically affected with the
unemployment across this country probably most of your life.
And as a union worker, I don't know whether this is a fair
question to ask you, but I am going to ask it anyway. Do you
believe that the American unions, labor unions, have abandoned
what I have always thought was their longstanding policy to
oppose illegal immigration?
Mr. Serbon. Well, they take a different view on certain
issues about the immigration debate. I know that they are
totally against the guest worker program, at least the
construction workers are.
You know, like I said, any company that uses the I-9 or E-
Verify, there is very few immigrants working in that field. And
I don't know why. Maybe there is a lot of illegals in the
construction, I am sure.
But I have had a couple of unions reach out, and they said
that they do support the--we got a bill, Senate bill 590 in
Indiana, dealing with illegal immigration. And they do support
it.
They just don't, some of them don't come out and job on the
bandwagon with me and get out there in the trenches and push
the issue. So as far as the hierarchy, I don't know what they
are thinking.
Mr. Gallegly. Do you think the motivation could possibly be
an increase in the brotherhood?
Mr. Serbon. Somewhat, yes.
Mr. Gallegly. Probably on a more important issue, there has
been a lot of discussion, and during the debate, we continue to
hear that illegals only take the jobs that American workers
will not take. Do you believe that there are jobs out there
that American workers have and would like to have today that
are and have been taken by people that have no legal right to
be in the United States?
Mr. Serbon. Well, they have had numerous raids a few years
back in food processing plants, like chicken and beef
processing plants. And every time they did a raid and actually
arrested the illegals that were working there, Americans filled
the gap.
And even there was an automotive plant that did I think it
was either axles or transmissions in southern Indiana. And just
the rumor that ICE was going to raid the plant sent hundreds of
their workers scurrying from the shift they were working on,
and the plant ended up hiring some American citizens.
And they actually quoted in the newspaper that--they
actually interviewed the citizens, and they said we have been
trying to get into this plant for a couple of months now, and
it was just full. And then after just the threat of ICE coming,
they had positions opened up.
So Americans will take these jobs. You may have a different
outlook as far as picking crops, but we do have visa programs
to address that issue.
Mr. Gallegly. Dr. Camarota, could you take a shot at that
same question?
Mr. Camarota. It sort of builds on something Dr. Shierholz
said. The idea that she advocated is that, look, even the
unskilled immigrants and the unskilled natives do very
different things.
But as my other panelist pointed out, when we have had
raids and the illegal immigrants were removed from the labor
market, what do you know? Natives got a large fraction of the
new jobs. Sometimes they had to pay more and treat workers
better. This happened at plants for Swift and at another plant
in Tar Heel, North Carolina. We have done some work on that.
What seems to have happened or the argument goes like this.
Well, there are fewer natives, say, in construction as a share
of unskilled natives in construction and more and more
immigrants. And this suggests to some people that, well, the
natives move out of construction and do something that requires
more skill.
The argument would be more persuasive is at the same time,
we haven't seen this dramatic decline in work. In other words,
lots of natives used to work in construction. They may work
less there. But they haven't gone over to other occupations.
They just work a whole lot less.
And this is a very long-term trend. As immigration has
increased over the last three decades, the share of less-
educated teenagers--the share of teenagers, I should say, and
less-educated adults working has just continually declined.
So what may seem to be happening is it is not so much that
they are moving and sort of just not competing with immigrants,
those that are, are just dropping out of the labor market.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you very much.
I would just like to express an observation I have made
over the last few years. As a parent of four grown young adults
and a grandparent, when my children were in high school and
college they worked in the fast food business. They all worked
in high school and college, flipping burgers. I know that many
young people today are trying to get these jobs and are having
a tough time.
I have made a personal observation of several food chains
in my area or fast food chains in my area, where I happen to
know a large percentage of the workers are undocumented. I
happen to know of at least one food chain where there is almost
no undocumenteds and doing exactly the same work, flipping the
same hamburgers and principally the same product. But the only
difference is about $2 an hour in the beginning wage.
At this time, I would yield to the Ranking Member, Ms.
Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I listened to everyone, I was reminded of the phrase,
``There is lies, darned lies, and statistics.'' And here we are
with a variety of statistics being cited to reach dramatically
different conclusions.
I am wondering, Dr. Shierholz, I mean, we have got whenever
there is a chart, you know, must be true. But your testimony
really somewhat puts a different analysis on this. Really, the
assumption that is being made here is that it is sort of a one-
for-one simple math issue in terms of immigrants coming in.
And I am wondering if you could explain why that simple
math is not the case. I am thinking about, for example, migrant
farm workers. I mean, we have done some analysis on that. We
have not seen Americans willing to go out and become a migrant
farm worker. I mean, very few.
I think some of it is the conditions of the work. Some of
it is the pay. But also it is being a migrant worker and having
to live in dormitories away from your family, and we just
haven't seen Americans sign up for that. And yet we know that
for every field job, there is three upstream and downstream
jobs in terms of marketing and the like that Americans are
holding.
And if you were to do the wages high enough to lure
Americans into a barracks, you probably wouldn't be able to
compete with farms across our border, in New Zealand or
Australia or Mexico or the like.
Can you explain why this one-for-one doesn't work?
Ms. Shierholz. Yes. You know, as a labor market economist,
I like this question because it lets me talk about something
that I think is a big misperception when thinking about labor
markets and immigration. I think there is this idea out there
that immigrants are just working machines that are doing work
that could have been done by someone else, period.
And what that does is it misses this whole other side of
the equation that workers, immigrant workers are also people.
They spend their wages on goods and services. They are buying
cars and groceries and paying rent. So that is paying the wages
of other people and generating jobs.
So, in an economy that has more people, be it immigrants or
native-born workers, in an economy that has more people, we
intuitively understand that that doesn't necessarily mean
higher unemployment rates. It is just a bigger economy. We do
not think that because New York has a bigger population than
Denver that New York is going to have a higher unemployment
rate than Denver. It is just a bigger economy.
So immigrants--there are both sides of the equation. They
just make the situation bigger.
Ms. Lofgren. Let me ask you this. I think we don't really
know, but there are people have estimated that there are 11
million, in the neighborhood of 11 million individuals who are
in the United States without the proper documentation. Some of
them have been here for 20 years. Some of them came last year.
I think some of my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle have indicated that it would probably be impossible to
round up 11 million people and deport them. But that by
hammering down on enforcement that there would be sort of an
attrition, that people would leave. Although there is no
evidence that that is, in fact, happening.
Can you describe, in your judgment as an academician and
someone who studies this, what would happen if we actually did
pull 11 million people out of the economy? If we pulled them
out next month, go to wherever you were born, what would happen
to the American economy?
Ms. Shierholz. So, okay, I have to think about this.
Obviously, if we all of a sudden rounded up 11 million people,
there would be a national disaster that would cause--you know,
that would cause a huge economic shock that would ripple around
and cause dramatic job loss.
So the transition would be very difficult, but let us
ignore the transition and just say, all right, magically, we
have 11 million fewer workers in this country. That would just
reduce the labor market by 11 million workers. It wouldn't mean
there would be 11 million job openings.
You have just shrunk the whole pie. So you have lost
workers, but you have also lost consumers. So in the same way
adding immigrants just sort of absorbs new people and makes the
economy bigger, subtracting them does the same thing.
So you had a bigger place, and now it is 11 million
smaller. But you didn't necessarily--you are not going to have
a whole bunch more job openings. You are not going to
necessarily reduce the unemployment rate by doing that.
Ms. Lofgren. I thank you for that answer.
I would just--this is a complicated question, and we all
see it from our own life experiences. But I think when I think
about foreign-born employers, I often think about Sergey Brin.
And I am glad that Google is in Mountain View, instead of in
Moscow, and it employs tens of thousands of my constituents.
And I am glad that he did what he did.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Gallegly. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert?
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you to the witnesses for being here today.
This is an intriguing area, and as Ms. Lofgren points out,
statistics point to unusual things. Let me ask with regard to
the statistics, Mr. Kochhar, that you have cited in your paper,
``After the Great Recession,'' the employment of foreign-born
Hispanics increased by 435,000 while employment of native-born
Hispanics decreased by 43,000.
You found that employment of foreign-born Blacks increased
by 81,000 while employment of native-born Blacks decreased by
142,000. You found that foreign-born Hispanics gained 98,000
construction jobs while 133,000 native-born Hispanics lost
construction jobs.
What is your explanation for this anomaly? The foreign born
gain jobs. The native born lose jobs.
Mr. Kochhar. You are referring to the report I submitted?
Mr. Gohmert. It was your paper ``After the Great
Recession.''
Mr. Kochhar. Right. So that was the period from the middle
of '09 to the middle of 2010.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes.
Mr. Kochhar. The first year of the recovery where, in the
aggregate, the native born still had a significant job loss,
and the foreign born were starting to recover in terms of jobs.
And so, what you describe by race and ethnicity, it just
filtered down the pipeline.
Mr. Gohmert. But do you have any explanation for that
emergence----
Mr. Kochhar. Your question is why one is gaining and the
other isn't gaining?
Mr. Gohmert. Yes.
Mr. Kochhar. I alluded to some of those. Well, all of those
reasons that I feel are relevant in my testimony having to do
with greater flexibility on the part of migrant workers, the
fact that we are catching them at a point of time of volatile
economic trend, and we happen to be catching one on the up and
the other, yes, on the up, but not quite across the line.
And also the demographic trends. So those are some of the
factors I refer to.
Mr. Gohmert. Mr. Serbon, American labor unions, if you look
over the entirety of the 20th century, had a history and policy
of being opposed to illegal immigration because they were
protecting or attempting to protect those American citizens who
had jobs, and it seemed to make sense.
Do you know why the American labor unions have abandoned
that longstanding policy of opposition to illegal immigration
and have now embraced illegal immigration as somehow being
helpful to their union members?
Mr. Serbon. Well, I really can't speak for the hierarchy of
our unions. I know a majority of union members, I think it was
58 percent in one poll I had read, want the enforcement aspect
of our immigration laws enforced.
Mr. Gohmert. But that is rank-and-file union members.
Mr. Serbon. Right. Right.
Mr. Gohmert. Yes. Do you have any polling of union leaders
to see how much different they are than union members?
Mr. Serbon. I have talked to some of the State leaders on
some groups, some of our labor groups, and they do support the
regular immigration aspect of our immigration policy.
Mr. Gohmert. But the policies seem to embrace illegal
immigration.
Mr. Serbon. Some of the higher-ups embrace it. I----
Mr. Gohmert. And that is why I am asking. Why do the
higher-ups of unions differ from their membership?
Mr. Serbon. I have no clue what they are thinking.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. But you do you think they are thinking
something? [Laughter.]
All right. I see my time has expired.
Mr. Serbon. Yes, I think they are thinking about something.
I don't know what it is.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, that is why I am wondering if maybe they
are more concerned about forsaking the interests of their
current members in order to pursue or lure future members. But
anyway, I am glad to know they are thinking something.
I yield back my time.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you.
The gentleman from Michigan, do you have some questions,
Mr. Conyers?
Very well. Mr. Conyers?
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman.
One of the things that we are trying to do to stem the
illegal entries is take care of the border there, and we have
what is known as the ``wall builders'' in the Congress. Just a
build a wall high enough and put enough guards on it. Are you a
wall builder?
Mr. Serbon. Me?
Mr. Conyers. You.
Mr. Serbon. I support their cause, but I don't--my main
issue is that you do the, like I said, E-Verify, I-9. Once they
get past the border, they are home free. That is my opinion,
and we need to do this for every employer.
You eliminate the job magnet, you eliminate the illegals.
Mr. Conyers. Yes, but you can't eliminate the job magnet if
you have got in Detroit the unemployment rate is not 9 percent,
but 38 percent. So we are trying to create a job magnet. So
when we create one for inside the U.S., don't worry. There will
be people trying to get here by any means necessary.
Mr. Serbon. Oh, I understand. Just the Doctor here had
pointed out that if you bring in more people, it will create
jobs. You know, they start their own businesses.
And in the construction field, before, I have been on
projects where you get a multiple layer of employers, you will
find that one employer, maybe he is an immigrant contractor.
And what they do is they hire all their own people. So I have
been on job sites where the whole crew was Romanian.
We have American electricians everywhere. That is a high-
skilled job. They did a very good job. But what I am saying is
if you are going to allow someone in here to create a job,
immigrant wise, and then they hire all their own people from
their own country, what does that do for the American people?
Other than bag their groceries when they come to buy them.
Mr. Conyers. Well, Congresswoman Lofgren has a bill in that
wants to relate the unemployment rate in building to allowing
people who do building to come in. It is a pretty simple thing,
but it is not being done. It is being ignored. We almost--we
will probably have to pass a law to get it done.
How is the new president of AFL-CIO doing, in your
judgment? Is he one of the ones up at the top that don't get
it, or is he an improvement, in your view?
Mr. Serbon. I think he needs some more enlightening on the
issue. I can't speak for him. You know, maybe you should have
another hearing and invite him.
Mr. Conyers. Well, we may do that. But I was just reacting
to your comment about the fact that some of the people at the
top of collective bargaining in the country have different
views from people in the middle and lower ranks of collective
bargaining.
Mr. Serbon. Well, if you are seeing like in my area where
unemployment for tradesmen was 28 or 30 percent, and we are
continuing to bring in immigrants, skilled or unskilled, and I
really don't see the leaders of the AFL-CIO saying stop. I
haven't heard it myself. Maybe you have. I think they need to
maybe voice their opinions for the American workers more.
Mr. Conyers. Well, I can help you because James Hoffa comes
out of Detroit there at national headquarters, and we fly
regularly on Delta. So if you don't mind, I will communicate
our discussion to him for you.
Mr. Serbon. Oh, sure. I would love to speak to him.
Mr. Conyers. Okay. Well, I speak to him pretty regularly.
Now the big discussion here among our distinguished panel
is that there is a causal connection between immigration
numbers and unemployment. And some say that there isn't any
direct causal connection. What do you think about that, sir?
Mr. Serbon. Well, I just look--you know, everyone does
numbers here and----
Mr. Conyers. Yes.
Mr. Serbon.--I see if there is 20 million people unemployed
and you are still bringing in 1 million, 1.5 million, 2 million
a year, something has got to give. And I think if we just stop
legal immigration for a couple of years and let the market sort
itself out----
Mr. Conyers. Stop it altogether, right.
Mr. Serbon.--I think we would be in a far better position.
I mean, at 99 weeks unemployment, like I said, when you are
coming up to 98 weeks and you just can't leave your home,
travel a couple hundred miles. Some tradesmen do. But if you
are not skilled, to travel somewhere out of your comfort zone
to go find another job.
Mr. Conyers. Can I get an additional minute, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Gallegly. Without objection.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir.
What about sending back all the illegals, period?
Mr. Serbon. That would be pretty difficult.
Mr. Conyers. What is it, about 11 million?
Mr. Serbon. It would be very difficult to send them all
back. But if you, like Ms. Lofgren stated before, immigration
or enforcement through attrition, if you start enforcing
certain laws and actually step it up, they will leave on their
own.
I mean, I just read that Mexico's unemployment rate is 4.9
percent. So that is quite a bit less than ours.
Mr. Conyers. Could I ask, Dr. Camarota, are you willing to
agree that there may not be a direct causal connection between
immigration rates and unemployment?
Mr. Camarota. Well, I think that what the research suggests
and both common sense is it is never one-for-one, an immigrant
arrives, and an American loses his job. Certainly, I have never
suggested that. That would just be simply silly, of course.
But on the other hand, 45 percent of the maids in the
United States and 35 percent of the construction laborers in
the United States are foreign born now. In each case, about
half is illegal. To suggest that that kind of massive increase
in the supply of workers has no impact on those occupations is
equally silly as a kind of one-for-one.
Some occupations are largely unaffected. Only 5 percent of
lawyers in the United States. So I don't think immigration has
almost any effect in that occupational category.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you.
What about this business of people will take any job?
Seasonal labor, that is almost all immigrant work. I mean,
people just don't go for working in the field. Stoop labor
isn't getting it. Besides, the pay is terrible, and the working
conditions are onerous. And that is why immigrants do the work,
get the work. That is the only jobs they can get.
Mr. Camarota. Well, remember, and even if we focused on
illegal immigrants, the Pew Hispanic Center estimates 5
percent, a very small fraction of all illegal immigrants, work
in agriculture. It is almost irrelevant to the illegal
immigration debate.
There is about three times or four times as many illegal
immigrants in things like construction and food service and
food preparation. And they are the jobs that are still
overwhelmingly done by natives, where immigrants have made all
these gains.
So if you want to have a special program for agriculture,
we could talk about that. I might be amenable. But again, it is
a tiny fraction of the illegal workforce.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
Thanks, Chairman.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
I want to thank all the witnesses this morning. Thank you
for your testimony and for answering the questions, and look
forward to working with you as we continue our efforts dealing
with this issue in the days and months to come.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit to the Chair additional written questions for the
witnesses, which we will forward and ask the witnesses to
respond as promptly as they can so the answers can be made a
part of the record of the hearing.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
And with that, again, I thank you for being here today. And
with that, the hearing stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Press Release from the American Immigration Lawyers Association (AILA)

Submission from the Center for the Study of Immigrant Integration
(CSII)

Letter from John L. Ghertner, MD

Prepared Statement of the National Immigration Forum


