- UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM,
AND HOMELAND SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 2, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-146

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

71-054 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr., Wisconsin, Chairman

LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas, Vice-Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia              ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        Virginia
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TED POE, Texas                       HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                   Georgia
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JUDY CHU, California
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina           TED DEUTCH, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MARK AMODEI, Nevada                  MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
[Vacant]

Caroline Lynch, Chief Counsel

Bobby Vassar, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

NOVEMBER 2, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Louie Gohmert, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Texas, and Vice-Chairman, Subcommittee on Crime,
Terrorism, and Homeland Security...............................     1
The Honorable Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, a Representative in
Congress from the State of Virginia, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security........     4
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     6

WITNESSES

The Honorable Laurie Robinson, Assistant Attorney General, Office
of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Questions for the Record from the U.S. Department of
Justice........................................................    36

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism,
and Homeland Security,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Louie
Gohmert (Vice-Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Sensenbrenner, Gohmert, Goodlatte,
Chaffetz, Gowdy, Amodei, Scott, Conyers, Cohen, Pierluisi, Chu,
and Quigley.
Staff Present: (Majority) Caroline Lynch, Subcommittee
Chief Counsel; Harold Damelin, Counsel; Allison Rose,
Professional Staff Member; Sarah Allen, Counsel; Arthur Radford
Baker, Counsel; Lindsay Hamilton, Clerk; (Minority) Aaron
Hiller, Counsel; and Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff
Member.
Mr. Gohmert. The Committee will come to order. Welcome to
oversight hearing on the United States Department of Justice
Office of Justice Programs. I would especially like to welcome
our witness. Thank you for being here, Ms. Robinson, and for
everyone else that joined us here today.
I am also joined today by distinguished Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee Bobby Scott and by the most recent Chairman
emeritus John Conyers from Michigan.
At this time we will begin the hearing. This is an
oversight hearing of Office of Justice Programs at the U.S.
Department of Justice, which obviously you have most recently
headed since January 2009. I know this is not the first time
that you were there as head of OJP when you previously served
in that role during the Clinton administration from 1993 to
2000. With almost a decade of experience as the head of OJP,
you are surely equipped to engage in discussion on the various
OJP programs.
Since it was established in 1984, OJP has been the
Department's primary grant for awarding agency through six
separate program offices and bureaus. OJP provides grants
intended to improve the company's capacity to prevent and
control crime, improve the criminal and juvenile systems,
increase knowledge about crime and related issues, and assist
crime victims.
From October 2008 through September 2011, OJP made over
17,000 grant awards totaling $9.8 billion in the criminal
justice field, including Federal, State, local and tribal law
enforcement agencies and private community organizations. OJP
currently manages over 50 different grant programs. While a
number of these programs serve a useful purpose within the
entire criminal justice context, in these very difficult
economic times where the Federal Government must drastically
reduce its spending we simply cannot continue to allocate
resources without verifying that they are being used as
effectively as possible and that it is for a legitimate Federal
role.
To that end we need to ensure that the programs we are
funding are accomplishing their intended purpose, that the
programs are still necessary and not outdated, and we are not
funding multiple programs with the same intended purpose, that
there is adequate communication between various grant making
offices so we are effectively leveraging our resources, that
grant recipients are not using funds in a wasteful or
fraudulent manner, that OJP is capable of and is in fact
engaging in effective, aggressive grant oversight, and that the
roles are our constitutional responsibility of Congress.
It is in this context that we examine OJP's performance.
Both the Justice Department's Inspector General and the GAO
have identified what I consider to be a number of significant
problems with respect to OJP. For example, in October 2010 GAO
found the performance measures being used by OJP to assess
whether the goals of the Byrne JAG program were being met and
were not appropriate and needed to be revised. GAO also found
that OJP did not have a process in place to validate the
integrity of the Byrne JAG recipients' self purported
performance data.
Given this Byrne JAG program is one of the largest grant
programs at DOJ, this is a serious problem that must be
addressed. It is essential that we are able to determine the
effectiveness of OJP's grant programs in deciding whether to
continue funding them.
I hope you will explain why it took GAO to point out that
these serious program deficiencies exist at OJP.
I am concerned by the IG's findings regarding OJP's
oversight of the Southwest Border Prosecution Initiative. Since
2002 it has been OJP's responsibility to oversee this
reimbursement program. In a 2008 report the IG was very
critical of OJP oversight efforts. OJP promised to implement
the changes recommended by the IG, but when the IG came back 2
years later, 2010, to review how OJP was doing, they continued
to find major weaknesses in the management and oversight of the
program.
Specifically the IG noted that there were red flags that
were missed by OJP. The IG found that $12.3 million, or 85
percent, of the reimbursements allowed by OJP were unallowable
or unsupportable. An 85 percent error rate is simply not
acceptable when handling taxpayer money. We look forward to
hearing your explanation on why OJP could not properly manage
this program and what is being done to correct the problem.
Additionally, GAO and IG reports have highlighted a serious
lack of coordination between DOJ and other agencies, including
the Department of the Interior, regarding how Federal money
should be spent. These reports also show serious violations of
grant requirements by the recipients, ranging from very
significant amounts of unsupported or unallowable expenditures,
failure to monitor subgrantees, the sloppy or nonexistent
recordkeeping, and failure to file required reports adequately
in a timely manner. In some cases grantees were found to have
misused millions of dollars.
These stories, while never acceptable, are even less so in
today's climate. OJP is currently responsible for over 14,000
active grants and these IG reports all issued fairly recently
cause me to wonder what grant monitoring procedures OJP has in
place that allowed these type of abuses to occur.
As we move forward, these problems need to be addressed and
corrected during the life of the grant, not after the grant
funds have been expended and the IG comes in to do an audit. In
this regard there are serious concerns about OJP's high risk
grantee list. While this list in place since only 2009 is
presumably intended to help monitor grantees who may be
misusing Federal funds, it appears that in reality the list
does very little. Even if an OJP grantee finds its way onto
this list they are still permitted to receive additional grants
while on the list and can have funds from any current grants
disbursed as well.
In addition, OJP has never referred any high risk grantee
for suspension or disbarment. This strikes me as a sign of very
weak grant oversight at best.
The acting IG testified this past June before another House
Subcommittee on the topic of Federal grant program oversight.
In the course of her testimony she noted that their audit work
has continued to identify areas where the Department could
further improve its management of grants, particularly in terms
of the Department's processes for awarding grants and its
oversight of grantees.
The IG has also suggested that OJP along with the COPS
office and Office of Violence Against Women needed to be more
responsive in addressing outstanding audit recommendations to
resolve questioned costs from audits or grantees. The IG noted
that in some instances the Department takes years to implement
an audit recommendation. These are also serious issues pointed
out by the IG, and we would like to know what you have done to
address them.
In addition to these grant management and oversight issues,
we are also very concerned about the IG's findings in a recent
audit of Department of Justice Conference planning and food and
beverage costs. The IG examined 10 department conferences, four
of which were put on by the OJP. Regarding these four
conferences, the IG found that OJP spent over $530,000 for an
event planner.
Five of the other six conferences examined by the IG were
put on internally and did not even use an event planner. Why
did OJP need to hire an event planner when that is clearly not
the norm at DOJ?
Three of these OJP conferences held in Palm Springs,
California, a lovely city, but nonetheless the event planner
used by OJP came from Anchorage, Alaska and was awarded the
contract without the benefit of an open solicitation. We would
like to know what was so special about this event planner that
the contractor had to be sole sourced.
The IG questioned many of the costs associated with the
event planner. For example, the event planner held a conference
planning meeting at the direction of OJP for 36 people in Palm
Springs, California for about a year before the conference took
place. This was done despite the fact that the contract
documents stated that such a face-to-face meeting was not
necessary in order to put on the conference. It appears to me
this was a total waste of taxpayer dollars.
As we move forward we must spend our money wisely for only
those OJP programs proven to be effective. Additionally, your
office has an obligation to ensure that the grant recipients
are complying with the conditions of the grants and spending
the money they received appropriately.
I look forward to hearing your testimony today, and with
that would yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Gohmert. Good morning, I am
pleased to join you this morning for this very important
oversight hearing on the Office of Justice Programs and am
pleased to hear from the Assistant Attorney General Laurie
Robinson, who you appropriately introduced as a very well
qualified and effective leader in the Department of Justice.
As you know, the Office of Justice Programs is charged with
working in partnership with the justice community to identify
the most pressing crime related challenges confronting the
justice system and to provide information, training,
coordination and innovative strategies and approaches for
addressing these challenges.
The Office of Justice Programs is comprised of six
different components, including the Bureau of Justice
Assistance, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National
Institute of Justice, the Office for Victims of Crimes, the
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, and the
Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering
and Tracking Office.
Because of limited time I want to focus on the area of
juvenile justice and delinquency prevention, and perhaps get to
other areas during the questioning. The juvenile justice system
in this country needs help. In any given night in the United
States almost 10,000 children are held in adult jails and
prisons where they are particularly vulnerable to physical and
sexual victimization because of their size and youth.
The Centers for Disease Control has added its voice to the
chorus of researchers who have reported that after release
children who are incarcerated in adult prisons commit more
crimes and more serious crimes than children with similar
histories held in juvenile facilities. And while juvenile
facilities are better than adult facilities, generally there
are far too many problems even in the juvenile facility. Nearly
100,000 children, some as young as 10 years old, are confined
to juvenile detention in residential facilities, many of which
are plagued with harsh and abusive conditions.
Just last year the Bureau of Justice Statistics pursuant to
the Prison Rape Elimination Act reported that 12 percent of
juveniles in publicly and privately run facilities reported
incidences of sexual abuse primarily by facility staff.
The Department of Justice can make an immediate critical
difference of youth custody by promulgating a final rule to
enforce the national standards to prevent, detect and respond
to prison rates that would require the removal of youth under
18 from adult jails and prisons. I would like to hear what is
happening to those rules and regulations.
The over representation of minority youth continues to be a
challenge. Additionally, African American youth are confined in
facilities at a rate over three times that over White youth. In
addition, minority youth more likely to be sent to public
rather than private correctional facilities and are more likely
to be housed in the most secure facilities. The Federal
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974
requires that States determine whether the proportion of
minorities in confinement exceeds their proportion in the
population. And if there is such over representation, States
must demonstrate that they are appropriately addressing that
problem. So I would like to know where we are in that regard.
Of course one huge concern is the proposals for reductions
of juvenile justice funding. One of the concerns is that the
core requirements of the 1974 JJDPA act may be in jeopardy if
States do not receive enough funding to make it worth their
while to comply with the requirements because the sanction for
violation is reduced funding. If there is not enough funding
they will not have the appropriate incentives to comply.
I would like to know--one kind of ongoing problem is a
question of when we can expect an administrator to be named to
the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention. I
find it troubling that 3 years into the Administration there
has been no one confirmed to lead this Federal home for
juvenile justice and to be speaking out on behalf of our
children.
Despite the existence of evidence based and proven programs
who are seeing funding for them cut in the budget situation we
are facing today, clearly this is penny wise but pound foolish
given that many of these programs save much more money than
they cost in avoiding criminal justice and social welfare
spending.
That is why I introduced the Youth PROMISE Act which I know
the Attorney General is supportive of, and to provide this kind
of evidence based and cost saving program and to get young
people on the right track and keep them on the right track.
I am very pleased to see that there are positive steps that
have been taken on behalf of our youth, particularly with the
National Forum on Youth Violence Prevention and the Defending
Childhood Initiative. I was also pleased to articipate in the
OJJDP national conference held October 12th through 14th, and
thrilled that over 3,000 people who registered for that program
at their own expense were able to participate.
So I look forward, Madam Assistant Attorney General, to
your testimony and to continued work on how we can get young
people on the right track and keep them on the right track.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
It is now my pleasure to introduce today's witness. Laurie
Robinson has served as----
Mr. Conyers. Pardon me, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gohmert. Absolutely, the Chairman emeritus, John
Conyers of Michigan.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I won't take long,
but I wanted to join in welcoming our distinguished witness,
Attorney Robinson. Just to refresh the memory of some of the
Members on the Subcommittee, the program of the National Forum
on Youth Violence was conducted in six cities and I am very
proud to say that Detroit was one of those cities that was
visited. And although the Deputy Attorney General wasn't there,
Attorney Tom Abt, her assistant, was in Detroit. And we had an
incredibly meaningful sight. They met in my Congressional
district at the Boys and Girls Club, and the mayor of the City
of Detroit, Dave Bing, was there. The U.S. Attorney for the
Eastern District of Michigan, Ms. Barbara McQuade, was there.
Michael Strautmanis, a deputy in the White House, was there
himself. And they were in total at five other cities dealing
with this question of youth and violence prevention. After the
hearing they made tours around the city. This forum was also in
Chicago, Boston, San Jose, Salinas, and Memphis. And this was
all last month. We think this commitment to attending this
question of youth violence in urban areas is of incredible
importance. We wanted to thank you for the work that is being
done in the Department of Justice in that regard.
Now the budget constraints that have limited you so far are
restraints that have come from the U.S. Congress. And so I wish
we could reiterate and I hope that you will make clear, indeed
if you have to submit additional materials--just what the
funding picture is--that we need to be appreciative of to know
how to deal with the budgetary issues in your department within
DOJ.
And finally, I just have to recall to Judge Gohmert, our
Chair today, that some of the problems that he described took
place during the years 2005 to 2008, a time in which I don't
think you were--well, I don't know where you were then, but I
know you weren't in the position that you are now with the
responsibilities that require you to come before our Committee.
But under your leadership I do know the Office of Justice
Programs has begun to correct itself and move forward, and it
is in that sense that I join the Chairman and the Ranking
Member Bobby Scott in welcoming you to this hearing today.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you. We appreciate that. I certainly
noted that some of these problems arose before 2008, that
certainly wouldn't be your responsibility. And of course one of
the things that endeared me so to the current Republican
leadership is my constant pointing out of problems that
occurred on our watch. It might be noted that I am actually
Vice-Chairman of this Committee. It may have something to do
with that.
But anyway we appreciate your being here today. Ms.
Robinson served as Assistant Attorney General for the
Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs since 2009.
Ms. Robinson has previously served as Assistant Attorney
General from 1993 until early 2000. From 2004 to 2009 Ms.
Robinson served as the Director of the Master of Science
Program in the University OF Pennsylvania'S Department of
Criminology. Between 2001 and 2009 she also served as a
Distinguished Senior Scholar in the university's Jerry Lee
Center of Criminality and as Executive Director of its Forum on
Crime and Justice.
Prior to joining the Department of Justice in 1993, Ms.
Robinson was the Director of the ABA's, American Bar
Association's, Section of Criminal Justice for 14 years, where
she founded the ABA's Juvenile Justice Center. Ms. Robinson is
a graduate of Brown University.
She has a written statement that will be entered into the
record in its entirety. We ask that you would summarize that
statement in 5 minutes or less and appreciate again your being
here. We know that the pay is not that good for witnesses
coming before Congress. And for anybody who doesn't know, there
is no pay.
Anyway I do now recognize Ms. Robinson, please.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE LAURIE ROBINSON, ASSISTANT ATTORNEY
GENERAL, OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Ms. Robinson. Mr. Gohmert, thank you so much, and Ranking
Member Scott and the distinguished Members of the Subcommittee
for having me here today.
I am very pleased to have the opportunity to discuss with
you the priorities in the work of the Office of Justice
Programs.
OJP's mission is to increase public safety and improve the
fair administration of justice across America through
innovative programs and leadership. The resources we provide
are critically important, especially in challenging times when
public safety professionals face shrinking budgets.
When I was confirmed 2 years ago I announced three goals:
First to support State, local and tribal criminal and juvenile
justice practitioners through innovative partnerships; second,
to expand our base of knowledge about what works to address
crime and better communicate that to the field; and, third, to
address the issues, Mr. Gohmert, that you had raised about our
obligations as stewards of Federal funds. That is so important,
and I can report on progress in each of these areas.
Tight budgets at every level of government have clearly
made it harder for jurisdictions to tackle their crime problems
alone. Since returning to OJP I have sought to expand
partnership with our stakeholders, and our work has paid off.
Both Mr. Scott and Mr. Conyers have mentioned our National
Forum on Youth Violence Prevention. This is a cooperative
effort across levels of government and across Federal agencies
to address youth and gang violence. The investment of Federal
funds in the forum is modest. It is not about new spending, but
it is about leveraging existing resources and making those
public dollars go further.
I am also proud of our progress building our base of
evidence and getting information about what works out to the
field. Last November the Attorney General appointed an 18-
member Science Advisory Board to help guide these efforts. And
in 2009, I launched an OJP-wide Evidence Integration Initiative
to improve our knowledge about effective practices and then get
that information out to practitioners on the front line.
As part of that initiative, in June we launched a new Web
site called CrimeSolutions.gov. It is a ``what works
clearinghouse'' with more than 150 programs assessed from
research for their effectiveness. And next year we open a State
and local help desk. It is a Diagnostic Center to serve as a
``one stop shop'' to help those implementing evidence based
approaches.
And finally, we are working hard as a top priority to
fulfill the trust the American taxpayer has placed in us to
manage public funds. During my confirmation hearing I said that
addressing waste, fraud and abuse would be a top priority. So
we have been actively working to strengthen internal controls.
As you said, Mr. Gohmert, we currently manage almost 14,000
grants, totaling almost $10 billion. Yet we consistently exceed
our statutory monitoring requirements. Last year we monitored
more than twice the amount required by law, and the
Department's Inspector General has pointed out the positive
steps we are now taking to improve our grant management
practices. Earlier this year she called our work--in testimony
before Congress--she called our work to implement the Recovery
Act ``extraordinary' and that is an unusual term for the IG to
use.
We have also found ways to minimize cost. In fiscal year
2011 we, within OJP, cut staff travel expenses by 39 percent
from the prior year. And we saved $2 million through freezes or
hiring promotions and staff training, again $2 million, and
reassessed our IT contracts to save $5 million.
We have specifically taken a number of steps to limit costs
related to training and conferences for the field. Even before
the IG's September report on conference costs we had already
taken measures to limit spending in this area--even before the
report came out. And since it came out, we have taken
additional steps, including a new policy I announced October 21
prohibiting all food and beverage costs under OJP grants and
contracts, except in the most extraordinary circumstances.
While we have acted aggressively to reduce these costs, I
think it is also important to remember that training
conferences for the field are indispensable to meet our
statutory mission of sharing information and providing
assistance to the criminal and juvenile justice field.
Mr. Conyers. Mr. Chairman, can the witness be given a
couple additional of minutes, please?
Mr. Gohmert. Without objection, please continue.
Ms. Robinson. I am about to wrap up.
Mr. Gohmert, OJP's effectiveness and credibility I think
depend on our ability to account for the dollars we administer.
I take that responsibility very seriously and look forward to
working with you and the Subcommittee to ensure our programs
meet the high standards you expect and the American people
deserve.
Thank you so much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Robinson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Ms. Robinson. We now continue with
5 minutes of questions from each Member. And I reserve my
questions for later so we can move on. I yield 5 minutes to Mr.
Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Robinson, I
understand that the Bureau of Justice Statistics is undertaking
a study of youth in adult court. Only 13 States collect that
data today, so it is extremely important so we know what is
going on. Do you have information on this study that you can
reveal now or would you like--I would like some information on
that. Could you do that now or for the record?
Ms. Robinson. Mr. Scott, I don't have that information at
this time. I know this is an area of very great interest and
focus for them. But we would be happy to get that information
for you for the record.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
You talked about stewardship. There was great fanfare about
the $16 muffins. Can you tell us what that was about?
Ms. Robinson. Yes, I would be happy to talk to you about
the steps that we have taken relating to conference costs.
First of all, the Department of Justice strongly shares the
concern of the Inspector General and of all of you, really of
all Americans, about using tax dollars wisely and the
importance of not tolerating wasteful spending. This is
something the Department has focused on for some time.
For example, in May of 2009 the Deputy Attorney General
issued a memo to all of the Department about limiting
conference costs. And then in January of this year the Attorney
General issued a memo across the board urging limitations on
spending not just in the conference area, but relating to staff
travel, to training, to a variety of things, and also placed a
freeze on hiring. And the savings that I noted in my opening
statement really derive from the steps that we took in response
to that.
Even before the Inspector General report was issued, we
took aggressive action at OJP to respond to this area, because
we work very closely with the IG, and during their work with us
in the investigation we were aware of their concerns in working
with them.
I would note that the conferences in the report all took
place, as Mr. Conyers has alluded to, before I had come to OJP.
It doesn't mean it is not an area of concern.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask a more specific question. $16
muffins, is it true that that was an absolute miscalculation,
that the cost included the room and a lot of other expenses,
not just the muffins?
Ms. Robinson. Apparently that is the case. This was not an
OJP conference, but the IG did issue a retraction on that last
week.
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Can you tell us the status of the
Prison Rape Elimination Act regulations as they pertain to
juveniles?
Ms. Robinson. Yes, I can tell you the following
information. As you know, a number of questions were released
with the draft regulations that were issued earlier this year.
I think there were 64 questions put out for comment. This is
being handled not by OJP but by a different part of the
Department, and hundreds and hundreds of comments were
apparently received in response to those 64 questions. Those
are now under review, as I understand it, by the Department. I
am told that the final regs will be finished in the near
future; then they have to go to OMB for final review. I have
not seen them. I don't know what is in them.
Mr. Scott. Six cities, as the gentleman from Michigan
mentioned, received planning grants under the Promise
Neighborhoods. Can you tell us what the importance of the
planning is before you get into a comprehensive program, the
value of planning and how evaluation and evidence will be
considered? Not on evidence based in terms of what they do but
also evaluation to make sure they are effective.
Ms. Robinson. Yes, I think that we have seen in all of
these community based programs, and this really goes back to
the beginning of the LEAA program, which was the predecessor
program to OJP. As you well know, that comprehensive plan--
bringing all parties to the table, all interested multi-
disciplinary groups--is the way to ensure that programs really
can make a difference, because having all of the interested
parties together with all interests at the table and
considering all of the data that needs to be on the table at
the same time, will ensure a data driven approach and will also
ensure, as you have pointed out, that evaluation is considered
from the beginning. You can't really evaluate a program after
the fact unless you have that in place at the outset.
Mr. Scott. How do you ensure that evaluations will actually
take place? Is that part of the grant process, that you have to
have an evaluation of your program after the fact?
Ms. Robinson. With the Promise Neighborhoods I don't know
if that is built in, but it should be because that is something
throughout the Administration that we are trying to ensure.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Scott. At this time we will--
Mr. Amodei, are you ready to ask questions?
Mr. Amodei. I yield my time back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Then Mr. Conyers for 5 minutes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Judge Gohmert. I appreciate your
coming before the Committee today. This area that you are in,
Assistant Attorney General Robinson, is critical. How we deal
with young people that too frequently in our society can get
caught up in peer pressure, the gangs and ultimately into
conduct, violent conduct. And I note that you were the Chair of
the Vera Institute of Justice and that you were in this work
when Janet Reno used to come before this Committee and sit
exactly in the chair that you did in this same room. If you
could take a few minutes to reflect on this journey that we
have all been going through in dealing with this very
critically important area of our society in terms of how we
approach the youngsters, and if there have been schools of
thought that have come and gone in the course of your
experience, I would be happy to hear about it.
Ms. Robinson. Well, thank you for the question, Mr.
Conyers. I would say that the main takeaway I would share is
that there is now in this country in the criminal justice field
and the juvenile justice field a common understanding. And we
see this reflected in the National Forum on Youth Violence, in
fact, and we see it reflected across law enforcement and across
people in prevention work, and we see it from the mayors, and
we see it from those in youth work--that a balanced approach is
needed, that you need to have law enforcement at the table and
people involved in social services and prevention, that no one
approach alone can make a difference.
The one thing since the 1990's on which there is now
greater focus is the back end with reentry, and that is the
additional element that we see brought to the table. So the
balanced approach, a data driven approach and a multi-
disciplinary one, I think, are the three elements that we would
see as key, and there is such a consensus around this from
every part of system.
Mr. Conyers. Now the LEAA, the Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, started back in 1968.
Ms. Robinson. Correct.
Mr. Conyers. And I was wondering if there were differences
between what happened then and what is happening now under OJP
under your administration?
Ms. Robinson. It is interesting that you ask that. I don't
know if there are many people around who are as much students
of the history of the program as much as I am.
Mr. Conyers. Well, when I came here the Chairman was Peter
Rodino of New Jersey.
Ms. Robinson. I recall. LEAA had a much greater emphasis on
the comprehensive planning in its distribution of formula
grants to the States than the OJP JAG Byrne funding has had
traditionally. We have tried in working with the National
Criminal Justice Association to return to a greater emphasis on
that comprehensive planning, and the NCJA, the National
Criminal Justice Association, has been a good partner in that.
I think that is particularly important at a time of
tightened budgets because of the need to think through how
spending is directed. That would be one critical difference, I
think.
Mr. Conyers. Mr. Chairman, could I get an additional 2
minutes?
Mr. Gohmert. Without objection.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, sir.
I wanted you to comment out of your wealth of experience,
Madam, on the whole ``lock 'em up and throw away the key''
strategy. There still exists here some very serious divergent
schools of thought; namely, you punish kids, you put them away,
ignoring the fact that frequently they come out worse than when
they went in. And the connecting observation to this is the
fact that minority youth are disproportionately incarcerated as
they are brought into the juvenile justice system.
Do you notice any awareness of the fact that frequently
they are the most ID'd, they are most frequently arrested, most
frequently prosecuted, most frequently get the longest
sentences, and most frequently end up as enemies of society by
this process that I have been describing?
Ms. Robinson. This is certainly an area that the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention has addressed over
a good deal of time under the disproportionate minority contact
focus within that office, that initiative. So yes, there has
been a great deal of attention to that. And I think that the
juvenile justice systems in many States have addressed that,
Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. I hope you keep working on it because I am
going to be; me and my staff are going to be in contact with
you about it.
Thanks, Chairman Gowdy.
Mr. Gowdy. [presiding.] I thank the gentleman from
Michigan.
Ms. Robinson, good morning, welcome.
Ms. Robinson. Good morning.
Mr. Gowdy. There is a quote from you in 2007 where I think
you accurately said particularly at a time of tight budgets we
need to be investing in evidence based approaches that can
actually help reduce crime and we need to stop funding programs
that don't work. I would add to that at some level we are going
have to have more of a conversation about what is an
appropriate role for the Federal Government juxtaposed with
what is appropriate for State governments. And it is not a
question of whether you place value on a program or an
initiative.
The examples I guess, at least to my mind, would be in the
area of DNA testing. If a State is willing to invest its own
money, hypothetically Virginia, South Carolina, Michigan is
going to invest its own money in coming up with a state-of-the-
art DNA lab and other States are not, why would the Federal
Government incentivize or reward States who don't meet what is
a fundamental responsibility of the criminal justice system,
which is testing their evidence? Why would that not be a
program that you would say, okay, States, that is a State
function whether you like it or not, your budgets are tight,
our are tighter, you are going--I think I saw a note we are
actually doing away with funding for the forensic science
grants; is that right?
Ms. Robinson. There are two different kinds of
appropriation lines relating to this in our budget, one is the
Paul Coverdell grants.
Mr. Gowdy. Right.
Ms. Robinson. Which we recommended not be funded in the
budget last year. So we were looking for areas to reduce
funding. And then there is the DNA testing, which is more the
forensics area, which includes funding to look--and I will give
you an example more on the science end--to look for ways to
actually speed the process and look for more the science way to
expedite ways that States are doing it.
But I would make the point the vast majority of the testing
in the labs is already paid for at the State and local level.
So I agree with you. It is an inherently State and local
responsibility. And as you well know as a former prosecutor at
the local level, 95 percent of criminal justice occurs at the
State and local level.
Mr. Gowdy. And even though I love my State and I am very
proud of it, we fought a battle as a local prosecutor getting
the State legislature and others to prioritize what are the
functions of State government. And it just strikes me as kind
of counterproductive when the Federal Government comes in and
rescues those States that aren't willing to have that debate.
Let me offer a worked of compliment to you. I think there
are at least a couple of programs I am familiar with in my own
former district which is now a congressional district. Lynn
Hawkins' Rape Crisis-SAFE Homes. South Carolina was number one
in the country in men killing women in 2000. And because of her
work through some help I believe from the Department of Justice
through a grant she has made remarkable progress.
One area where I don't see funding and maybe it is because
I missed it, children advocacy centers, intervention programs,
youth at risk programs. We can debate whether those work or
not, some may, some may not. What is nondebatable is the
success of the Children Advocacy Center and raising the
conviction rates in child sex cases.
So what is DOJ doing with respect to the children advocacy
centers that are fighting for funding in these austere times.
Ms. Robinson. No, we have funded Child Advocacy Centers
definitely through our Juvenile Justice Office, so we have
provided that funding. And if I may, can I go back to the DNA
for a moment?
Mr. Gowdy. Sure.
Ms. Robinson. The kind of thing I find very exciting is
through our National Institute of Justice, where we are doing
some experimentation. I will give you an example from
Baltimore. We are providing funding to the Baltimore Police
Department and they are working with an academic institution
with Yale and with a private company, as well, to test out
digital technology, to go actually to the crime scene to sample
DNA technology right there. And what they can do, and I am not
an expert in this technology at all so I hope I am describing
it correctly, but to get a smaller number of samples that they
then, with this digital technology, process more quickly and
less expensively. And I am told that it could really
revolutionize the way we collect and process DNA technology to
make it much quicker and less expensive.
Mr. Gowdy. My time is up, but I wonder if the gentleman
from Virginia might be gracious enough to allow me to ask one
more question.
Mr. Scott. No objection.
Mr. Gowdy. I don't want to get into the whole travel
conference, I don't have enough time to do that other than to
say there is a facility--it is not in my district, it is in
South Carolina--called the NAC, it is run by a former Federal
prosecutor, I guess she is still a Federal prosecutor, her name
is Cami Chandler. She does a phenomenal job. I was there last
week, first time I have been there as a nonprosecutor. Are we
using that as much as we ought to be? Columbia may not be as
glamorous as a city that starts with San, although I think it
is, it may not be, I understand reasonable minds can differ on
that. Are we using the NAC which is as a phenomenal resource as
much as we should be using it?
Ms. Robinson. Yes, actually I love the NAC. I have been
there. The NAC--we do use that. It is actually booked almost
all the time by the Executive Office of U.S. Attorneys, as I am
sure you are familiar with as a former U.S. attorney. And we
try to get in there more often, but it actually is booked
almost all the time. But we do keep that in mind. And that is
one of the things that we now are doing is actually--not just
with the NAC--but we have a checklist that we are now requiring
our staff at OJP to use to go down the checklist; for example,
can this meeting be done by teleconference? Can it be done in a
Federal facility? So the NAC is going to be on that list.
Mr. Gowdy. Good. Thank you. The gentleman from Tennessee,
Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, sir. First of all, I want to thank
the Department, Ms. Robinson in particular, for all your
efforts in coming to Memphis and other cities, I think Detroit
is another, a National Forum for Youth Violence Prevention.
Memphis was pleased to participate. Mr. Abt is almost a
Memphian now, I think we have registered him to vote, taken his
picture, all those things we have to do. It is a major success
I think in bringing people together, the stakeholders and the
community, and work together with youth violence, which Mr.
Conyers was talking about, that is such a problem. I appreciate
your reaching out to my office keeping me informed and
involved. That has been very helpful.
Mr. Conyers' questions were about the youth and losing the
youth and particularly minority youth. And I thought Mr. Gowdy,
who I have come to respect greatly since he has been on this
Committee, I got to know him in Congress, was going there in
the same area I was going. And I think when he asked you about
some quote you made previously about discarding things that
don't work and then suggesting that maybe there are certain
programs that shouldn't be Federal and most I guess--I don't
know how you phrased it, Mr. Gowdy, but it was that programs
should be local and not Federal oftentimes. Many, many, many
young people, particularly people of color, are arrested for
possession of marijuana which shouldn't be a Federal issue. It
should be a local issue, like Mr. Gowdy said. Let the locals
decide whether they want to make that illegal or not and how
they deal with it.
I know the City of Chicago, some aldermen are introducing a
decriminalization bill today. The whole program in this country
with marijuana arrests has been a failure for 40 years. The
public is against it. More of the public now is for
decriminalization than is against it. Those numbers are simply
going to grow.
What is the Department of Justice doing to try to see that
we don't continue to put scarlet letters on young people with
arrests so they can't get jobs later, can't get maybe
scholarships, get grants, loans in college and have the States
make the decision to get the Federal Government out of in line
with the Ron Paul-Barney Frank-et cetera bill.
Ms. Robinson. On the general issue of reentry after
convictions we have actually been doing a lot through our
Prisoner Reentry Council. The whole issue of reintegration of
people after they have been in the juvenile or criminal justice
system is very top priority for Eric Holder as Attorney
General. So we are working in concert with the Department of
Labor and other parts of the government across the executive
branch, both at the cabinet level and the agency staff level.
Mr. Cohen. I know in the program you brought to Memphis
there has been a holistic approach which I think is so needed.
When you arrest a person and give them that scarlet letter and
conviction from marijuana offense, it stays with them the rest
of their life, and even if you go to labor, et cetera. There is
Second Chances, but certain businesses wouldn't hire you if you
have a felony offense, particularly for drugs. People can get
all kind of jobs and be drunk as much as they want the night
before. They can't if they smoke marijuana and that happens to
maybe be in their system.
Shouldn't this be an area the Department of Justice looks
to make reform so we are not putting more young people at risk
for not getting opportunities future?
Ms. Robinson. No, the Administration has not taken that
step at this point.
Mr. Cohen. And do you think that--what does the
Administration need to get to that step? Do they need some kind
of consciousness training, do they need some scientists that
maybe can give them some information or some pollsters that can
tell them about the youth that they are losing and whatever
they are losing? What do they need?
Ms. Robinson. Well, I will be happy to raise this with my
boss over there.
Mr. Cohen. Do you know about Byrne grants? And there is a
problem I have, I think Byrne grants, and this is something you
could do.
Ms. Robinson. Yes.
Mr. Cohen. Byrne grants are given out to law enforcement
agencies, and when they use them oftentimes to arrest people
for marijuana possession, it is just a vicious cycle. They get
the money, they use it, they confiscate monies, they get--
sometimes they get the proceeds of the arrest or the bust, and
it is cash register justice.
Shouldn't the Byrne grants be conditioned on maybe going
after the drugs that cause people to become addicted, like
cocaine and meth and crack and only allow the Byrne grant
monies to be used for those type of drug offenses where people
get addicted and then go out and rob and murder?
Ms. Robinson. Currently, by law, the JAG Byrne funding is
overwhelmingly formula grant funding, so those decisions are
made at the State level.
Mr. Cohen. Can you give us some statistics or would you get
some statistics on how much they have used that for marijuana
arrests, which I think you will find it shockingly high?
Ms. Robinson. Yes. Yes, we can look at that. I actually
would be surprised if it is that high, but we can certainly
look at those statistics and get back to you with that
information.
Mr. Cohen. If I could have 1 more minute, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Gowdy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cohen. Some people don't realize what is going on in
the country, and we had a hearing, a discussion about a year
ago, 2 years ago, and Mr. Rangel, who is a knowledgeable man,
said, oh, they don't make marijuana possession arrests in New
York, that doesn't happen. New York is the number one location
in the country for marijuana possession arrests, and it is
people of color, and it is part of the program they have got
there, they use it as a law enforcement tool, and then they
stigmatize the person forever.
So I think you would be surprised, and I would like to ask
you if your office can do a study on the number of people in
the jurisdictions, maybe with this Byrne grant money, who have
been arrested for marijuana possession or marijuana in general
because, you know, while you do them in the way, you give this
money out in a lump sum, I would submit that this
Administration, General Holder, should have some direction to
the locals on how to spend that money, and the direction should
be to go after meth and crack and heroin. Those are drugs that
cause people to be addicted and cause them to have to steal and
rob and do violent acts to get their habit, their drug fed.
They have got a monkey on their back, and that is their Jones,
and they take it. Marijuana is not the problem. It is turning a
whole generation of young people against the system, and that
is something we can't afford.
Ms. Robinson. Yes. We can, by the way, put policy guidance
with the distribution of the money, even though we can't direct
it under the current law.
Mr. Cohen. Well, if you would look into putting that
guidance in effect to let me know what guidance you might have
done in the past or what you are looking for in the future.
Ms. Robinson. Of course.
Mr. Cohen. And I appreciate you, you are just phenomenal
and do a great job. And so I started by praising Mr. Gowdy. I
want to close by praising you.
Ms. Robinson. Thank you so much.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman from Tennessee. The Chair
would now recognize the gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you for being here. I want
to touch on a couple different topics. Talk about the DNA
initiative. Can you give me a sense of where the backlog is
nationwide?
Ms. Robinson. Of course.
Mr. Chaffetz. Is it getting worse, is it getting better?
Where is it at?
Ms. Robinson. No, that is a very good question. I think it
is helpful to think about the backlog as something with both a
kind of front door and back door. We know that with the
assistance of money that Congress has provided through the
National Institute of Justice, we have been able to help States
and localities build their capacity by about threefold over
recent years, but at the same time new businesses come in the
front door, and in many ways that is because criminal justice
professionals have realized how helpful DNA is in solving
cases, and it is not just in the traditionally violent crime
cases.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, what degree of confidence do you have
that these grants are actually being used for this? We have
reports out of southern California in particular where this
grant money was not being used to actually work on the DNA
backlog. So what kind of oversight, what sort of assurance do
you have that this money is actually going for its intended
purpose?
Ms. Robinson. We actually do have in many instances--may I
ask what the specifics were about that?
Mr. Chaffetz. Sure, I will be happy to give you the news
reports out of southern California, Los Angeles County in
particular, where the backlog has become so untenable and so
big, they literally had trailers with refrigerators, just
throwing them in there, and the money was not actually being
used for this. I just want to make sure that DOJ is aware of
this and that they are actually pursuing and making sure that
the grant money actually goes for the intended purpose.
Ms. Robinson. Yes, well, I am aware of the fact that some
of the backlog in L.A. was in the police department as opposed
to actually in the DNA lab where funding had gone, but we are
happy to work with your staff on that.
Mr. Chaffetz. The question is, how do you follow up and
make sure that this money is actually being used for these
intended purposes?
Ms. Robinson. We do monitoring on all of these grants. We
actually do desk audits on all of our grant funding.
Mr. Chaffetz. If you have such--do you have--okay, I would
like--if you have an audit on all of these, I would like a copy
of that, please.
Ms. Robinson. Yes.
Mr. Chaffetz. Is that something you could provide me? How
long? When will I get that?
Ms. Robinson. We can get that to you within the next week
to 10 days.
Mr. Chaffetz. We will give you 14 days.
Ms. Robinson. Maureen Henneberg.
Mr. Chaffetz. We will give you 14 days. That sounds good.
I need to move quickly. I want to go to the Southwest
Border Prosecution Initiative. This is a program that, as I
understand it, was never authorized. However, it received about
$326 million. The Department has proposed that this program be
eliminated. The funding of this is gone. Why would you
eliminate this program?
Ms. Robinson. We have been asked by Congress to recommend
limited funding, to go down in funding, and this was an area
that we had identified as one perhaps not to extend, and the
reason was--in looking over the panoply of the 53 programs at
OJP--that are in the reimbursement programs. These are not
evidence-based programs. They are backward looking
reimbursements, and when Mr. Gowdy had raised earlier, ``Are
these programs that States and localities could fund'' we were
trying--you know, every program that we have of the 53----
Mr. Chaffetz. But, I mean, illegal immigration truly is the
fault of the Federal Government, isn't that correct?
Ms. Robinson. Yes, it is. Well----
Mr. Chaffetz. I mean, the States are having to live with
the consequences of the Federal Government not doing its job.
We have not secured the border. I guess one of my concerns is,
if you look at that and then you also look at the State
criminal assistance, alien assistance program----
Ms. Robinson. Right.
Mr. Chaffetz. This went from--went into law in 1995, is
authorized to receive $4.4 billion, yet the Administration is
only requesting $136 million in fiscal year 2012. That is down
from $950 million through 2011. So the question is
prioritization from the Administration as to why we are
severely looking at the assistance to the States that deal with
the problem that was really created in the responsibility of
the Federal Government.
Ms. Robinson. You raise a good point. It is really a
question of available dollars.
Mr. Chaffetz. But why has the Administration not put this
as a priority?
Ms. Robinson. It is really a question of available dollars.
Mr. Chaffetz. So you have a choice as to whether or not to
reimburse these States, help the locals with dealing with the
criminal alien population, and the Administration is making a
very concerted effort to diminish those funds, put them down to
a point where they are starting to approach zero, and that is
one of my concerns, and I would love to learn more as to why
you don't think that is a priority.
Yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman from Utah. The Chair would
now recognize the gentleman from Puerto Rico, Mr. Pierluisi.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you, Chairman. Welcome, Ms. Robinson.
Ms. Robinson. Thank you.
Mr. Pierluisi. The first thing I will say, and I will be
brief about this, and not because it doesn't deserve more time,
is that I should commend you because I know that you have had
two stints at DOJ, and something happened in between which
caused the ire of the Inspector General, and ever since you
came back, now you are getting the praise of the Inspector
General, and I get the sense that it has to do with the fact
that you can even take pride of authorship or ownership of some
of these programs, and it must have been pretty disappointing
for you to see that these programs were being criticized and
that could be endangered as a result of bad management
practices. So I like, and I like what I hear, that now you are
being praised for having better internal controls, and so on,
like we should.
Now, at times in this hearing it sounded like philosophical
and, you know, why should the Federal Government get involved
in this area and so on? Well, putting aside the law enforcement
components of DOJ, FBI, DEA, and so on, in my view in this area
the role of the Federal Government should be to be the promoter
and supporter of best practices throughout America in the law
enforcement area. It is as simple as that. This is one Nation,
and when you identify best practices, you should be promoting
States and local enforcement agencies to pursue them. It makes
sense.
Then technical support. That is key. And that is another
fair area. It is fair game for the Federal Government to get
involved in that. Now it troubles me that--I know we are going
through fiscal constraints at the Federal level and at the
local level, but, wow, what I have seen is a 25 percent cut in
your programs in the last year.
Ms. Robinson. Yes.
Mr. Pierluisi. That is a huge cut. So I am concerned. When
you face a cut so dramatic, the first thing that comes to my
mind is priorities, and that is the first question I have for
you. I mean, what are the areas of most need in your mind? What
are your priorities in using the scarce resources you are being
given?
Ms. Robinson. Thank you so much for the question. The areas
I see as the greatest priority are what I would call the
evidence-based programs and areas like juvenile justice, areas
like the law enforcement programs. I was just at the
International Association of Chiefs of Police meeting in
Chicago last week. Five thousand police chiefs from around the
country. So many of them coming there, of course, on their own
dime because their jurisdictions cannot pay for it, talking
about the challenges they are facing in their local
jurisdictions dealing with issues like gangs, like youth
violence, like drugs, and having to do it with limited budgets,
with sophisticated crime that crosses jurisdictions, and gangs
that are dealing with very sophisticated technology in many
instances, and they are doing it again on tightened budgets,
and what they need from us, certainly grant money, but also
know-how. They need smart-on-crime approaches. This is what
they can't get in their local jurisdictions. So technical
assistance, training, training on things like the ICAC task
forces, you know, the Internet Crimes Against Children task
forces, things like how to deal with a crime scene, things like
how to deal with cold cases, and in the juvenile area. Mr.
Scott referred to our conference on juvenile justice that we
had. Again, we had juvenile justice professionals from around
the country who came, paying their own way to get there because
there was an opportunity to learn about how to deal with kids,
whether it was in the mentoring area or on child protection.
This is so important, to have Federal leadership.
And Mr. Gowdy, in a way, this is what this is about, the
Federal leadership, the appropriate Federal roles, this is what
the program is really about, the appropriate Federal roles,
what is it the Federal Government can add that is really the
add-on that the States and localities can't or are unable to
do. Building knowledge, spreading knowledge. The technical
assistance and training. Certainly, the data collection. No one
State or locality is going to collect national data. Those are
the kinds of things. And then spreading that knowledge, and the
kind of thing that I described with the DNA. Those
advancements, the bulletproof vests invented and developed by
LEAA, our predecessor agency. Those are the kinds of things
that grow out of programs like this, the reentry work, reentry
really invented out of OJP, that concept, that concept and the
work that we are doing to spread it.
So those are the things. So you start with that core and
build out from that. Those are the things. It is about
leadership.
Mr. Pierluisi. Mr. Chairman, could I get just 1 minute? It
is just to make a comment and see what reaction Ms. Robinson
gives me.
Mr. Gowdy. Without objection.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you so much. The last I heard you were
being criticized because apparently in coming up with proposals
for areas in which there could be cuts, it appears that there
is going to be a significant cut in immigration, in supporting
local and--State and local law enforcement agencies in the area
of immigration. But then the first thing that comes to my mind
isn't a Federal responsibility to take care of our borders and
to enforce our immigration laws? Shouldn't that be an area in
which we are not really promoting State and local law
enforcement agencies to do what we should be doing ourselves at
the Federal level? Isn't that part of the reason why, in
setting your priorities, you said, well, this is really our
burden, so let's stop spending money for that purpose, to have
the local law enforcement community assume it.
Ms. Robinson. No, you raised a very good point.
Mr. Pierluisi. But you don't want to comment further?
Ms. Robinson. Well, I think that it is a very good point. I
think that the way the program is structured makes it a
difficult one to administer in many ways, but that is probably
a longer conversation.
Mr. Pierluisi. I hear you. By the way, you are cordially
invited to visit Puerto Rico. I got envious when I heard that
Congressman Cohen has had you over there, so please come see
us.
Ms. Robinson. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank the gentleman from Puerto Rico.
Ms. Robinson, on behalf of all of us, we want to thank you
for your testimony today. Without objection, all Members will
have 5 legislative days to submit to the Chair additional
written questions for the witness, which we will forward and
ask the witness to respond to as promptly as she can so the
answers may be made part of the record. Without objection, all
Members will have 5 legislative days to submit any additional
materials for inclusion of the record.
With that, on behalf of all of us, we thank you for your
presence and your testimony. The hearing is adjourned.
Ms. Robinson. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


