- WHETHER THE CONSTITUTION SHOULD BE AMENDED TO ADDRESS THE FEDERAL DEFICIT?

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

WHETHER THE CONSTITUTION SHOULD BE AMENDED TO ADDRESS THE FEDERAL
DEFICIT?

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE CONSTITUTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 13, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-30

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-316                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
[Vacant]

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on the Constitution

TRENT FRANKS, Arizona, Chairman

MIKE PENCE, Indiana, Vice-Chairman

STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JERROLD NADLER, New York
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
STEVE KING, Iowa                     JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
Virginia

Paul B. Taylor, Chief Counsel

David Lachmann, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------

MAY 13, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Trent Franks, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona, and Chairman, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     1
The Honorable Jerrold Nadler, a Representative in Congress from
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on the
Constitution...................................................     2

WITNESSES

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia
Oral Testimony.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
David M. Primo, Professor, University of Rochester and the
Mercatus Center
Oral Testimony.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Robert Greenstein, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
Oral Testimony.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Andrew Moylan, National Taxpayers Union
Oral Testimony.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Prepared Statement of the American Federation of State, County
and Municipal Employees (AFSCME)...............................    44
Prepared Statement of Craig Jennings, Director of Federal Fiscal
Policy, OMB Watch..............................................    47
Prepared Statement of Alan Parks, President, Americans for a
Balanced Budget Amendment......................................    50
Letter from Colin A. Hanna, President, Let Freedom Ring..........    51
Letter from James L. Martin, Chairman, The 60 Plus Association...    52
Letter from Geoff Duncan, Chairman, Pass the Balanced Budget
Amendment, Georgia.............................................    54

WHETHER THE CONSTITUTION SHOULD BE AMENDED TO ADDRESS THE FEDERAL
DEFICIT?

----------

FRIDAY, MAY 13, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on the Constitution,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 11:24 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Trent
Franks (Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Franks, Chabot, Nadler, and Scott.
Staff Present: (Majority) Zachary Somers, Counsel; Sarah
Vance, Clerk; (Minority) David Lachmann, Subcommittee Chief of
Staff; and Veronica Eligan, Professional Staff Member.
Mr. Franks. The Subcommittee will come to order.
We want to welcome everyone to the Subcommittee on the
Constitution, particularly the witnesses that are here with us
today. I also want to say that I know that because of the
change in the schedule this morning, that we are going to have
a few people that will not be here. One of the notable absences
will be Mr. Jim Jordan, the Chairman of the RSC, who is very
strongly in favor of a balanced budget amendment, and I wanted
to express his comments in that regard.
We called a hearing today because we must examine ways to
change America's course on Federal spending and the enormous
Federal deficits that we face. It is absolutely necessary that
a balanced budget once again become the norm in America.
Currently, the Federal Government is borrowing $0.40 of every
dollar it spends. The massive amount of borrowing is causing
the Federal deficit to grow rapidly as a percentage of
America's total economic output. If we continue on our current
path, the Federal deficit will climb to at least 100 percent of
our annual Gross Domestic Product by the end of this decade.
To put that another way, if we begin to pay our deficit and
debt off today at $1 billion a year, a very modest effort on
our part, it would take us somewhere in the neighborhood of 12
to 15,000 years to do that. And the good news is we are not
doing that, we going into debt at a thousand times that pace.
So that puts it into perspective.
Unfortunately, the deficit spending has become the way of
life for the Federal Government. It hasn't always been this
way, for the first 140 years of America's history, we lived
under an unwritten constitutional rule that budgets should be
balanced except during times of war. According to Nobel Prize
winning economist James Buchanan, ``Politicians prior to World
War II would have considered it to be immoral to spend more
than they were willing to generate in tax revenue, except
during periods of extreme and temporary emergency.''
We must return to those roots. The Federal Government
cannot continue to live beyond its means. The question is how
do we turn the current pattern of overspending around for the
long term.
Some suggest that we can tax our way out of this crisis.
However that has never been proven to work, in fact, it has
been proven many times not to work. In order to pay for
entitlement spending alone, solely by raising taxes, we would
have to double the marginal tax rates for all income tax
brackets over the next 30 years.
Others suggest that statutorily imposing spending caps and
other legislative restraints will solve the problem. In the
past, however, such efforts have failed miserable in the long
run. The one solution that has the teeth to impose spending
restraint on the Federal Government is a constitutional
amendment.
Since the 1930's, there have been numerous proposed
constitutional amendments to require a balanced budget or to
control government spending or borrowing. Unfortunately, none
of those constitutional approaches to spending restraints have
been adopted. A balanced budget amendment has been unable to
gather the necessary two-thirds majority of both Houses during
the same Congress.
But with this hearing, we can begin to consider once again
whether the Constitution should be amended to control Federal
spending. Hopefully our witnesses can help us determine whether
Constitutional amendment is needed. And if it is, whether a
balanced budget amendment is the correct approach and what the
necessary components of such an amendment would consist of.
Over 200 years ago, Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison
that no generation can contract debts greater than may be paid
during the course of its own existence. Because according to
Jefferson, then the earth would belong to the dead and not to
the living generation. Today America is contracting debts that
will burden multiple future generations; it is time for
Congress to act.
And with that, I would now recognize the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, Mr. Nadler, for his opening statement for 5
minutes.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Here we go again, if
you can't balance the budget, and you can't face your
constituents after having voted for truly Draconian budget
cuts, why not vote on the Constitutional amendment instead?
That way you can vote for the idea of a balanced budget without
having to make any hard choices and without doing anything real
to get toward a balanced budget. Not a bad deal.
Of course, we have all been down to road before. My
Republican friends love constitutional amendments. For any
complaint, there is the constitutional amendment. It is not,
however, a free vote. If adopted, this proposed amendment would
have catastrophic consequences for the Nation, for the economy,
and for the future.
While it would be nice to have some easy way to force a
balanced budget, the world doesn't work that way. We know how
to balance the budget because we have done it before. Under the
Clinton administration, we balanced the budget, which would
have remained in balance except for the reckless Bush
administration's tax cuts and unfunded wars.
In the not too distant past, we managed not only to balance
the budget, but to run surpluses and begin paying down the
debt. That is what you do in good times, you pay down the debt.
Unfortunately, thanks to President Bush and a Republican
Congress we managed to turn record surpluses into record
deficits in record time. How did we do it? There was the huge
tax cuts for the very wealthy; there were two wars fought off
budget. I don't recall hearing a peep from any of my colleagues
on the other side who are now born again fiscal conservatives.
In fact, Vice President Cheney said, we have learned that
deficits don't matter. That summed up the Republican attitude
during the Bush administration.
Having the regulators go to sleep while financial
manipulators, banks and hedge funds crashed the economy, killed
off revenues, and that is one of the main causes of our present
budget crisis in addition to those ongoing tax cuts. But rather
than admit the serious economic mismanagement and looking for
ways to straighten things out, we got this dusted off quack
remedy from the past.
I guess it is easier to vote for something like this than
to have to endure another Town Hall where angry constituents
want to know why you voted to destroy Medicare.
Strangest of all, the amendment calls for balancing the
budget by 2016, even though the Republican budget the House
recently passed doesn't project a balanced budget until 2040.
The amendment would require a three-fifths votes by
Congress to exceed a balanced budget. That should lead to some
really history-making horse trading. Can you imagine what the
holdouts, the ones that get to you 60 percent will get in
exchange for passing a budget? I would predict if this goes
into effect in order to pass budgets will need of 60 percent,
and you will have monumental, monumental deficits to buy their
votes, and monumental earmarks to buy their votes. It will make
anything we do now look like child's play.
Really troubling is the proposal to require a three-fifths
vote to raise the debt limit. Do the sponsors really want to
reduce U.S. Treasury notes to junk bond status? Do you think
anyone will buy our paper if this becomes law? I wouldn't. The
amendment also treats military engagements as the only true
emergencies requiring the budget to be out of balance. That
shows a poor understanding of history and of economics. By the
way, given the proposal and the new Defense authorization bill
that came out of Armed Services, we are going to be at war all
the time anyway, so this would totally negate this amendment.
Did Herbert Hoover win the last election? If in the middle
of a recession when tax revenues are down and unemployment is
up, we begin to slash the budget in ways my Republican
colleagues are now suggesting, much less the far more Draconian
measures that this amendment would require will go from the
great recession right into another great depression.
It has been tried before and if we want the Constitution to
enshrine Herbert Hooverism, we will get what we deserve. We
should know that in good times you should balance budgets and
pay down the debt; in bad times, during a recession you should
run deficits in order to prime the pump and get the economy
running and put people back to work.
Let's manage the budget the old fashioned way, by making
hard choices, by promoting growth, by making everyone pay their
fair share of taxes, including billionaires and oil companies.
It isn't fun, and it won't make us a lot of friends. We have
done it before and we can do it again. It only requires the
courage of our own convictions to face the voters with the
actual budget you are proposing. And I know how hard those Town
Halls can be, I held many of them myself, but that is the job.
Let's get down to business and quit fooling around with
proposals that could never be implemented with anything that
the Congress, that the Republicans for that matter would be
willing to vote for. Thank you, I yield back.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. And without objection,
other Member's opening statements will be made part of the
record. We have a very distinguished panel of witnesses today.
Our first witness is representative Bob Goodlatte, he has been
a major force in all of this. Congressman Goodlatte is serving
his 10th term as representative of Virginia's sixth
congressional district. He is Chairman of the House Judiciary
Committee's Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition
and the Internet, and serves on the House Agriculture
Committee, where he is currently Vice Chairman of that
Committee.
On January 5, 2011, Representative Goodlatte introduced two
balanced budget amendments: H. Res. 1, which has 131
cosponsors, and H. Res. 2, which has 221 cosponsors. Welcome
you today, Bob.
Our second witness is Professor David Primo. Professor
Primo is an associate professor of political science at the
University of Rochester and a senior scholar at the Mercatus
Center at George Mason University. He received his doctorate in
political science from Stanford University, his research
focuses on American politics, government spending and campaign
finance. Professor Primo has authored, or coauthored, several
journal articles and policy reports, as well as three books,
including Rules and Restraint, Government Spending and the
Design of Institutions.
Our third witness is Robert Greenstein. Mr. Greenstein is
the founder and president of the Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities. He is considered an expert on the Federal budget
and a range of domestic policy issues. He has written numerous
reports, analyses, book chapters, op ed pieces and magazine
articles. Prior to founding the Center, Professor Greenstein
was administrator of the Food and Nutrition Service at the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. He was appointed by President
Clinton in 1994 to serve on the bipartisan Commission on
Entitlement and Tax Reform and headed the Federal budget policy
component of the transition team for President Obama. He is a
graduate of Harvard College, and has received honorary
doctorates from Tufts University and Occidental College.
Our fourth witness is Mr. Andrew Moylan. Mr. Moylan is vice
president of the Governmental Affairs for the National
Taxpayers Union, where he lobbies on Federal and State issues,
conducts policy research and analysis, assists in taxpayer
education efforts, and formulates reports and opinion pieces.
His writings have appeared in publications such as The Wall
Street Journal, The Washington Times, Investors Business Daily
and Forbes Magazine. Mr. Moylan is a graduate of University of
Michigan, and prior to joining NTU, worked at the Cato
Institute. Welcome, sir. I welcome all of you.
Each of the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety. I ask that each witness
summarize his or her testimony in 5 minutes or less. And to
help you stay within that timeframe, there is a timing light on
your table. When it switches from green to yellow you will have
1 minute to conclude your testimony, when the light turns red,
it signals that the witness' 5 minutes have expired. Before I
recognize the witnesses it is the tradition of the Subcommittee
that they be sworn. So please stand to be sworn in.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Franks. Be seated. I will now recognize our first
witness, the Honorable Bob Goodlatte for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE BOB GOODLATTE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Nadler, and Members of the Subcommittee. It is an honor to be
before my colleagues on the Judiciary Committee to talk about
this important issue. It is not a new issue. In fact, in 1798,
less than 10 years after our Constitution took effect, Thomas
Jefferson wrote to John Taylor and said ``I wish it were
possible to obtain a single amendment to our Constitution. I
mean, an additional article taking from the Federal Government
the power of borrowing.''
This is also not the first time a serious effort has been
made to pass a balanced budget amendment to the United States
Constitution. On March 2, 1995, a pivotal day in the history of
our country, the United States Senate failed by 1 vote to send
a balanced budget amendment to the States for ratification. The
amendment had passed the House by the requires two-thirds
majority, with more than 70 Democrats joining with almost all
the Republicans to provide 300 votes in favor of it. And the
Senate vote was the last legislative hurdle before ratification
by the States. If that amendment had passed and been ratified
by the States, 49 out of 50 of which have balanced budget
amendments of their own, then we would not be facing the fiscal
crisis we now face.
If that amendment had passed, then balancing the budget
would have been the norm rather than the exception over the
past 15 years, and we would have nothing like the annual
deficits and skyrocketing debt that we must address today.
The good news is that like 1995, this Congress is again
standing at a crossroads at this very moment. The decisions we
made today will steer the direction of our country for the next
15 years. And we have an opportunity now to take action to
ensure that 15 years from today, our children will face a much
brighter fiscal picture. We must not allow ourselves to miss
this opportunity.
Here's what we know, experience has proven time and again
that Congress cannot, for any significant length of time, rein
in excessive spending. The annual deficits and the resulting
debt continue to grow due to political pressures and dependency
on government programs. Budget plans that purport to cut
spending over long periods of time are great goals, but in
order to achieve the results these budgets promise, a majority
of fiscally conservative Members must be elected in perpetuity.
While it is one of my strongest desires that this will occur,
we simply cannot afford to bet our children and grandchildren's
future on this happening.
In order for Congress to be able to consistently make the
very tough decisions necessary to sustain fiscal responsibility
over the long term, Congress must have an external pressure to
force it to do so. I believe the most realistic chance we have
today to enact the institutional reform necessary is through a
balanced budget amendment to our Constitution.
Many Members of Congress have introduced balance budget
amendments to this Congress. I introduced two versions on the
first day of the 112th Congress. House Joint Resolution 2 is
the exact text that passed the House in 1995 and failed in the
Senate by 1 vote. This amendment requires that total annual
outlays not exceed total annual receipts. It also requires a
true majority of each Chamber to pass tax increases, and
requires a three-fifths majority to raise debt limit. This
legislation has limited exceptions for times of war.
House Joint Resolution 1, which I also introduced, goes
much further. In addition to provisions of H. Res. 2 it also
requires a three-fifths majority to raise taxes and imposes an
annual spending cap that prohibits spending from exceeding 20
percent of GDP. In the U.S. Senate, 47 Republican senators have
cosponsored a balanced budget amendment that is similar to
House Joint Resolution 1, which is a strong sign that the
Senate is ready to engage in debate on this subject.
While my preference is to pass the stronger version of the
balanced budget amendment, I want to be very clear in my
testimony today, the two-thirds majority requirement for
passing an amendment to the Constitution demands that we
achieve bipartisan support for any balanced budget amendment.
Our extraordinary fiscal crisis demands an extraordinary
solution. So we simply cannot afford to succumb to political
posturing on this issue at a point in time so critical to our
Nation's future. We must rise above that and move forward with
the strategy that includes legislation that will get at least
290 votes on the House floor.
So as we consider a balanced budget amendment, I encourage
the Members of this Committee to devote our effort to passing
the strongest balanced budget amendment that can garner two-
thirds of the House of Representatives.
We are at a crossroads in America. We can make the tough
choices and control spending, paving the way for a return to
surpluses and ultimately paying down the national debt. Or we
can allow big spenders to lead us further down the road of
chronic deficits and leave our children and grandchildren
saddled with debt that is not their own. The choice is ours,
the stakes are high and failure is not an option. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Franks. And thank you, Mr. Goodlatte.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goodlatte follows:]
Prepared Statement of the Honorable Bob Goodlatte,
a Representative in Congress from the State of Virginia
March 2, 1995 was a pivotal day in the history of our country. On
that day, the U.S. Senate failed by one vote to send a balanced budget
amendment to the states for ratification. The amendment had passed the
House by the required two-thirds majority previously and the Senate
vote was the last legislative hurdle before ratification by the states.
If that amendment had passed, then we would not be facing the
fiscal crisis we now face. If that amendment had passed, then balancing
the budget would have been the norm, rather than the exception over the
past 25 years and we would have nothing like the annual deficits and
skyrocketing debt that we must address today.
The good news is that like 1995, this Congress is again standing at
a crossroads at this very moment. The decisions we make today will
steer the direction of the country for the next 25 years. We have an
opportunity now to take action to ensure that 25 years from today, our
children will face a much brighter fiscal picture. We must not allow
ourselves to miss this opportunity.
Here's what we know: experience has proven time and again that
Congress cannot for any significant length of time rein in excessive
spending. The annual deficits and the resulting debt continue to grow
due to political pressures and dependency on government programs.
Budget plans that purport to cut spending over long periods of time
are great goals, but in order to achieve the results these budgets
promise, a majority of fiscally conservative Members must be elected
into perpetuity. While it is one of my strongest desires that this will
occur, we simply cannot afford to bet our children and grandchildren's
future on this happening.
In order for Congress to be able to consistently make the very
tough decisions necessary to sustain fiscal responsibility over the
long term, Congress must have an external pressure to force it to do
so.
I believe that the most realistic chance we have today to enact the
institutional reform necessary is through a balanced budget amendment
to our Constitution.
Many Members of Congress have introduced balanced budget amendments
this Congress. I introduced two versions on the first day of the 112th
Congress. H.J.Res. 2 is the exact text that passed the House in 1995
and failed in the Senate by one vote. This amendment requires that
total annual outlays not exceed total annual receipts. It also requires
a true majority of each chamber to pass tax increases and requires a
three-fifths majority to raise the debt limit. This legislation also
has limited exceptions for times of war.
H.J.Res. 1, which I also introduced, goes much further. In addition
to the provisions of H.J. Res. 2, it also requires a three-fifths
majority to raise taxes and imposes an annual spending cap that
prohibits spending from exceeding 20% of GDP.
In the U.S. Senate, 47 Republican Senators have cosponsored a
balanced budget amendment that is similar to H.J.Res. 1, which is a
strong sign that the Senate is ready to engage in debate on this
subject.
While my preference is to pass the stronger version of the balanced
budget amendment, I want to be very clear in my testimony today. The
two-thirds majority requirement for passing an amendment to the
Constitution demands that we achieve bipartisan support for any
balanced budget amendment.
Our extraordinary fiscal crisis demands an extraordinary solution,
so we simply cannot afford to succumb to political posturing on this
issue at a point in time so critical to our nation's future. We must
rise above that and move forward with a strategy that includes
legislation that will get at least 290 votes on the House Floor.
So, as we consider a balanced budget amendment, I encourage the
Members of this Committee to devote our effort to passing the strongest
balanced budget amendment that can garner two-thirds of the House of
Representatives.
We are at a crossroads in America. We can make the tough choices
and control spending, paving the way for a return to surpluses and
ultimately paying down the national debt, or we can allow big spenders
to lead us further down the road of chronic deficits and leave our
children and grandchildren saddled with debt that is not their own.
The choice is ours. The stakes are high. Failure is not an option.
__________

Mr. Franks. We will now recognize Professor Primo for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DAVID M. PRIMO, PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
AND THE MERCATUS CENTER

Mr. Primo. Thank you very much, Chairman Franks, Ranking
Member Nadler and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me here today to discuss whether the U.S. Constitution
should be amended to deal with the Nation's fiscal problems. As
Chairman Franks mentioned, I am an associate professor of
political science at the University of Rochester, and a senior
scholar at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University.
I have spent several years researching the mechanics of
budget rules and I have written a book Rules and Restraint, on
this subject. In my testimony this morning, I will establish
why attempts to create long-term fiscal reforms are likely to
fail in the absence of Constitutional budget rules.
The recent bipartisan attention to our Nation's fiscal
problems is heartening. Eelected officials in both parties have
proposed bold changes to the status quo. And finally voters are
paying attention. In a recent poll an astonishing 95 percent of
the respondents agreed that the Federal budget deficit is a
problem, and 81 percent agreed that action is needed now. So I
think this is a rare opportunity for meaningful, long-term
change. But I fear, I fear that there's a significant risk that
promises made today will not be kept tomorrow. The political
reality is that the hard cuts in any plan are usually deferred
until well into the future. So the likelihood of having long-
term agreements with durability, in the absence of some
enforcement mechanism, is unfortunately very small. I believe
that a Constitutional amendment can help us avoid making this a
wasted opportunity.
Today I will focus my testimony on three main points. First
I will establish why a Constitutional amendment is necessary.
Second, I will discuss three principles that Congress should
follow as it designs a Constitutional rule. Third, I will argue
that the benefits of Constitutional reform outweigh its
potential risks.
So first, why Constitutional reform? After all, there are
other ways to enforce budget rules. The House and the Senate
can create internal rules such as the PAYGO rule enacted in
2007. Congress and President could reach agreement on a statute
with enforcement mechanisms such as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings in
the 1980s. Well, the answer lies in Article 1, Section 5 of the
U.S. Constitution, and this is going to establish why Chamber-
based and even statutory rules are inferior to Constitutional
rules.
Article 1, Section 5 states plainly, ``Each House may
determine the rules of its proceedings.'' What this means is
that a current Congress cannot bind future Congresses.
Historically, Congress and the President have chosen to evade
or undo rules that proved to be inconvenient. PAYGO and Gramm-
Rudman-Hollings are just two examples.
Constitutional rules are different. Unlike internal or
statutory rules, Constitutional rules can only be changed after
several significant hurdles have been overcome. Constitutional
rules, therefore, provide the means to help keep Congress in
check and ensure that fiscal discipline is maintained even when
the temptation to abrogate agreements is hard to resist.
The promise of Constitutional rules as enforcement
mechanisms lies in this durability. But this durability is also
a peril. Bad rules can be locked in just as good rules can be.
And this brings me to my second main point. To prevent bad
rules from being locked into the Constitution, legislators
should follow three principles when constructing them: One, the
rule should be general and apply to the entire Federal budget;
a Constitutional rule is meant to be permanent, and as a
consequence, it should focus on total spending and not on some
programs at the exclusion of others.
Two, the rules should be precise to prevent the use of
loopholes or gimmicks. A Constitutional rule that leaves too
many implementation details up to the Congress is likely to be
eviscerated despite the best of intentions. Third, rules should
have limited, carefully constructed exit options. In order to
send a signal that Constitutional rules ought to be waived only
in extraordinary circumstances, the threshold for waiving the
rule should be very high, something like 90 percent of both
Chambers.
My final point addresses the critics of Constitutional
reform. Amending the Constitution is a serious, some might even
say drastic step for this country. Some critics argue that a
Constitutional amendment is unnecessary or too risky. Well, the
history of failed budget rules suggests that Constitutional
rules are necessary. As for alleged risks, such as increased
financial burdens for the States or the delegation of too much
power to the U.S. Supreme Court, these are speculative risks
and ought to be weighed against the very real danger that
Congress will not be able to abide by the rules it sets out for
itself.
In closing, Congress and the President have a rare
opportunity to enact meaningful budget reforms. Constitutional
rules, unlike statutory or internal rules, can provide the
enforcement mechanism that will help ensure that reforms to
entitlements and other spending areas are not undone by future
congresses.
Thank you again for inviting me to testify and I welcome
your questions.
Mr. Franks. Thank you Professor Primo very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Primo follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. We will now recognize Mr. Greenstein for 5
minutes.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT GREENSTEIN,
CENTER ON BUDGET AND POLICY PRIORITIES

Mr. Greenstein. Thank you for the invitation. And I should
start by saying I very much agree that our fiscal policy is on
an unsustainable course. However, a Constitutional balanced
budget amendment would, in my view, be a highly ill-advised way
to address that. It would require a balanced budget every year
regardless of the State of the economy, unless a super majority
of both Houses overrode that. And that would thereby require
the largest budget cuts or tax increases precisely when the
economy is weakest and would hold substantial risk of tipping
faltering economies into recessions and making recessions
longer and deeper.
When the economy weakens, revenue growth drops and revenues
may even contract while expenditures for programs like
unemployment insurance increase. Those revenue declines and
expenditure increases are temporary, but they are critical for
helping struggling economies to keep from falling into a
recession and from moderating the depth of recessions that do
occur.
When the economy weakens, consumers and businesses spend
less and that causes further job loss. The drop in tax
collections and increase in unemployment and other benefits
that occur automatically when the economy weakens cushions that
blow. It keeps the purchases of good and services from falling
even more, and that's why economists use the term automatic
stabilizers to describe these reductions in revenue and
increases in expenditure that occur automatically when the
economy weakens. These changes help stabilize the economy.
The Constitutional balanced budget amendment effectively
suspends the automatic stabilizers. That's the opposite course
from what sound economics should call for. That's why one of
the Nation's leading economists and budget experts, Bob
Reischauer, as the director of CBO in 1992 explained, and I am
quoting, ``If it worked, a Constitutional balanced budget
amendment would undermine the stabilizing role of the Federal
Government.'' It is why when a Constitutional amendment was
considered in the '90's, more than a thousand economists,
including 11 Nobel laureates issued a joint statement saying
the proposed amendment mandates perverse action in the face of
recessions.
To keep the budget balanced every year would aggravate
recessions and that is why this January when asked in a Senate
Budget Committee hearing, the current CBO director, Douglas
Elmendorf, sounded essentially the same warning. To be sure,
the balanced budget requirement could be waived by a vote of
three-fifths of the House and Senate, but that doesn't address
the problem. It is difficult to get three-fifths vote for
anything considering the paralysis that regularly marks the
Senate.
In addition, it may take months after a downturn begins
before sufficient data are available to convince three-fifths
of the Members of both Houses that a recession is underway. And
it is all too likely that even after evidence of a downturn is
clear, that a minority in the House or the Senate would hold a
waiver vote hostage to demands for concessions on other
matters. By the time a recession were recognized to be underway
and there were three-fifths in both Houses, if that could be
achieved at all, extensive economic damage could have been done
and hundreds of thousands, or even millions of additional jobs
lost.
The bottom line is the automatic stabilizers need to be
able to continue to work automatically to protect American
businesses and jobs. And the balanced budget amendment
effectively precludes that. I would also note that it would
make it harder than it already is to raise the debt limit by
requiring a three-fifths vote of both Chambers. Frankly, I
think that is playing with fire. It would heighten the risk of
a default which could damage our economy for years to come.
I don't have time to go into it in my opening remarks, but
the Constitutional balanced budget amendment could interfere
with the proper workings of Social Security and even the
Federal Reserve as well.
A final point I would make is that the fact that States
must balance their operating budgets even in recessions makes
it all the more important from the standpoint of economic
policy that the Federal Government not be subject to the same
stricture. That was theme of a recent article by the American
enterprises institute scholar Norman Ornstein.
And I will close by saying what Ornstein wrote. Ornstein
wrote, ``Few ideas are more seductive on the surface and more
destructive in reality than a Constitutional balanced budget
amendment.'' Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Greenstein follows:]

Prepared Statement of Robert Greenstein, President,
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
Thank you for the invitation to testify today. I am Robert
Greenstein, president of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a
policy institute that focuses both on fiscal policy and on policies
affecting low- and moderate-income Americans. We, like most others who
analyze fiscal policy developments and trends, believe that the
nation's fiscal policy is on an unsustainable course. As part of our
work, we have been analyzing proposed changes in budget procedures for
more than 20 years. We have conducted extensive analyses of proposals
to write a balanced-budget requirement into the Constitution, among
other proposals.
The purpose of changing our fiscal policy course is to strengthen
our economy over the long term and to prevent the serious economic
damage that would likely occur if the debt explodes in future decades
as a share of the economy. But we need to choose our fiscal policy
instruments carefully. We want to avoid ``destroying the village in
order to save it.''
The goal of a constitutional balanced budget amendment is to
address our long-term fiscal imbalance. Unfortunately, a constitutional
balanced budget amendment would be a highly ill-advised way to try to
do that and likely would cause serious economic damage. It would
require a balanced budget every year regardless of the state of the
economy, unless a supermajority of both houses overrode that
requirement. This is an unwise stricture that many mainstream
economists have long counseled against, because it would require the
largest budget cuts or tax increases precisely when the economy is
weakest. It holds substantial risk of tipping faltering economies into
recessions and making recessions longer and deeper. The additional job
losses would likely be very large.
When the economy weakens, revenue growth drops and revenues may
even contract. And as unemployment rises, expenditures for programs
like unemployment insurance--and to a lesser degree, food stamps and
Medicaid--increase. These revenue declines and expenditure increases
are temporary; they largely disappear as the economy recovers. But they
are critical for helping struggling economies to keep from falling into
a recession and for moderating the depth and length of recessions that
do occur.
When the economy weakens, consumers and businesses spend less,
which in turn causes further job loss. The drop in tax collections and
increases in unemployment and other benefits that occur automatically
when the economy weakens cushions the blow, by keeping purchases of
goods and services from falling more. That is why economists use the
term ``automatic stabilizers'' to describe the automatic declines in
revenues and automatic increases in UI and other benefits that occur
when the economy turns down; these actions help to stabilize the
economy.
A constitutional balanced budget amendment, however, effectively
suspends the automatic stabilizers. It requires that federal
expenditures be cut or taxes increased to offset the effects of the
automatic stabilizers and prevent a deficit from occurring--the
opposite course from what sound economic policy calls for.
Over the years, leading economists have warned of the adverse
effects of a constitutional balanced budget amendment. For example, in
Congressional testimony in 1992, Robert Reischauer--then director of
the Congressional Budget Office and one of the nation's most respected
experts on fiscal policy--explained: ``[I]f it worked [a constitutional
balanced budget amendment] would undermine the stabilizing role of the
federal government.'' Reischauer noted that the automatic stabilizing
that occurs when the economy is weak ``temporarily lowers revenues and
increases spending on unemployment insurance and welfare programs. This
automatic stabilizing occurs quickly and is self-limiting--it goes away
as the economy revives--but it temporarily increases the deficit. It is
an important factor that dampens the amplitude of our economic
cycles.'' Under the constitutional amendment, he explained, these
stabilizers would no longer operate automatically.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Statement of Robert D. Reischauer before the House Budget
Committee, May 6, 1992.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, when a constitutional balanced budget amendment was
under consideration in 1997, more than 1,000 economists including 11
Nobel laureates issued a joint statement that said, ``We condemn the
proposed `balanced-budget' amendment to the federal Constitution. It is
unsound and unnecessary. . . . The proposed amendment mandates perverse
actions in the face of recessions. In economic downturns, tax revenues
fall and some outlays, such as unemployment benefits, rise. These so-
called ``built-in stabilizers' limit declines of after-tax income and
purchasing power. To keep the budget balanced every year would
aggravate recessions.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ This statement was issued on January, 30, 1997.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More recently, in January 2011, the current CBO director, Douglas
Elmendorf, sounded a similar warning when asked about a constitutional
balanced budget amendment at a Senate Budget Committee hearing.
Elmendorf observed:

``Amending the Constitution to require this sort of balance
raises risks . . . [t]he fact that taxes fall when the economy
weakens and spending and benefit programs increase when the
economy weakens, in an automatic way, under existing law, is an
important stabilizing force for the aggregate economy. The fact
that state governments need to work . . . against these effects
in their own budgets--need to take action to raise taxes or cut
spending in recessions--undoes the automatic stabilizers,
essentially, at the state level. Taking those away at the
federal level risks making the economy less stable, risks
exacerbating the swings in business cycles.'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Federal Service, Transcript of Senate Budget Committee hearing,
January 27, 2011.

Proponents of a constitutional amendment likely will respond to
these admonitions by noting that the proposed constitutional amendment
would allow the balanced-budget requirement to be waived by a vote of
three-fifths of the House and the Senate. That, however, does not
address this problem. It is difficult to secure three-fifths votes for
anything; consider the paralysis that marks the work of the Senate.
Moreover, it may take months after a downturn begins before sufficient
data are available to convince three-fifths of the members of both
houses of Congress that a recession is underway. Furthermore, it is all
too likely that even after the evidence for a downturn is clear, a
minority in the House or Senate would hold a wavier vote hostage to
demands for concessions on other matters (such as new, permanent tax
cuts). By the time a recession were recognized to be underway and
three-fifths votes were secured in both chambers, if such support could
be obtained at all, extensive economic damage could have been done and
hundreds of thousands or millions of additional jobs unnecessarily
lost.
The bottom line is that the automatic stabilizers need to continue
to be able to work automatically to protect American businesses and
workers. The balanced budget amendment precludes that.
Nor is a recession the only concern. Consider the savings and loan
crisis of the 1980s, or the financial meltdown of the fall of 2008. A
constitutional balanced budget amendment would have hindered swift
federal action to rescue the savings and loan industry or to rapidly
put the Troubled Assets Relief Program in place. In both cases, history
indicates that federal action helped save the economy from what
otherwise likely would have been far more dire problems.
Moreover, the federal government provides deposit insurance for
accounts of up to $250,000; this insurance--and the confidence it
engenders among depositors--is critical to the sound functioning of our
financial system so that we avoid panics involving a run on financial
institutions, as occurred in the early 1930s. A constitutional
prohibition of any deficit spending (unless and until a supermajority
of both houses of Congress voted to authorize it) could seriously
weaken the guarantee that federal deposit insurance provides. That is a
risk we should not take.
These are illustrations of why fiscal policy should not be written
into the Constitution.
A parallel problem is that the proposed constitutional amendment
would make it even harder than it already is to raise the debt limit,
by requiring a three-fifths vote of both the House and Senate to raise
the limit. This is playing with fire. It would heighten the risk of a
federal government default. A default would raise our interest costs
and could damage the U.S. economy for years to come.
Mistaken Analogies to States and Families
Proponents of a constitutional amendment sometimes argue that
states and families must balance their budgets every year and the
federal government should do so, too. But statements that the
constitutional amendment would align federal budgeting practices with
those of states and families are not accurate.
While states must balance their operating budgets, they can borrow
to finance their capital budgets--to finance roads, schools, and other
projects. Most states do so. States also can build reserves during good
times and draw on them in bad times without counting the drawdown from
reserves as new spending that unbalances a budget.
Families follow similar practices. They borrow--they take out
mortgages to buy a home or student loans to send a child to college.
They also draw down savings when times are tight, with the result that
their expenditures in those periods exceed their current incomes.
But the proposed constitutional amendment would bar such practices
at the federal level. The total federal budget--including capital
investments--would have to be balanced every year, with no borrowing
allowed for infrastructure or other investments that can boost future
economic growth. And if the federal government ran a surplus one year,
it could not draw it down the next year to help balance the budget.
I would also note that the fact that states must balance their
operating budgets even in recessions makes it all the more important
from the standpoint of economic policy that the federal government not
be subject to the same stricture. American Enterprise Institute analyst
Norman Ornstein addressed this matter in a recent article, where he
wrote: ``Few ideas are more seductive on the surface and more
destructive in reality than a balanced budget amendment. Here is why:
Nearly all our states have balanced budget requirements. That means
when the economy slows, states are forced to raise taxes or slash
spending at just the wrong time, providing a fiscal drag when what is
needed is countercyclical policy to stimulate the economy. In fact, the
fiscal drag from the states in 2009-2010 was barely countered by the
federal stimulus plan. That meant the federal stimulus provided was
nowhere near what was needed but far better than doing nothing. Now
imagine that scenario with a federal drag instead.'' \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Norman Ornstein, ``Four Really Dumb Ideas That Should Be
Avoided,'' Roll Call, January 26, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.J. Res. 1 Raises Additional Issues
The foregoing concerns apply to all versions of the balanced budget
amendment that have been introduced. Some versions of the balanced
budget amendment, such as H.J. Res 1, raise additional serious
concerns, because they would write into the Constitution new
prohibitions against raising any revenues--including closing wasteful
tax loopholes--to help balance the budget and also would prohibit
federal expenditures in any year from exceeding a figure such as 20
percent of the Gross Domestic Product. These constitutional
prohibitions could be overridden only by supermajority votes in both
the House and the Senate.
This requirement for a supermajority to raise taxes would be
extremely unsound. It would protect what President Reagan's former
chief economic advisor, Harvard economist Martin Feldstein, has called
the biggest area of wasteful government spending in the federal
budget--what economists call ``tax expenditures'' and Alan Greenspan
has called ``tax entitlements.''
In 2010, tax expenditures amounted to $1.1 trillion, more than the
cost of Medicare and Medicaid combined (which was $719 billion), Social
Security ($701 billion), defense ($689 billion, including expenditures
in Iraq and Afghanistan), or non-defense discretionary spending ($658
billion, including expenditures from the Recovery Act). Many of these
tax expenditures are fully the equivalent of government spending. Let
me use child care as an example.
If you are low- or moderate-income, you may get a federal subsidy
to help cover your child care costs, and the subsidy is provided
through a spending program. If you are higher on the income scale, you
still get a government subsidy that reduces your child care costs, but
it is delivered through the tax code, as a tax credit. (Moreover, if
you are a low or modest income parent with child care costs, you likely
will miss out because the spending programs that provide child care
subsidies are not open ended and can only serve as many people as their
capped funding allows. By contrast, if you are a higher income
household--and there is no limit on how high your income can be--your
child care subsidy is guaranteed, because the tax subsidy you get
operates as an open-ended entitlement.) It is difficult to justify
making the tax-code subsidy sacrosanct and the program subsidy a
deficit-reduction target merely because one is delivered through a
``spending'' program and the other is delivered through the code.
And as the child care example illustrates, sharply distinguishing
between subsidies delivered through the tax code and those delivered
through programs on the spending side of the budget also has a
``reverse Robin Hood'' aspect. Low- and moderate-income households
receive most of their government assistance through spending programs;
affluent households receive most of their federal subsidies through tax
expenditures. Effectively barring reductions in tax expenditures from
contributing to deficit reduction is a prescription for placing the
greatest burden of deficit reduction on those who can least afford to
bear it.
The problems do not stop there. If it requires a supermajority to
raise any revenue, another likely outcome is a proliferation of tax
loopholes. New loopholes--including loopholes that Congress did not
intend but that high-priced tax lawyers and accountants have found ways
to create--could become untouchable once they appeared, because it
would require a supermajority of the House and Senate to raise any
revenue. It would become more difficult to close tax loopholes that
opened up, since special-interest lobbyists could seek to block such
action by preventing a supermajority in one chamber.
Finally, H.J. Res 1 would bar federal spending from exceeding 20
percent of GDP. To hit that level would require cuts of a draconian
nature. This can be seen by examining the austere budget that the House
of Representatives passed on April 15, sometimes referred to as the
Ryan budget.
Under that budget, Medicare would be converted to a voucher system
under which, the Congressional Budget Office has said, beneficiaries'
out-of-pocket health-care costs would nearly triple by 2030 (relative
to what those costs would be that year under the current Medicare
program). CBO also has written that under the Ryan budget, federal
Medicaid funding in 2030 would be 49 percent lower than it would be if
the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion were repealed but Medicaid
otherwise was unchanged. And funding for non-security discretionary
programs would be cut more than one-third below its real 2010 level.
Yet CBO says that under this budget, total federal spending would be
20\3/4\ percent of GDP in 2030, so it would breach the allowable limit
under H.J. Res 1. This illustrates the draconian nature of the proposed
20 percent-of-GDP requirement.
Another way to look at the 20 percent of GDP level is to examine
federal expenditures under Ronald Reagan. Under President Reagan, who
secured deep budget cuts at the start of his term, federal expenditures
averaged 22 percent of GDP. And that was at a time before any members
of the baby boom generation had retired and when health care
expenditures throughout the U.S. health care system (including the
private sector) were one-third lower as a share of GDP than they are
today. It also was before the September 11 terrorist attacks led
policymakers to create a new category of homeland security spending,
and before the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan led to increases in
veterans' health-care costs that will endure for a number of decades.
Conclusion
Policymakers need to begin to change our fiscal trajectory. As
various recent commissions have indicated, we need to stabilize the
debt as a share of GDP in the coming decade, and to keep it stable
after that (allowing for some fluctuation over the business cycle). But
establishing a balanced budget amendment in the Constitution would be
most unwise. It would likely exact a heavy toll on the economy and on
American businesses and workers in the years and decades ahead. It is
not the course the nation should follow.
__________

Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Greenstein. We now recognize Mr.
Moylan for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF ANDREW MOYLAN,
NATIONAL TAXPAYERS UNION

Mr. Moylan. Chairman Franks, Ranking Member Nadler, Members
of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
this morning on behalf of the American taxpayer regarding the
important questions surrounding a Constitutional amendment to
address the Federal deficit. My name is Andrew Moylan and I am
vice president of Government Affairs for the National Taxpayers
Union, a nonpartisan citizen organization founded in 1969 to
work for limited government at all levels.
I want to start with an old joke that our budget tells us
what we can't afford, but it sure doesn't keep us from buying
it. And unfortunately, that has been true of Washington for far
too long, and that's why for decades, NTU has been one of the
most powerful voices supporting durable, structural reforms to
our budget process to protect taxpayers. We believe that a
strong balanced budget amendment is not only necessary to
address our debt problems, but would provide the very life
blood that will restore and sustain the financial health of our
republic.
Our current situation is certainly bleak, and I want to
point out just three nuggets that I think are instructive about
just how bleak it is. First of all, under President Obama's
budget outline for this year, our borrowing this year alone
will be roughly equal to the entire Federal budget of 1982
after adjusting for inflation. To put this another way, again,
after adjusting for inflation, we are spending both the 2003
Federal budget, and the 1982 Federal budgets this year.
Second, in the President's plan the lowest single year
deficit we see in the coming decade is $607 billion, which is a
number higher in absolute terms than every yearly deficit from
1789 to 2008, and roughly equal in inflation adjusted terms to
our overspending in war mobilized 1944.
Finally, while many in Congress attributed the recent
explosion in spending due to crisis response due to a financial
meltdown in a resulting recession, the Federal Government has
actually run deficits in 44 of the last 50 years, which ought
to give pause even to the most diehard of Keynesians who
believe that surpluses should be the norm in most economic
growth cycles.
We have been told for the better part of 40 years now that
fiscal discipline would evolve by electing the right people,
while Republican and Democrats alike abuse the Nation's good
credit. We were told statutory measures were sufficient to
bring outlays under control, even as laws like Gramm-Rudman-
Hollings were trampled underfoot. We were told that our
foundational document shouldn't be cluttered by mundane matters
of budgeting as the tax, spend, and borrow culture in
Washington threatens to erode the foundations of prosperity for
people like my 2-year old daughter.
No one would argue that the Founders of our Nation lacked
political will. And even they could not balance the budget and
keep up payments on the national debt without a structure to
facilitate it. In 1786, the Articles in Confederation collapsed
in large part because of chaotic finances and it took a
structural change then, the drafting of a new Constitution. And
it will take a structural change today, the drafting of a
balanced budget amendment to ensure fiscal discipline.
While the views I express here are mine alone, I also come
today as the ambassador for more than 90 grassroots
organizations across the country that comprise the BBA Now
coalition. This collaborative effort, which you can read more
about at bbanow.org worked together to develop a commonsense
balanced budget amendment that has, at its core, three
principles: A balanced budget requirement, a super majority
threshold for passage of a tax increase, and a limitation on
Federal spending. There are several resolutions that have been
introduced that include these important pillars, including
Representative Goodlatte's H.J.Res 1, Senator Hatch's S.J.Res.
3, and the so-called consensus BBA, introduced as H.J.Res. 56
by Representative Walsh, and S.J.Res. 10 by Senator Hatch and
his 46 Republican colleagues.
Opponents of a BBA often argue that it would leave Congress
unable to respond to emergencies or recessions. But the truth
is that under most BBAs, Congress can enact whatever kind of
spending or taxation policies it chooses so long as the super
majority of its Members vote in the affirmative. And
furthermore, despite claims to the contrary, Congress is not
only capable of the achieving such super majorities but has
done so regularly when faced with truly urgent decisions. And
as an example, I would point to the trouble Troubled Asset
Relief Program which is surely as unpleasant a vote as has ever
been cast in Congress. And yet it passed with a three-fifths
majority in the House and with 74 votes in the United States
Senate.
It is also important to note that a BBA is not an economic
policy, and it is not a Federal budget. It is simply a set of
guidelines within which Congress can create a sustainable
economic policy and a Federal budget. If we failed to seize
this opportunity, the result could well be a painful debt
crisis that could begin not over the span of 6 months, but over
the course of 6 hours on a Sunday evening while you sit with
your family, and investors in Asian markets begin to stampede
away from American debt.
The President has said that he hopes his era will be
remembered as a time when ocean levels stopped rising, but to
modify that line slightly, I hope that we can look back on this
time together and say that this was the moment when the rise of
red ink began to stop and our budget began to heal. Thank you,
and I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Moylan follows:]

__________

Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Moylan, and I thank all of you
for testimony. I will now begin the questioning by recognizing
myself.
Now Mr. Moylan said I think this is perhaps a moment for us
to deal with things that we haven't thus far been able to deal
with. I don't often quote Shakespeare, but he said, ``There is
a tide in the affairs of men, which, taken at the flood, leads
on to fortune. But omitted all the voyage of their lives is
bound in shallows and in miseries, and on such a full sea we
now find ourselves afloat, and we must take the current when it
serves or lose our venture.''
And I think that this is a moment when the American people
are awake, they understand the significance of the issue. They
understand that the deficit they are dealing with may be able
to eventually destroy us in a way that no military power has
ever been able to be do. And I think this is the time for this
Congress to take a stand. I want to especially thank Mr.
Goodlatte for having the courage to come forward with this, and
I want to also reiterate on behalf of Mr. Jordan, his support
for this effort and the support of much of the RSC in Congress
in that vein.
I know that there are those who testified here today that
we need deficits to prime the pump, in times of low economic
activity, but I am convinced that if we prime the pump much
more with deficits, we are all going to fall in the well. And I
know that there are those who have said that there's an
automatic stabilizing factor with deficits, but as Mr. Moylan
pointed out, 44 of the last 50 budgets have been with deficits.
And it seems to me that the deficits are not stabilizing
us, but they are leading us to what has become one of the most
significant points of instability in our history.
So I am going to ask Mr. Goodlatte a question. The annual
Federal budget has been balanced only six times since 1960, and
yet many of the opponents of the balanced budget amendment seem
to be more concerned with ensuring that the government can run
deficits during recessions than addressing the major economic
downturn that will eventually occur if we don't get spending
under control.
And I would ask you, Mr. Goodlatte, do you believe that
either of your balanced budget amendment proposals are so
inflexible that Congress would not be able to address the short
term needs of the country during a recession or a critical
emergency?
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. No, I do not
believe that's the case. In fact, I think Mr. Moylan has just
cited a very good example with the TARP vote, very
controversial, very difficult vote, but passed with majorities
that exceed the requirements of even my stronger balanced
budget amendment.
So I don't think that's the case. I think the greater
concern is this, there is no automatic stabilizer that Mr.
Greenstein refers to. The evidence, of course, is in the few
times that the budget has been balanced in the last 50 years,
but it also defies Keynesian economic theory. An abbreviated
version of Keynes would say in difficult economic times, the
government will borrow money, spend that money to stimulate
economic activity which will create jobs in theory, which will,
in turn, result in increased revenues coming back to the
Federal Government which the Federal Government will then use
to pay back the money that it borrowed.
Obviously, that last part of Keynesian economic theory is
theory and not practice, and therein lies the problem and why I
think we need to have the strongest rule possible to restrain
the desires of Members of Congress representing people who have
desires to see government spend money on lots of different
things know that they have to live within their means. And
that's obviously the core purpose of a balanced budget.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, sir. I think history may bear
out that your efforts were not only timely, but may have been
critically important to the success of the country.
Professor Primo, it will take years for a balanced budget
amendment to be ratified and have the force of law, and that
leads to two questions. First, is the delay in an amendment
becoming effective a reason not to pursue the amendment? And
second, what should Congress do to control spending while we're
waiting for the enactment of a balanced budget amendment?
Mr. Primo. I believe that while we--it will take several
years to put into effect a Constitutional amendment, but that
doesn't mean that we can't take steps now to put us on the
track to abiding by that amendment when it goes into effect.
And right now the debate that's going on between the Congress
and the President over how to deal with the Nation's fiscal
problems, that debate should continue. And there should be an
agreement that's reached that takes on the difficult
entitlement issues and takes on some difficult tax issues.
There are reasonable positions on both sides of that issue, I
believe. And those two sides should come together to formulate
an agreement that will put us on the glide path toward abiding
by that Constitutional amendment when it comes into effect.
And the benefit of doing this is that it will send also a
very strong signal to the markets that the United States is
serious about fiscal reform. So the passage of the amendment
today or the process of beginning of the passage of the
amendment today is very important because of the signals it
sends to the markets as well as the spur it will give, I
believe, to the Congress and President to reach agreement on
fiscal reform.
Mr. Franks. Could I ask unanimous consent for 1 minute to
ask Mr. Moylan a question?
Mr. Nadler. By all means.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Moylan, some of the opponents of balanced
budget amendments argue that the Constitution is not the place
for budget rules, that it somehow would be an inappropriate
place to put a balanced budget requirement in the Constitution
itself. Can you address that?
Mr. Moylan. I think that it is precisely the place to lay
out what we see as sort of the rules of the road for how
Congress can budget moving forward. The Constitution is not the
place to enshrine specific policies; it's not the place to
enshrine what marginal tax rates will be or anything like that.
But laying out what the rules of the road are and establishing
what those guidelines are is extremely important to be able to
guide Congress in the direction that respects taxpayers and
respects the burdens that they have to pay and that ensures
that we can get to balance.
So I think that that's an objection that I find wanting a
little bit because we're not talking about enshrining any kind
of particular policy or any particular implication to a budget
or a program. I mean, all of that stuff is within the purview
of Congress once the amendment is passed.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, sir, I would now recognize the
Ranking Member for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I would start off by pointing out
that one of my objections to this amendment is that it
precisely does exactly what you just said it doesn't do. It
enshrines in Constitutional our particular views as economics
and the budget. It says it takes the view, for example, that we
ought to cut expenditures rather than increase taxes, that's
legitimate political debate. But it's a legitimate political
debate our grandchildren ought to be as free to have as we are
to have. Maybe we should increase taxes rather than reduce
expenditures, maybe the other way around. That's a decision
every generation should be able to make for itself.
And this amendment deliberately biases that by saying you a
need three-fifths vote to increase the debt limit. You need a
whole majority of those, not just persons voting, an
extraordinary majority to increase taxes.
Second, let me ask Mr. Goodlatte, and please answer quickly
because I have a number of questions for a lot of people. This
amendment demands a balanced budget by 2016. The House
Republican budget that we just passed that some people are
saying was rather Draconian in its cuts wouldn't get to a
balanced budget by 2040. In broad strokes, how would you
advance the balanced budget from 2040 beyond what the
Republican budget does in 2016, which would be necessitated by
this amendment?
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. I would direct to you
the House Republican Study Committee Budget which balances it
in 9 years.
Mr. Nadler. It's not 2016?
Mr. Goodlatte. No, we don't know it is 2016 because we
don't know how long the States will take to ratify this. But I
certainly am prepared to adjust that budget by accelerating
some spending.
Mr. Nadler. Let me ask you the second question. Most of the
States have balanced budget amendments; New York State adopted
it in 1847. But those amendments, like any rationale
corporation differentiate between the capital budget and an
operating budget. This does not necessitate, if there were that
we would never borrow money. If you never borrow money a family
wouldn't afford the house or the car, the corporation couldn't
invest, the Federal Government couldn't invest in long-term
investments. It makes no sense. How do you reply to that?
Mr. Goodlatte. As you know the Federal Government budgets
on an annual basis and it does not make expenditures well into
the future as it is now. So quite frankly, that certainly is
another alternative to consider, but given the fact that we
have a deficit--a debt that is now over $14 trillion, we have
got a lot of debt on the plate we have to work--I think it is
better to limit the----
Mr. Nadler. Let me just observe that any organization
whether it be a government or a corporation, et cetera, ought
to have some debt for long-term investments. If you want to
balance an ongoing expense budget, that's what most States do
and that's what a lot of corporations do. And you want to limit
the amount of the debt for long-term investments and not say
you should never borrow for it.
Mr. Greenstein, the basic theory behind this amendment is
that we're spending too much and we're--period. What is the
basic cause of the change? In 2000, the debate of the
presidential election between Bush and Gore was what should we
do with the anticipated $5.6 trillion deficit over the next 10
years--I'm sorry, what should we do with the anticipated 5.6
surplus then anticipated over the next 10 years? What turned
that into the huge deficits we have now?
Mr. Greenstein. We just issued a paper on this earlier this
week just using basically the Congressional Budget Office
analyses. There are really three main factors, one of the
largest factors were the costs including the extra interest, as
a result of 2001 and 2003 tax cuts. Another large factor were
additional expenditures that certainly weren't contemplated in
2001 for the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and related funding
for Homeland Security. We really didn't spend much on that
before----
Mr. Nadler. Tax cuts and the wars and Homeland Security?
Mr. Greenstein. And third big issue, of course, is the big
increase in the deficit that resulted as a result of the
biggest recession since the Great Depression.
Mr. Nadler. If we got unemployment down to 5 percent as it
was in 2007, what would that do to the size of our deficit?
Mr. Greenstein. Excuse me?
Mr. Nadler. If unemployment were gotten down to 5 percent
as it was in 2007 before the onset of the great recession, what
would that, by itself, do to the size of the deficit?
Mr. Greenstein. I don't have the figures in front of me,
the economic maybe it would reduce it a third, but we'd still
have very large deficits.
Mr. Nadler. It would reduce it by about a third. Let me ask
you, lastly, I saw a figure recently that as a percentage of
GDP, total taxation is now running at about 15 percent,
historically it has run 22, 23 percent, are those figures
correct?
Mr. Greenstein. Well, historically if you take a long
average it is in the 18 to 19 percent range. It is very low
now, that's a combination of the tax cuts but also the fact the
economy is so weak, whenever the economy weakens this much that
reduces revenues a share of the gross----
Mr. Nadler. And finally, my last question is the following:
I read this amendment and it says, no bill to--it says that the
Congress shall enforce and implement this article by
appropriate legislation. The President shall submit a budget
which shall be balanced in terms of anticipated revenues and
anticipated expenditures. Let's assume the President submitted
a budget under this amendment and he said we're going to cut
taxes and therefore revenue is going to go up. So my--or
because taxes are already cut I'm assuming this level of
revenues. The revenues are, in fact, much lower and the
expenditures are the same or higher. How would you enforce this
amendment if the estimates were off? And if Congress decided to
take wrong estimates either deliberately or not deliberately?
Mr. Greenstein. I don't think this is clear, two parts to
the answer is I read the wording of the Constitutional
amendment. It does say that estimates can be used in
determining whether the balanced budget requirement has been
met. The bigger issue is what happens if, due to factors in the
economy, whatever the factors would be, we're running a deficit
in a given year, it is clear in the estimates it is going to be
a deficit and the Congress and the President don't rein it in,
what happens? Do people have standing to go into court? Do the
courts or the President unilaterally? Who is empowered to take
the action to restore balance if the Congress and the President
don't pass legislation to do that? I don't think that's clear
how that would be enforced from the wording of the amendment.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Nadler, I wonder if I might be allowed
to answer the question.
Mr. Nadler. Please.
Mr. Goodlatte. First of all, the obvious answer it will be
enforced at the polls in the next election, but secondly.
Mr. Nadler. That hasn't seemed to work in the last 30
years, that's the whole point of your amendment.
Mr. Goodlatte. There is no such Constitutional requirement
or even a requirement in the law that we balance the budget.
But the second thing is that most States that have this
requirement also have additional budget rules that may require
the governor of the State to step in and make adjustments to
expenditure in the middle of the budget process in order to
bring it back into balance, that certainly is what is done in
Virginia, and governors of both parties have to step in and
make some tough decisions in the middle of process if the
projections don't match up with the initial budget.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Nadler. And I would now
recognize Mr. Scott for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, this
entire discussion is interesting because you get down to the
bottom line if we're going to balance the budget, it is going
to require some tough votes, whatever the mechanism is. And
many of them will be career-ending votes. In 1993, we passed a
budget by the thinnest of margins. One vote could have
switched, would have ruined it in the House, the Vice President
had to vote in the Senate. We received zero Republican votes in
the House or Senate. There were tough votes. As a matter of
fact, when the 218th vote was cast in the House, Marjorie
Margolies-Mezvinsky was greeted by a chorus of cheers from the
Republican side, bye-bye Marjorie. That vote was used to defeat
her in the next election, along with 50 Democratic colleagues
who lost their seats primarily because of those tough results.
Those votes resulted a record number of jobs, record
economy as measured by the Dow Jones industrial average. The
Republicans tried to dismantle that plan in 1995. President
Clinton let the government get shut down rather than sign those
bills. The result was not only did we balance the budget, we
were on course to paying off the entire national debt by 2008.
Had we not fought two wars without paying for it, prescription
drugs without paying for it, tax cuts without paying for it. We
would have paid off the national debt by 2008. We'd owe no
money to China, Japan, Saudi Arabia. We would have paid off the
entire debt held by the public. In fact, when Greenspan was
testifying in early 2001 he was asking questions like what
happens if you pay off the national debt too quickly, what
happens if there are no government bonds, what happens to
investments and long-term interest rates?
In 2001, we eliminated PAYGO which we had, which meant if
you wanted to do a tax cut, you'd have to pay for it with
spending cuts. If you wanted to increase spending, you'd have
to raise taxes to pay for it, PAYGO. We eliminated PAYGO,
passed the tax cuts and everything else and went directly into
the ditch; instead of paying off the debt we doubled the debt.
Now at some we are going to have to actually vote for tax
increases and/or spending cuts to get the budget under balance.
This is not magic, it is arithmetic. Now if we look at the
proposed amendments, one of the questions that's been responded
to is, we had all these questions responded to. One question
that was not asked is how this proposal will actually help
balance the budget?
Now we have been debating the title, but not really the
provisions. The provisions of the bill basically, not just
dismiss H.R. 1, because that has a super majority to increase
taxes, that will obviously make it more difficult to balance
the budget. But all of them have--if you're going to pass an
unbalanced budget, you require a 60, a three-fifths vote.
The question is will that help or hurt passing a severe
meaningful deficit reduction plan? Now the Clinton budget never
got anywhere close to 60 percent, Ryan's budget which is the
one the House passed, didn't get anywhere close to 60 percent.
If you needed 60 percent those budgets wouldn't have passed.
Now we have heard examples of how you do get to 60 percent, you
can pass an $800 billion TARP, spending. You can pass an $800
billion tax cut from last December, that got 60 percent. That's
obviously not the direction we need to go.
My question is, how is a requirement of a super majority
going to help you get people to cast career-ending votes? Would
it be easier to pass the Ryan plan, for example, with a simple
majority, or a three-fifths vote in both the House and the
Senate?
Mr. Greenstein, can you explain to me whether it would be
more likely or less likely that a plan like Ryan's would pass
when you increase the number of votes required?
Mr. Greenstein. I think clearly less likely. In my view,
super majorities requirements in some States, California as an
example, have really led to gridlock and they have made it
harder for a policymakers to make the very tough decisions that
are needed. We're going to need very tough decisions in the
years ahead, whether it is a Constitutional amendment or not,
the Constitutional amendment, I think, everyone on the panel
agrees is, in itself, something that changes a program or
raises a tax.
Mr. Scott. Let me ask a follow-up question on that. There
is no proposal on the table, the colleague from Virginia
mentioned the Republican Study Group which balances the budget
in 9 years. That budget to pass would require what percentage
under this proposal?
Mr. Goodlatte. It would require a majority vote.
Mr. Scott. No, it would require the Republican majority--
may I have an additional minute, Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Franks. Yes.
Mr. Scott. The Republican Study Committee Balances the
budget in 9 years would require a three-fifths vote in the
House and Senate to pass.
Mr. Goodlatte. No, it would require majority vote because
it did not contain tax increases?
Mr. Scott. It's an unbalanced budget this year.
Mr. Goodlatte. Correct, correct.
Mr. Scott. And you're going to pass an unbalanced budget
this year.
Mr. Goodlatte. Again, as I said before, it presumes that
you have--the budget hasn't been balanced in more than a
decade, so you've got to have a glide path; there's no question
about that.
Mr. Scott. Right. But the glide path requires a three-
fifths vote to enact.
Mr. Goodlatte. No, not until this it ratified.
Mr. Scott. Right, exactly. If the balanced budget amendment
were in effect, the Republican Study Committee budget, it would
take a three-fifths vote to pass.
Mr. Goodlatte. If the balanced budget amendment were in
effect, that's correct, but only if we hadn't been doing the
work together to get to a balanced budget----
Mr. Scott. But the point is that requiring a three-fifths
vote to pass the Republican Study Committee's budget would make
it more difficult to pass rather than less likely.
Is there anything in the three-fifths requirement that
makes it more likely that a fiscally responsible budget would
be enacted rather than a fiscally irresponsible budget? You
didn't have any trouble getting three-fifths to pass an $800
billion tax cut late last year.
Mr. Goodlatte. But we didn't balance the budget.
Mr. Scott. It made it worse, it made it worse. And you got
three-fifths for that.
Mr. Goodlatte. But that would be contrary to this law.
Mr. Scott. Where is it in the law that prefers a fiscally
responsible--once you get to three-fifths--and any budget that
is going to pass under this, any budget this year, if this was
the law, any budget that would pass would require three-fifths,
my question is, why is it more likely that it would be fiscally
responsible requiring three-fifths or ``Katie, bar the door''
Democrats get their spending, Republicans get their tax cuts,
and we are further in the ditch.
Mr. Goodlatte. Because you've got to go face the voters
after you've done that.
Mr. Scott. We faced the voters after we cut taxes $800
billion. I don't see anybody that got any pain for putting us
$800 billion worse in the ditch last December than we are
today; who's suffering from that?
Mr. Goodlatte. There was no requirement that the budget be
balanced, that's the difference.
Mr. Scott. And there's no requirement that the budget be
balanced under any of these proposals. The only requirement is
it takes three-fifths to pass the budget.
Mr. Goodlatte. That's correct. But I think it would have
tremendous pressure on individual Members to go home and
explain why they voted for something that didn't balance when
there was an alternative offer that did balance and they didn't
vote for it.
Mr. Scott. You have that today. You have that today.
Mr. Moylan. Mr. Chairman, may I respond briefly to that? I
think that the three-fifths supermajority requirement, we view
that as a bulwark against what we view as irresponsible tax
increases. And part of the reason that we hold that view is
that even if you assume extension of the 2001/2003 tax cuts,
even if you assume patching of the AMT, revenues will get back
to historical average levels by about the end of this decade.
And so eventually we are going to get back to average levels of
revenue even if we again assume extension of the policies that
I know you're not a supporter of. And so we see this as really
spurring the needed spending restraint to be able to bring the
budget back to balance.
Mr. Scott. You're absolutely right, I don't support those
provisions. I support a budget that is $1.3 trillion better
than the Republican budget we passed. As a primary author of
the Congressional Black Caucus budget that let the tax cuts for
the wealthy expire and we came up with revenues to be able to
extend, by paying for them, the tax cuts under $250,000. We
extended them, but we paid for them. And we ended up $1.3
trillion better than the Republican budget without repealing
Medicare.That's what I support.
Mr. Moylan. I think there's no question that we can balance
the budget at a higher level of spending; it requires a much
higher level of taxation. And I don't have the numbers in front
of me, but my recollection of a lot of the alternative budgets
that came from the Democratic side is that we're talking about
balancing the budget at 23, 24, 25 percent of GDP. The question
is whether or not that's advisable. I would submit that it's
not.
Mr. Scott. There is a difference between a tax limitation,
limiting taxes and balancing the budget. If the society
decides, for example, that it wants universal health care and
society is willing to pay for it as the health care reform did,
we had significant additional spending and we more than paid
for it.
Now unfortunately, under this proposal, you can pass a new
spending plan with a simple majority, but then turn around and
can't pay for it because you can't get the supermajority to pay
for it. That's how you end up in the ditch.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired. But Professor
Primo, did I hear you would like to make a response?
Mr. Primo. Yes, I would. Thank you.
One important thing that a Constitutional amendment will do
is create a norm that used to be present in the Congress: that
budgets ought to be balanced. The presumption of a
Constitutional amendment that requires a balanced budget or
that limits spending to a certain percent of GDP is that that
is what is expected of Members of Congress. Deficits would no
longer be the norm, but would have to become the exception. And
so I believe that having a Constitutional amendment in place
will send a very different signal to voters than the current
status quo, which is that deficits are acceptable.
Mr. Scott. How do the provisions--not just the title, how
do the provisions of the Constitutional amendment actually help
get to a balanced budget?
Mr. Primo. If I may respond, they would help to get to a
balanced budget because elected officials would be able to go
back to their districts and say I had to cast this tough vote
because the Constitution requires fiscal responsibility, and
that is a very different message. So right now you go back to
your districts and you say, ``Oh, I had to make a cut to this
program, but look, we got some fiscal responsibility out of
it.'' Voters are going to say, but you cut my program.
Mr. Franks. The gentleman's time has expired.
I would just say that we do have a fairly good laboratory
to answer some of these questions; that is, in Arizona we have
a balanced budget amendment, and it has, even in difficult
moments like this, allowed us to balance our budget and improve
our economy. It has worked very well in the States, and we do
that all the time. So some of these doomsday, and when they
talk about tax cuts being the problem, that is creating
increased revenues.
But in the interest of fairness, without objection, I will
give the gentleman one more minute.
Mr. Scott. I will just ask a question about Arizona. You
said you have a balanced budget. Does that include capital
expenditures? You have to balance the total budget, as these
amendments would, all outlays and all revenues; or does your
Constitutional amendment to balance the budget allow you to
borrow money for capital expenditures like all the other----
Mr. Franks. I just answered the gentleman's question. There
are some efforts on the part of the legislature to try to
circumvent that, but yes, we have to balance the budget on
capital expenditures, too. But there are sometimes leasing
programs to try to get around that, and I think the gentleman's
point is well taken.
But in Arizona and a lot of other States who have balanced
budget amendments that are not only not able to deficit spend,
but they are not able to print money and they are not able to
do a lot of other things that the Federal Government does, it
has worked very well. Arizona was hit harder than just about
anyone in this recession, and yet we are coming out of it very
effectively, the United States isn't. And the primary
difference is the fact that we have a balanced budget, we have
no alternative.
But with that, I want to be fair, but if----
Mr. Greenstein. Could I have one sentence?
Mr. Franks. Please.
Mr. Greenstein. All I want to say is, what is the key goal?
If the key goal is fiscal responsibility--and we all agree that
requires tough choices, regardless of your views on what those
choices should be--then I would urge not to erect new
supermajority requirements which will make it harder, not
easier, to get the tough choices made.
Mr. Franks. Mr. Moylan, you have a last word?
Mr. Moylan. I would just respond to Mr. Scott's statement
that what would incentivize a balanced budget here is, first of
all, simply the requirement that the budget be balanced, and
second of all, we view these supermajority requirements again
as these backstops against tax hikes. You could theoretically
balance the budget by raising taxes. You would have to convince
more of your colleagues to be able to do that than if you were
to choose to do so through spending restraint. I view that as a
feature of it, you may view it as a bust. But the requirement
of the balanced budget is the most important portion of it
because it requires that you square income and outlays, and the
question is how do you get to that?
Mr. Franks. I don't know how to add anything more to that
and would concur with that.
Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Just very briefly. There is no requirement in
these that the budget be balanced. You need a 60 percent vote
to pass any budget that is pending in Congress today. There is
no requirement to balance the budget.
Mr. Franks. Well, with that, I am just saying that perhaps
there is an alternative here, and that is to repeal the law of
mathematics. So let's work on that.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit to the Chair additional written questions for the
witnesses, which we will forward and ask the witnesses to
respond as promptly as they can so that their answers may be
made part of the record.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
within which to submit any additional materials for inclusion
into the record.
And with that, again I thank the witnesses, thank the
Members for the lively discussion, and observers. And this
hearing is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


