- FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 16, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-85

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-188                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 16, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3

WITNESS

The Honorable Robert S. Mueller, III, Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation
Oral Testimony.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Post-Hearing Questions from the Honorable Robert S.
Mueller, III, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation........    57

FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 16, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Lamar Smith
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Smith, Sensenbrenner, Coble,
Gallegly, Chabot, Pence, King, Franks, Gohmert, Poe, Reed,
Griffin, Marino, Gowdy, Ross, Adams, Quayle, Conyers, Scott,
Watt, Jackson Lee, Waters, Quigley, Chu, Deutch, and Wasserman
Schultz.
Staff present: (Majority) Sean McLaughlin, Chief of Staff
and General Counsel; Allison Halataei, Deputy Chief of Staff/
Parliamentarian; Crystal Jezierski, Counsel; Arthur Radford
Baker, Counsel; (Minority) Perry Appelbaum, Staff Director and
Chief Counsel; and Sam Sokol, Counsel.
Mr. Smith. The Judiciary Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare
recesses of the Committee at any time.
And we welcome everyone here today, Members, and
particularly the Director of the FBI, Director Mueller, and we
appreciate his willingness to testify today.
I am going to recognize myself for an opening statement,
then recognize the Ranking Member for an opening statement.
Welcome, Director Mueller. I very much appreciate your
being here today. Apparently this will be your last appearance
before the House Judiciary Committee as FBI Director. We all
thank you for your almost 10 years of dedicated public service.
Director Mueller began his tenure as FBI Director only days
before the September 11th terrorist attacks. Since then, he has
led the bureau through an ever-changing threat environment
requiring a historic transformation of the agency.
Under his leadership, the FBI has successfully thwarted
numerous terrorist plots, including plots to bomb New York's
subway system, to destroy skyscrapers in Texas and Illinois,
and to kill dozens of innocent Americans at a Christmas tree
lighting ceremony in Oregon last December.
Terrorists remain intent on carrying out their plots to
destroy America. Just last month, a 20-year-old student from
Saudi Arabia was arrested in my home State of Texas for
attempting to use weapons of mass destruction.
The terrorist threat may have changed, but it has not
diminished. Our counter-terrorism laws must keep pace with the
evolving threats.
It is imperative that Congress reauthorize the expiring
provisions of the PATRIOT Act. Section 206 roving authority,
section 215 business records, and the lone wolf definition are
critical to apprehending terrorists before they strike.
Unfortunately, the myths surrounding the PATRIOT Act often
overshadow the truth. As Congress considers the reauthorization
of these provisions, we must set aside fiction and focus on the
facts. These are key investigative tools of the FBI. The most
recent example may be that section 215 business records
authority was used to thwart last month's plot in Texas.
In the last decade, dramatic advances in technology have
provided Americans with a wide variety of communication and
research devices, but these new technologies have also enabled
terrorists, spies, and criminals to operate with greater
anonymity and less chance of detection.
As a result, our law enforcement agencies may increasingly
find themselves in the dark. Simply put, the technical
capability of law enforcement agencies needs to keep pace with
new technologies.
Congress initially addressed this growing gap in 1994 when
it passed legislation enabling law enforcement agents to
conduct court-approved electronic surveillance. Since then,
technology has continued to progress and we have new
communication devices, new services, and new modes of
communication. Yet, Federal law has not kept pace and does not
address the contemporary challenge that law enforcement
agencies face when attempting to intercept electronic
communications.
``Going dark'' is not about expanding the legal authority
to conduct surveillance. It is about the inability to collect
information that a judge has already authorized.
Congress must develop a solution that balances privacy
interests, ensures continued innovation, and secures networks
from unauthorized interceptions.
Technology also has facilitated a dramatic increase in the
proliferation and exchange of child pornography. Child
pornography was almost eradicated in America by the 1980's.
Unfortunately, the Internet has reversed this accomplishment.
Today pedophiles can purchase, view, or exchange this
disturbing material with near impunity. In the last 12 years,
electronic service providers have reported almost 8 million
images and videos of sexually exploited children. Child
pornography on the Internet may be our fastest growing crime,
increasing an average of 150 percent a year. That must stop.
Better data retention will assist law enforcement officers with
the investigation of child pornography and other Internet-based
crimes.
When investigators develop leads that might save a child or
apprehend a pornographer, their efforts should not be
frustrated because vital record were destroyed. Every piece of
discarded information could be the footprint of a child
predator.
I look forward to hearing from Director Mueller today on
these and other issues of importance to the FBI and the
country.
That concludes my opening statement.
And the gentleman from Michigan, the Ranking Member of the
Judiciary Committee, is recognized for his opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Smith.
Of course, top of the morning to our soon-to-be-departing-
this-year Director Mueller.
We almost need a closed door session because some of the
things we would like to talk about--well, maybe we might want
to have one before you leave. It is not until September anyway.
The things that are uppermost in my mind are these. I would
like to talk with you about your experiences here nearly a
decade, and actually longer, in the FBI but as its leader
nearly a decade. I am interested in how we can reduce gun
violence in this country. I am deeply concerned about how we
can more effectively control the drug epidemic in this country.
And I am very interested in how we can improve and continue to
improve our relations with the Muslim citizens in this country.
And so I look forward to your presentation and your review.
We have had a good relationship with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation under your leadership. You have been available to
us. We have been candid in our discussions across the years.
Well, I guess it was a predecessor of yours that required that
we put term limits on your job, but I join the Chairman in
welcoming you here and I am sure all of the Members of the
Judiciary Committee do as well.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
Without objection, other Members' opening statements will
be made a part of the record.
We are pleased to welcome today's witness, Robert S.
Mueller, III, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Director Mueller was nominated by President George W. Bush and
began his term as the sixth director of the FBI on September 4,
2001.
Director Mueller has a long and distinguished record of
public service. Early in his career he served for 12 years as a
prosecutor in the United States Attorney offices. After serving
as a partner at the Boston law firm of Hill and Barlow,
Director Mueller returned to the Justice Department in 1989,
serving first as an assistant to the Attorney General. The
following year, he took charge of its Criminal Division.
In 1998, Director Mueller was named United States Attorney
in San Francisco, and he held that position until 2001.
Director Mueller is a graduate of Princeton University,
earned his Master's degree at New York University and his law
degree from the University of Virginia School of law.
He is also a decorated Marine, having received the Bronze
Star, two Navy commendation medals, the Purple Heart, and the
Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry.
The witness's written statement will be made a part of the
record in its entirety, and Director Mueller, once again, we
welcome you today and look forward to your statement.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE ROBERT S. MUELLER, III, DIRECTOR,
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

Mr. Mueller. Good morning to you, Chairman Smith, Ranking
Member Conyers, and Members of the Committee. And I thank you
for the opportunity to appear here today before you.
Today the Bureau faces unprecedented and increasingly
complex challenges. We must identify and stop terrorists before
they launch attacks against our citizens. We must protect our
Government, businesses, and critical infrastructure from
espionage and from the potentially devastating impact of cyber-
based attacks. We must root out public corruption by white-
collar crime, organized crime, stop child predators, and
protect civil rights. We must also ensure that we are building
a structure that will carry the FBI into the future by
continuing to enhance our intelligence capabilities, improve
our business practices and training, and develop the next
generation of Bureau leaders. We must do all of this while
respecting the authority given to us under the Constitution,
upholding civil liberties and the rule of law.
The challenges of carrying out this mission have never been
greater, as the FBI has never faced a more complex threat
environment than it does today. Over the past year, the FBI has
faced an extraordinary range of threats from terrorism,
espionage, cyber attacks, and traditional crime. Let me discuss
just a few examples.
Last October, there were the attempted bombings on air
cargo flights bound for the United States from Yemen, directed
by al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula. And last May there was
the attempted car bombing in Times Square, aided by TTP in
Pakistan. These attempted attacks demonstrate how al-Qaeda and
its affiliates still have the intent to strike inside the
United States.
In addition, there were a number of serious terrorist plots
by lone offenders. Their targets ranged from a Martin Luther
King Day march in Spokane, Washington to a Christmas tree
lighting ceremony in Portland, Oregon to subway stations in
Washington, D.C., and motives and methods of these plots,
although varied, make these some of the most difficult threats
to combat.
The espionage threat persisted as well. Last summer, there
were the arrests of 10 Russian spies known as illegals who
secretly blended into American society in order to
clandestinely gather information for Russia.
And we continue to make significant arrests for economic
espionage as foreign interests seek to steal controlled
technologies. The cyber intrusion at Google last year
highlighted the potential danger from a sophisticated Internet
attack. Along with the countless other cyber incidents, these
attacks threatened to undermine the integrity of the Internet
and to victimize the businesses and people who rely on it.
In our criminal investigations, we continue to uncover
billion dollar corporate and mortgage frauds that weaken the
financial system and victimize investors, homeowners, and
ultimately taxpayers.
We also exposed health care scams involving false billings
and fake treatments that endangered patients and fleeced
Government health care programs.
The extreme violence across our southwest border continues
to impact the United States, as we saw the murders last March
of American consulate workers in Juarez, Mexico and the
shooting last month of two U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement agents in Mexico.
And throughout the year, there were numerous corruption
cases that undermined the public trust and countless violent
gang cases that continue to take innocent lives and endanger
our communities.
As these examples demonstrate, the FBI's mission to protect
the American people has never been broader and demands on the
FBI have never been greater. And to carry out these
responsibilities, we need Congress' continued support more than
ever.
Let me briefly discuss two areas where Congress could help
the FBI with its mission.
First, we do encourage Congress to reauthorize the three
FISA tools that are due to expire later this spring. The roving
intercept authority is necessary for our national security
mission and provides us with tools similar to what we use in
criminal cases already. The business records authority permits
us to obtain key documents and data in our national security
cases, including our most serious terrorism matters. And the
lone wolf provision is important to combat the growing threat
from lone offenders and homegrown radicalization. These
authorities, all of which are conducted with full court review
and approval, are critical to our national security.
Second, the FBI and other Government agencies, as the
Chairman alluded to, are now facing a growing gap in our
ability to execute court-approved intercepts of certain modern
communications technologies. We call this the problem of
``going dark.'' With the acceleration of new Internet-based
technologies, we are increasingly unable to collect valuable
information and evidence in cases ranging from child
exploitation and pornography to organized crime and drug
trafficking to terrorism and espionage. Let me emphasize that
collecting this evidence has been approved by a court. But
because the laws have not kept pace with changes in technology,
we often cannot obtain the information responsive to the court
order. And we look forward to working on this issue with this
Committee and with Congress in the future months.
Lastly, let me say a few words about the impact of the
continuing budget resolutions on the FBI and our workforce.
The support from this Committee and Congress has been an
important part of transforming the FBI into the national
security agency it is today. But for our transformation to be
complete, we must continue to hire, train, and develop the
best, brightest agents, analysts, and staff to meet the complex
threats we face now and in the future. Under the current levels
in the continuing resolution, the Bureau will have to absorb
over $200 million in cuts, and without any changes, the current
CR will leave us with over 1,100 vacant positions by the end of
the year. And put simply, these cuts would undermine our
efforts to transform the FBI and potentially to carry out our
mission.
I appreciate the opportunity to review the FBI's recent
work in responding to the far-reaching threats we face today,
and I also want to thank the Committee for your continued
support on behalf of the men and women at the FBI. And of
course, I will be happy to answer any questions you might have.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mueller follows:]

__________

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Director Mueller.
I will recognize myself for initial questions.
My first one, Director Mueller, goes to the need and
importance of data retention by Internet service providers.
There are a large number of Internet-based crimes today,
particularly child pornography. I think probably the fastest
growing crimes in America today are identity theft and child
pornography which, as I mentioned in my opening statement, is
increasing at about 150 percent a year, as it has been for the
last 15 years.
Would you let us know how you think better and perhaps
longer data retention might be helpful to addressing some of
those kinds of crimes?
Mr. Mueller. Well, a number of years ago, for instance,
when it comes to communications, telephone companies were the
only means of communications. Records were kept by the
telephone companies principally for billing purposes, and they
were readily accessible in response to court orders requesting
those records. With all the electronic communications in this
day and age and companies that provide services that are not
primarily communications providers, we have difficulty often in
obtaining records from these particular companies. States in
Europe, others, have a records retention statute that requires
the retention of records for a period of time. We find in our
investigations historical records are often, not in every case
but I would say, historical records are important to our
ability to develop an investigation to the point where we can
arrest, indict, and hopefully convict that individuals who are
responsible for the activity.
Mr. Smith. Great.
Mr. Mueller. I have talked about records retention in the
past and am supportive of that form of legislation today.
Mr. Smith. Thank you and that is helpful.
I would also like to ask you about the PATRIOT Act. You
have told us why it is important, and I don't want to paint too
bleak of a picture here, but what would happen if the three
provisions that are due to expire, I think May 27th, are not
made permanent? How would it hamper your investigations if we
did not have those three provisions?
Mr. Mueller. Let me start with the three provisions at
issue. I will start with the business records provision. This
enables us to go to the FISA Court, when we have a showing of
relevance to an investigation, to obtain basic records that are
necessary to provide predication for further investigation that
are more intrusive, for instance, records from a WalMart, or in
the case of Azazi where an individual is seeking to obtain
hydrogen peroxide for an explosive device, we would want to get
the records of those purchases. A person who goes to WalMart to
buy components of an IED. We would want to get those records
from WalMart.
Today we get those records in an international terrorism
investigation by going to the FISA Court and with the 215
provision having the ability for the court to order the
production of those records.
And it is not just those records I have identified. There
are travel records. There are records relating to rental cars.
All of these types of records are not covered by national
security letters or covered by 215. We have used that provision
over 380 times since 2001, and so it is an important provision.
The second one relates to roving wiretaps. Where we are
able to show that an individual--it may be a foreign
intelligence officer--is seeking to evade surveillance by
buying throw-away cell phones in order to change cell phone
activity on a daily basis, we are able to go to the court under
the current provisions and have the FISA Court direct that we
are able to focus on that individual regardless of the
particular cell phone that individual is using at a particular
time. Otherwise, we have to go back to the court daily or
weekly to get a re-up of those orders, and consequently, it is
a great deal of additional manpower that would be required were
we not to have the roving wiretap provision.
The other point I would say is on the criminal side of the
house, we have had this for any number of years where we have
the roving wiretap capability, and we have used it successfully
on the criminal side and it makes no sense in my mind to have
it on the criminal side but not on the national security side.
Lastly, the lone wolf provision was put into place to
respond to the issue relating to Moussaoui, the individual who
we believe back in advance of September 11 may have been here
to be one of the pilots who was arrested by immigration
services. The statute required that we show that he was
affiliated with a particular terrorist group. We could not make
that showing. We could not get the FISA order to look at his
laptop. This provision was passed to address that particular
incident. It is directed at non-U.S. citizens. It allows us to
get a FISA warrant on an individual who is a terrorist but we
cannot prove is affiliated with any particular group.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Director Mueller. I am going to
squeeze in one more question. Maybe you can answer it very
briefly.
Considering that we are in an unclassified setting, real
quickly what do you think are the most urgent terrorist threats
we face in America today? Is there a one, two, three?
Mr. Mueller. I would say the top two are probably threats
out of the FATA, out of Pakistan-Afghanistan border area from
al-Qaeda. Shahzad, the Times Square bomber--and there have been
a number of other individuals coming out of training in that
particular area that have posed a threat and continue to pose a
threat.
Secondly, and almost equal, is the threat from al-Qaeda in
the Arabian Peninsula where you have seen the Christmas Day
bombing of the year-plus ago, the attempt to come into Detroit
and blow up the plane, as well as the two printers that were
picked up in Dubai and in the UK recently. They were on their
way to the United States and, if they had not been intercepted,
would have blown up those planes.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
Mr. Mueller. The last two I would say are Al-Shabaab in
Somalia and what is a substantial concern is a radicalization
over the Internet of persons, lone wolves, in the United
States. That is the full view of that threat picture.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Director Mueller.
The gentleman from Michigan, the most recent Chairman
emeritus of the Committee, is recognized for his questions.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much, Chairman Smith.
In our area in Detroit, we are very concerned about
improving the relationship of the Muslims, the Arab community
with law enforcement. And we are still reeling over that
October 2009 shooting where an FBI agent killed a person with
21 bullets. There was an undercover informant involved. And
there is a continuing swell, undercurrent of criticism about
some of the undercover informants of the FBI stirring up
trouble in the Arab American community, almost as provocateurs.
That is a very disturbing situation that I hope is not going on
in other communities across the country.
Your comments?
Mr. Mueller. Well, let me start by saying since September
11th, every one of our field offices, 56 field offices, has had
extensive outreach to the Muslim American, Arab American, Sikh
American communities with direction from headquarters to do
everything you can to develop relationships for individuals and
entities associated with those communities. And across the
country, I think those relationships are very, very good.
I am familiar with the incident to which you refer in
Detroit. I think everyone who has looked at that incident
believed that the response was appropriate under the
circumstances.
And lastly, with regard to the use of undercover
operations, we have used these for probably the 100 years of
our existence in terms of undercover operations when it comes
to public corruption, on narcotics trafficking, traffic in
child pornography. And so the use of undercover operations we
do across the board day in and day out. Undercover operations
in terrorist cases are not much different than undercover
operations that we do across the board.
Secondly, I would say and point out that they are subject
to substantial review at headquarters and are monitored as they
go forward not only by headquarters but also monitored by the
U.S. Attorney's offices in which the undercover operations are
taking place to assure that we are not entrapping individuals
but there is a predisposition of those individuals to undertake
that criminal activity.
And finally, I would say if you look at the number of
terrorist threats that were thwarted where individuals were
arrested and those individuals would assert the entrapment
defense, I am not familiar with a jury that has found in favor
of a defendant on the entrapment defense in the many cases that
have gone to trial since September 11th.
Mr. Conyers. We have a recession, a depression in many
places, and it stemmed from the subprime mortgage scandal, the
bundling up of derivatives and sending them into financial
markets all over the world. Wall Street has been thoroughly
embarrassed by some of the activity that has been determined.
We are passing all kinds of laws trying to put sunlight on some
of these activities that are going on.
Not one person has been imprisoned yet. Nobody has gone to
jail. Nobody has been punished. The Department of Justice can't
come up with any kind of strategy to really use the criminal
justice system as it is used for everything else. Could that be
because the FBI hasn't done enough work in getting a case built
up, the evidence brought in that would result in indictments?
Mr. Mueller. I strongly disagree with that portrayal of our
efforts, Congressman. There have been any number of
indictments. We have had takedowns just about every 6 months of
persons arrested for mortgage fraud, securities fraud,
corporate fraud. There are ongoing trials today in that arena.
If you look at mortgage fraud alone, we have over 3,000 cases
that we have been investigating. We have got 94 task forces. I
have got 340 agents that are directed just to mortgage fraud.
Mr. Conyers. Yes, but it is not Wall Street.
Mr. Mueller. With regard to corporate fraud, we have 667
cases, over 55 related to the subprime mortgage industry. Most
of these cases are of Wall Street. We have 110 agents that are
looking at corporate fraud. When it comes to securities fraud,
we got 1,700 cases. I have got 233 agents that are working on
securities fraud, and out of those particular initiatives,
there have been any number of indictments and convictions. And
I would be happy to give you a listing of those indictments and
convictions.
And one last point. If you look at the newspapers today and
yesterday and the day before, you will see that there are cases
that are taking place in New York as we speak with regard to
corruption in Wall Street.
Mr. Conyers. I feel a little better now. [Laughter.]
And I will start reading the papers more carefully.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Conyers.
Considering the gentleman from Wisconsin's role in
developing the PATRIOT Act, he is recognized for a very full 5
minutes.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
First of all, Director Mueller, let me say that I am going
to truly regret your term expiring in September. I was the
Chairman of the Committee at the time 9/11 took place. The
cooperation between you personally and me personally, as well
as the FBI and the Committee, helped us develop I think some
very useful legislation, and it was not just the PATRIOT Act,
but it was other laws as well that has made Americans safer.
I think on September 12th, 2001, if anybody would have
predicted that we would have avoided a major terrorist attack
for over 9 years, they would have been accused of smoking
something that they shouldn't be smoking. That is a result of
the FBI utilizing the tools that the Congress gave them and you
directing the agents of the FBI in a manner where there have
not been any proven civil rights violations as a result of the
expanded provisions given to law enforcement as a result of the
PATRIOT Act.
And I would agree with the Chairman of the Committee that
there has been an awful lot of hype about the PATRIOT Act that
is not actually founded in the 16, subsequently expanded to 17,
expanded tools that were given to law enforcement by that act.
Now, all of that being said, we are in the process of
fighting over reauthorization. I want to ask you to make some
comments about the bill that is pending in the other body since
we can't ask the authors of that. So you have got the field to
yourself.
The Senate version of the extension sunsets the national
security letter standard established under the act at the end
of 2013. Do you support reverting back to the pre-9/11 standard
for national security letters? And if not, why not?
Mr. Mueller. I do not. Let me say that the reauthorization
that is up does not address national security letters. In other
words, the three provisions that are being up for
reauthorization do not relate to national security letters. But
the national security letters are the building blocks of any
case which enable us to collect information, and based on that
information, we then can make a further showing to the FISA
Court for more intrusive investigative activity such as
monitoring conversations or doing searches. Changing the
standard or sunsetting national security letters would
adversely impact us if it were sunsetted undercutting our
ability to undertake the kinds of investigations that have led
to the disruptions in the last 9 years.
Also, having a sunset provision contributes a degree of
uncertainty in the months going up to when that provision is to
be reauthorized that is unsettling and disturbing in the sense
that you don't know where your investigations will be at a
particular time when it comes up for Congress' reauthorization.
And consequently, quite obviously we prefer not to have that
uncertainty, not to have that question about what will be our
powers down the road.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Now, on another issue, I am fully aware
that there are only three provisions of the PATRIOT Act that
were sunsetted. I did the hearings 5 years ago, 6 years ago
where the other 14--there was really no controversy, and they
were made permanent. But there are those that wish to beat the
drum and open them up again. And one of those is the delayed
notification search warrants where the Senate bill proposes to
shorten the time from 30 days to 7 days.
A couple of questions. Has the 30-day notification delay
been held unconstitutional or improper? What operational
advantages result from shortening the 30 days to the 7 days?
And will investigators have an easier time investigating
terrorist threats or a more difficult time?
Mr. Mueller. I think the 30-day time frame works well. It
gives you an opportunity to develop the investigation without
having to, every week, go back to the court with an additional
filing. Every one of these filings are fairly substantial.
Every one of these filings--you have to put manpower into it,
whether it is from the investigative point of view or from the
prosecutorial point of view. I see no advantage to drawing it
back to 7 days. It means additional work.
The other thing I would say is that the 30-day time limit
is set by the court. So the court is reviewing this
periodically, and if the court believes that there is some
problem with the 30-day period, the court can go ahead and
require a further report shorter if that particular judge who
is monitoring this feels that 30 days is inadequate.
So I would be against the change from 30 days----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. The final question is, does shortening
the delayed notice warrant do anything to assist the target of
the investigation to evade surveillance?
Mr. Mueller. I would have to think about that and get back
to you on that particular question.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Sensenbrenner.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized
for her questions.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to say to our FBI Director, Mr. Mueller, I
thank you for your 10 years or more of service, and I
appreciate the way that you have always been responsive to the
Members when we have sought you out for information or
clarification. And we are going to miss you.
But before you go, I have to tell you that some of us have
been focused on the financial crisis, and just as Mr. Conyers
started to talk about what role the FBI have played in bringing
to justice some of those who have committed mortgage fraud, for
example--it seems that we know some things and we have learned
through WikiLeaks and those who received some of the WikiLeaks
information about Bank of America and Bank of America is
involved with the Balboa organization, insurance organization,
and one of their ex-employees who have exposed some information
about fraud.
Without going into that specific case, I appreciate the
fact that you have indicated that you have all of these
investigations going on and you have these agents and the
special task force. But this has been going on since 2004.
Nobody has gone to jail. Nobody has been identified as a major
player in all of this. Meanwhile, people are losing their homes
and we find that the servicers who are supposed to do the loan
modifications uncover fraud but they do nothing about it
because they are not charged with doing anything about it.
What is the FBI doing? Who have you sent to jail? When are
we going to get some justice in this area?
Mr. Mueller. Excuse me just 1 second.
I wish I had brought today the statistics of the persons we
have arrested, indicted, and successfully convicted and sent to
jail. There are hundreds. And I would be happy, as I told
Congressman Conyers, to get those statistics to you.
What I have relayed in response to the question from
Congressman Conyers is the efforts that we have made in the
last 2 or 3, 4 years to address exactly what you are saying is
the problem. And we have been very successful in those efforts.
We have had a comprehensive approach, coordinated with the
Department of Justice, and through task forces around the
country, as well as in New York in the financial arena in New
York to address exactly what you pointed out in terms of those
factors that contribute to where we are in terms of the
economy.
Ms. Waters. Mr. Director, let me just ask you this. Most of
the mortgages are being initiated through the Big Five. You
have got Bank of America. You have got Wells Fargo, Chase
Manhattan. And they are servicers. They own these servicing
operations. This is where the problems are. We don't hear
anything about what is being done about fraud from the big
servicers who are so-called managing these loan modifications
that ignore the fraud, who maybe even participate in it. What
has been done on the big operations?
Mr. Mueller. Let me say that I am familiar with the
allegations relating to services. We do have fraud or illegal
activity with regard to the services and servicing of
mortgages, and we do have open investigations there. I could
not in open session discuss with you more specific parameters
of our investigations other than to say that to the extent that
we have allegations with regard to fraud, we do investigate and
are investigating.
Ms. Waters. Let me just say it starts with the loan
initiators, some of whom we discovered, for example, with
Countrywide in California who put these loan initiators out on
the street without a lot of training and not a lot of
background checks. They actually committed fraud in some cases
where they signed the name of the homeowner to mortgages that
they did not understand or know about. It starts there, and
then from the loan initiators, it goes on to--you know, we have
to say that some of those responsible for the secondary market
have some responsibility in that. By the time it gets to the
servicer, the servicers again are committing crimes. So we have
homeowners who have been exposed at three levels by an industry
that simply ripped us off. What is going to be done about it?
Mr. Mueller. They just handed me some of the statistics we
have. Back in 2010, we had 217 indictments and informations in
the corporate fraud arena, and as of this year, we have had 89.
As an example of a case, in February, last month, Michael
McGrath, the former president of U.S. Mortgage, a privately
held mortgage company, was sentenced to a jail term of 168
months for his role in orchestrating a $136 million corporate
fraud scheme related to the subprime mortgage industry.
Ms. Waters. What happened with Ameriquest? Did you do
anything with Ameriquest, the big one?
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired, and the
gentleman from Florida, Mr. Ross, is recognized for his
questions.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mueller, again, I want to echo the sentiments of the
Members of this Committee and congratulate you on your service.
It is very distinguished and it has been at a time when this
country has needed your type of leadership. So I thank you.
Specifically with regard to the PATRIOT Act and the roving
wiretaps, this is something that I find absolutely useful if we
are going to continue the type of surveillance necessary to
prevent any further attacks. And I guess my question to you is
in these roving wiretaps, if it is not reauthorized, what is
your recourse in terms of delays.
Mr. Mueller. Our only recourse in that event is to keep
going back to the court as we receive new information that the
person has thrown away the first cell phone that they had on
day 1 and bought another one for day 2, and we can anticipate
another one for day 3.
Mr. Ross. And how long would that take?
Mr. Mueller. It takes a good long time, and there is a
delay in terms of getting the re-upped order. And so you may
well miss conversations as you attempt to draft the application
with the affidavit and the proposed order, get it to a court so
it can be reviewed and issued. So the consequence is the delay
that it takes to get the order and what you may lose in the
time frame that it takes you to get that order where you do not
have coverage on that particular phone or phones.
Mr. Ross. And it makes us significantly more vulnerable.
Mr. Mueller. It can. It can, yes, sir.
Mr. Ross. With regard to the national security letters,
when those have been issued, how have they been received by
some of the communications providers? Have you seen any
resistance?
Mr. Mueller. There have been pockets of concern where we
have had to use the 215 business records to back up national
security letters.
Mr. Ross. So in other words, they wouldn't give you the
substance of the communication. They would just give you the
fact that a communication----
Mr. Mueller. They may give us some information, but not the
information to which we believe we are entitled under national
security letters which requires us then to go to 215 proviso to
obtain the records.
Mr. Ross. And that too is a delay then.
Mr. Mueller. That is a delay.
Mr. Ross. Is there anything we can do to help you there?
Mr. Mueller. It is a delay.
Mr. Ross. With regard to the Espionage Act, do you think it
should apply to foreign defendants outside of the territorial
jurisdiction of the United States?
Mr. Mueller. I think I know to what you are alluding in
terms of ongoing investigations. I unfortunately would have to
stay away from opining on the application of the Espionage Act.
Mr. Ross. I understand.
With regard to gangs, what efforts are being made to
investigate and to curtail the growth and involvement of gangs?
Mr. Mueller. Well, from the perspective of----
Mr. Ross. I know you have a task force.
Mr. Mueller. We have over 100 violent gang crime task
forces. We have what we call Safe Trails task forces for Indian
Country, and we have 41 prostitution task forces or working
groups across the country. We have over 1,300 agents who are
working gangs throughout the United States.
Mr. Ross. How is it going? Have you seen an increase, gang
activity increase, stabilize, or decline?
Mr. Mueller. I would have to say that gang activity is
increasing not perhaps at the rate it did maybe 4 or 5 years
ago, but still, nonetheless, is increasing. I do believe that
our work on these gang task forces principally with State and
local law enforcement have made a dent in many communities. Our
admonition to the task forces to identify a particular sector
of the city which has levels of violent crime, address that
violent crime and at the end of it, I want to see what impact
there has been in reducing the violent crime in that area of
the community. And as we focus on that, we do it with our State
and local counterparts, and I think we have been effective in
utilizing that task force concept in addressing gangs.
Mr. Ross. And you found good cooperation with the State and
local law enforcement?
Mr. Mueller. Yes, although I continue to urge--when
Congress appropriates funds for State and local law enforcement
or even for us, there are areas in which there is a great
incentive to--as you give an incentive to a State and local law
enforcement to cooperate with the Federal authorities, it
enhances that cooperation. And consequently our success in the
Bureau is dependent on our relationships with State and local
law enforcement. And to the extent that Congress in its
activity can encourage that, I am supportive.
Mr. Ross. One last question. What advice would you publicly
give to your successor?
Mr. Mueller. I would say that the Bureau is its people, its
agents, its analysts, and its staff. You will never find a
greater group of dedicated professionals across the country.
Rely on them. They do the job day in and day out, tremendously
dedicated. And to the extent that we are successful, it is
these individuals. But as I said before, it is also so
important to understand that our success is dependent on
working with our State and local law enforcement, as well as
our counterparts overseas.
Mr. Ross. Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Ross.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Scott, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Mueller, it is good to see you today.
Talking about Medicare fraud, there have been reports that
billions of dollars are being siphoned off by criminal
activity. 60 Minutes and other exposes have shown it is
widespread and easily done. When you have FBI agents chasing
after Medicare fraud, do they produce more in savings than they
cost?
Mr. Mueller. I would have to get back to you but I
absolutely believe that is the case.
Mr. Scott. Say again?
Mr. Mueller. Absolutely, I believe that to be the case. I
would have to give a close look at it, but I do believe that is
the case.
Mr. Scott. And in the mortgage fraud, you have been back
and forth on that. The fraud was so widespread. Are you seeking
civil fines from a lot of people that got illegal profits?
Mr. Mueller. I know the Department of Justice--and we are
helping the Department of Justice in certain instances in
seeking civil fines, but we also, whenever we can, would seek
outright forfeiture of any ill-gotten gains. And we have been
successful in doing that.
Mr. Scott. You have agencies where just the whole company
profited through corrupt practices. Is there any widespread
effort to get--I mean, if you go through, there are billions,
trillions of dollars of illegal profits that ended up with the
total collapse of our economy. Is there any effort to recover
those illegal profits----
Mr. Mueller. Yes.
Mr. Scott [continuing]. On a widespread basis?
Mr. Mueller. Absolutely. Initially we will look at it for
criminal forfeiture to the extent we can identify the ill-
gotten gains and tie it into the fraudulent scheme. Secondly,
we would go after it, and by we I mean the Department of
Justice civilly. And thirdly, you have private actors that we
would go after and seek the ill-gotten gains. Perhaps the
Madoff case is the most notorious example of that kind of
attempt to recoup the losses to----
Mr. Scott. And you are doing that on other cases too?
Mr. Mueller. Pardon?
Mr. Scott. You are doing that on other cases too?
Mr. Mueller. Absolutely.
Mr. Scott. There are two areas, organized retail theft and
ID theft, where a lot of crimes could be solved if you had the
manpower to actually do the legwork because there is usually a
paper trail. Do you have enough agents working on organized
retail theft and ID theft to be an effective deterrent?
Mr. Mueller. Let me just talk about organized retail theft.
We will, in particular areas of the country where there is a
need for us to assist State and local law enforcement in
addressing it or there is some sort of organized criminal
activity that cuts across jurisdictional lines, allocate the
personnel to address it, generally in the task force paradigm.
ID theft. Again, we will work with our State and local
counterparts. There are a number of task forces and working
groups to address ID theft, but I will tell you that it is so
prevalent. It is very difficult to comprehensively address
that, and our resources are relatively thin, particularly when
it comes to----
Mr. Scott. But if you had more resources, you could do more
work on ID theft.
Mr. Mueller. More resources, we could do more in terms of
ID theft and a number of other areas.
Mr. Scott. Are there any loopholes in gun laws that need to
be closed?
Mr. Mueller. That is a very broad subject. I would have to
look at a particular piece of legislation to opine on where we
should be in that area.
Mr. Scott. Well, if you could get back to us with
recommendations, that would be helpful.
Mr. Mueller. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Scott. My time is running out. If you could comment
generally for the record on any problems that the FBI lab has,
any challenges they have. If you could just get back to me on
if there are any challenges, things we need to look at.
There is a disconnect around here about cutting a budget
and what will not get done. If you could provide examples of
what would not get done if some of these proposed budget cuts
are passed, that would be helpful.
Finally, you indicated on the criminal side as opposed to
national security you needed the lone wolf provision, and the
lone wolf provision requires a determination of terrorism. How
do you get those without the same information that would allow
you to get a title III warrant? Or why do you need the PATRIOT
Act provisions rather than--because if you have evidence that
he is a terrorist, that should be enough evidence to get a
title III warrant, and the same with some of the other
provisions.
Mr. Mueller. That is not necessarily true. On the title III
and the criminal side, you are looking for a person who has
committed or is in the process of committing a crime. On the
national security side, you are trying to prevent that
terrorist act and identify that person as a terrorist. The
glitch is that you have to show without this statute that the
person is an agent of a foreign power in order to get that
warrant on the FISA side, which if it is a terrorist group, as
we saw in the Moussaoui case, may be difficult to do.
There is another aspect to it and that is often on the
counter-terrorism side and since September 11th, we integrate
information from the CIA, NSA, and other intelligence entities.
There are provisions on the national security side to protect
that information, the sources and the methods that you do not
have on the criminal side. And consequently, the mechanisms we
have on the FISA Court and the FISA statute allow us to do
often that which cannot be done on the criminal side and where
the focus is an agent of a foreign power, the agent of a
foreign power in this case being a terrorist.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, is
recognized.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, I want to commend you for your service not just
with the Bureau but also as a Federal prosecutor. I had the
privilege of meeting you in South Carolina many years ago when
you came down to our State Law Enforcement Division, also known
as SLED, for a computer. And I also want to take this
opportunity to compliment your agents in the upstate of South
Carolina, specifically Spartanburg and Greenville. They worked,
along with the DEA, a public corruption case which saw a
magistrate judge and an elected clerk of court go to prison for
selling evidence, selling drugs out of the evidence locker. And
to the extent you are going to be in South Carolina before your
term expires, if you would tell Special Agents Mike Kelly,
Brian Bryan, and Jim Lannamann how grateful all of us are for
their hard and excellent work. They really are a credit to the
Bureau.
Mr. Mueller. I will pass that on, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Gowdy. They have been wonderful. I got to work with
them for 16 years as a prosecutor and there are days I miss
that job. [Laughter.]
Mr. Mueller. So do I. [Laughter.]
Mr. Gowdy. Maybe we can go back together and be on the side
of the angels and prosecute again.
I wanted to ask you about mortgage fraud and health care
fraud. You have already addressed those. I would ask you
specifically with respect to health care fraud, I don't know
whether this statistic is correct or not. I suspect it probably
is: 48 different agencies or sub-entities that have
jurisdiction with respect to investigating health care fraud.
Is there a more streamlined approach and therefore more
effective approach that you could recommend? Does the Bureau
ever bump into other agencies when you are investigating health
care fraud? Is there a better way than the way we are doing it?
Mr. Mueller. Having been a prosecutor, you know we do bump
into other agencies, and when we bump into other agencies, we
try to incorporate them in a task force. If you look in Florida
and Texas and around the country, the major successes have been
undertaken in utilizing the task force concept where many of
those 60-odd agencies that you mentioned are participants. And
it is not just the Federal. It is not just HHS and the IG or
the FBI or the Postal Service. It also is State and local
attorney general offices, local district attorney offices that
participate in these task forces, and you find you are able to
triage the cases. The more substantial ones will go to Federal
court. The ones that can be addressed in State court are then
triaged and addressed in State court. What you try to do is
identify the universe of cases and then make certain that every
one of them is addressed in one way or another. Again, the task
force concept is the way to go, and we have any number of task
forces and working groups around the country addressing health
care fraud.
Mr. Gowdy. Using both your law enforcement hat and your
prosecutorial hat, are there any categories of declinations
that the Bureau is receiving from U.S. Attorney's offices that
you find troubling? Are you working a certain category of cases
and just not having them indicted or prosecuted? And I am not
trying to put you on the spot with U.S. Attorneys. But are
there any categories of cases that your folks could use some
help with in terms of maybe a disproportionate number of
declinations?
Mr. Mueller. No. I don't think the issue is declinations,
but having been a U.S. Attorney and now an investigator, the
one thing I do say is that we have to together address white-
collar criminal cases swiftly, effectively, and move on to the
next. One can get bogged down in the paperwork and the
intricacies and the desire for a number of counts and where we
have a large backlog of cases, as we do, for instance, in the
mortgage fraud area, we have to go through and push those
through both from the investigative side as well as from the
prosecutor's side. And I have found that prosecutors around the
country understand that and are giving us the support that we
need to continue to investigate and prosecute these cases.
Mr. Gowdy. My time is almost up, so I will ask you one more
question and then finish with one quick comment.
Any changes that you would like to see in the sentencing
guidelines?
Mr. Mueller. Not offhand. I would have to get back to you
on that. I really have not given that much thought recently.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, I will close by the same way I started,
thanking you for your service in law enforcement and also as a
prosecutor.
Mr. Mueller. I will see you back in the courtroom.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Gowdy.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized
for her questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Director Mueller, thank you, first of all,
for your service. We have had the mutual privilege, I would
claim, at this point to see each other on a number of occasions
over the years, and I know that we have gone through some
enormously tough times.
I want to focus on what I think is a rising but certainly a
crisis that our combined law enforcement have really tried to
counter and that is the drug violence on the Texas border or on
the southern border. I would like to get your assessment. We
know that President Calderon is coming to the end of his term.
We know that there have been 35,000 deaths plus. We know that
two teenagers left El Paso and didn't make it back from the
other side of the border. We know that the mayor of Laredo has
been here pleading for a focus.
My question is obviously we have the Border Patrol, but the
FBI, as I understand it, are in a number of drug task forces,
gun-running task forces. I would like to know what progress we
have made. What can we claim as victories with the task force
structure that we have used to try and get our hands around
this question? That is number one.
What is the level of gun-running that you have assessed
specifically out of Houston, Texas or coming from the United
States into Mexico?
Number three, I do believe you could be a vital advocate.
Some of us said that we tire of seeing fallen law enforcement
officers, just recently a U.S. marshal, certainly Mr. Zapata in
Mexico, though he was, as we understand it, under those laws
unarmed, but fallen law enforcement officers in the line of
duty. We honor them every May 15.
Speak specifically to the question of clips being sold
randomly over the counter, if you will, ammunition clips, and
speak specifically to a background check for private sellers
and how that would be helpful and not harmful. What harm could
that do?
And I might say, Mr. Mueller, that what is not left to the
Federal Government certainly is the States, but in this
instance I consider the lack of reasoning gun regulatory
process and unfunded mandate to the States and the cities
dealing with the fallen, whether it is our law enforcement
officers or the bloody Friday and Saturday nights that come
about through local gang warfare, methamphetamine fights,
cocaine fights, whatever fights you are having. That is an
unfunded mandate that this Federal Government is not answering.
So if you would for a moment give us the real impact of
$133 million in cuts or more as we make our way through this
budgeting process. Mr. Mueller?
Mr. Mueller. Let me go back and start on the first question
I think related to Mexico and what we see on the border and
what successes there might be down there. I do believe
President Calderon has undertaken an unprecedented attack on
the cartels and violence in Mexico. Unfortunately, it has not
been as successful as he or anybody else would like, given the
murder rate and the atrocities that occur south of the border.
I do believe one of the--and I am not certain I would call
it a success. I would say at this point in time we have not
seen wholesale violence north of the border. We have the
incidents of law enforcement shootings, the ICE agents in
Mexico and then customs enforcement agents in the United
States. We have had in several of our cities over the past
several years kidnappings where individuals who have businesses
or family in Mexico but they are living in the United States
will be kidnapped. We put together task forces to address that,
and I do believe that those incidents have been reduced as a
result of that.
We also in the FBI particularly focus on corruption at the
border. We have got a number of task forces that address
corruption. They have been successful in rooting out corruption
north of the border.
And lastly I would say we contribute with our border
offices as well as our legal attache office in Mexico to a
unified intelligence task force operating out of El Paso that
is, I believe, a substantial advance in providing intelligence,
not just individuals, our counterparts in Mexico, but also to
those who are operating along the border to prevent that
violence from coming north of the border.
We recently addressed one of our concerns which is the
gang, Barrio Azteca, which has grown over a number of years
both in Mexico as well as in the United States. We had a
takedown and arrest of a number of the principal players in
Barrio Azteca several weeks ago. That also was an important
step.
You asked about the extent of guns going from Houston, if I
am not mistaken, down south.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And if you could include in that the
clips. Just answer specifically clips legislation and
background checks.
Mr. Mueller. Neither on the guns nor the clips do I really
have an understanding of the extent of the gun-running from
north of the border to south of the border. I would have to get
back to you on that.
As to the gun laws and modifications to the gun laws, I
don't think there is a person in law enforcement who isn't
tremendously disturbed when any law enforcement agent in
whatever entity loses his or her life. And there have been a
spate of those killings recently, unfortunately, and the number
of law enforcement that died in the course of duty last year
was up from the year before. And without getting into
specifics, there is not a one of us who wouldn't like to see
some sort of capability to address automatic, semi-automatic
and large clip weapons. When it gets to the specifics, I will
leave that up to others, but all of us in law enforcement are
concerned whenever any particular law enforcement agent goes
down. Unfortunately, it is not getting better, it is getting
worse.
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, can I just ask a question to
you, please?
Mr. Smith. Of course.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And Mr. Mueller could hear the question.
Two questions. One, I think it would be appropriate for a
classified briefing on the drug violence and drug task force in
particular. Some of the information is classified and I would
just encourage the Ranking Member and the Chairman to consider
such a briefing.
And then to Mr. Mueller, I would like to engage with the
task force in Houston and would ask the FBI to cooperate. I
will be seeking to engage with a meeting and just getting the
sort of overall briefing as to what is occurring.
Mr. Chairman, I just want you to know there is gun-running
in Houston, and it is challenging. But I appreciate the fact
that if we could have a briefing, you could consider that.
Mr. Smith. We will certainly consider that. Thank you for
the suggestion.
The gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Adams, is recognized for
her questions.
Ms. Adams. Thank you. Thank you for your service. As
someone who has worked in an undercover capacity on a task
force with the FBI in a previous life as a deputy sheriff, I
understand the intricacies involved when you are doing
investigations. And while a lot of people want it to hurry up
and get to the fruition, sometimes it is not that easy. And if
you do want a conviction, you want to make sure that you have
every ``I'' dotted, every ``T'' crossed, and ensure that when
you bring that information to the courts, that the courts will
be able to go forward with that conviction. So I want to thank
you for your service.
I want to get back to the roving wiretaps because I have
heard a lot about it in Committee meetings and everything, and
I have heard some people say that you don't have your target
identified. Now, as someone who has been involved in these type
of investigations, I know that you have to have a target
identified before you can get this type of tap. Correct?
Mr. Mueller. Correct.
Ms. Adams. It may not be you have the accurate name. They
may have 20 names associated with the same person, but you have
your target identified.
Mr. Mueller. Exactly. You have it exactly right. We have to
go to the judge with sufficient information to identify this
individual from all other individuals. We may not have an
accurate name, as you indicate, on the individual, but
nonetheless, we may have been surveiling him for a period of
time. We may have information on somebody. The name is affixed
to this particular person, but we don't know the true name. But
we, in order to get the warrant, have to have sufficient
specificity to identify this individual from all others.
Ms. Adams. I have been in those situations when I have been
trying to obtain a warrant myself.
Let me get back to the PATRIOT Act, and I want to ask you
what unique challenges to investigations and to terrorism
prevention efforts are posed by the self-radicalized jihadist?
Mr. Mueller. Having been in law enforcement yourself, one
knows that it is somewhat easier to make a case when there are
a number of individuals who are conspiring together. One will
crack. You will get communications. There will be some
telltales that will enable you to pursue the investigation. If
you have a person who is self-radicalized, for instance, on the
Internet, and his association is with the Internet and with
other persons who are anonymous on the Internet, and that
person watches videos and that person continuously educates him
or herself in terms of getting to the point where they are
willing to undertake terrorist attacks, they are very, very
difficult to discover because there is no outreach to others.
There is no communication. You can't identify a person lower in
the chain or up the ladder that will identify him. And so it is
a real challenge for us in law enforcement to be able to
identify those persons before they undertake a terrorist
attack.
Ms. Adams. I listened to the last questioning and I heard
your answers. I too am concerned about what appears to be
targeting of our law enforcement personnel across our Nation
and those working outside, as what happened in Mexico. I have a
husband who is on the wall at Judiciary Square, along with a
lot of my friends. So I have a true understanding of this
issue.
I am concerned, however, that we send men and women across
the border and they aren't armed. So I know that wasn't your
agency, but it does concern me enough that I want that on the
record that we need to do more to give our men and women the
tools they need when we are TDYing them or sending them into
such an area.
Now, the lone wolf provision and how it works. We have
heard so much here about the PATRIOT Act and that it is going
to target American personnel. And that is not what it does. Is
that correct?
Mr. Mueller. This is for a non-U.S. citizen. That specific
provision is applicable only to a non-U.S. citizen. And that is
perhaps unique to that particular provision, but it is in that
provision. The fact that it applies only to a non-U.S. citizen
is in that particular provision of the statute.
Ms. Adams. Thank you.
Well, again, thank you for your service. I want to thank
your men and women. I have worked with them before on task
forces. They are very professional and I appreciate all that
you do.
Mr. Mueller. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Adams.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt, is recognized.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Mueller--I always have trouble with the name, but
I think I got it right this time.
When you have been before the Committee before, I have
asked you about a whole range of different issues. But I am
going to put on my Ranking Member hat of the Intellectual
Property Subcommittee this time and try to focus attention on
some issues there.
We recently, in fact yesterday, had hearings on
proliferation of counterfeit goods in both the domestic and
international marketplace and examined the issue of piracy of
copyrighted items such as movies and luxury items on rogue
sites based in foreign countries. One of the things that we
found was that clearly reacting to this is going to require a
coordinated response between multiple law enforcement agencies,
the FBI, Department of Justice, Homeland Security, ICE, and the
Patent and Trademark Office, if we are going to effectively be
able to address the problem.
I am interested in your assessment of the extent to which
those different agencies are coordinating their efforts,
whether you feel like you have crafted a coordinated effort in
this area, and if so, discuss how this has worked in practice
and whether jurisdictional and oversight challenges that we
have here in Congress even between the agencies have arisen.
It has never really even been clear to me whether ICE is
under Homeland Security, whether it is under the Department of
Justice, whether it is under the FBI. I don't know where it is.
Maybe you can clarify that for me in the process of responding
to that question.
Mr. Mueller. Yes, sir. Let me start off by saying that ICE
is in the Department of Homeland Security.
Going to the issue of how we address intellectual property,
we obtained, I think, an additional 20 slots for agents
specifically to focus on intellectual property last year, 2010.
I believe we are still in the process of allocating those
resources, but allocating those resources so they would
maximize the impact. Not doing one in an office here, one in an
office there, but looking at where we can most effectively
align those agents to have the maximum impact on what is a
huge, huge problem.
I will tell you that our focus to date has been on
intellectual property as it relates to health and safety. An
example is an investigation we had some time ago into
counterfeit aircraft parts where it goes beyond just the loss
of money but could adversely impact the life of persons.
And so when it comes to intellectual property, we do have
additional resources. We are trying to allocate those
additional resources to address the problems, and I would say
we would do it again in the context of task forces with ICE
agents, with agents who also have jurisdiction so we can
together maximize the impact.
Mr. Watt. So you feel like you are coordinating effectively
in this area? Because there still seem to be yesterday just a
crying out of almost a helpless feeling on the part of the
people in industry about the extent of piracy and rogue sites
that are selling pirated goods or whatever.
Mr. Mueller. I would have to get back to you on the extent
and whether there are any issues with regard to that
coordination.
Mr. Watt. Get back to me on that and also on the question
of whether you feel like--you said you got 20 additional
personnel, but specifically whether you are adequately
resourced to investigate and prosecute these cases because, as
I said at the hearing yesterday, the extent of the problem far,
far exceeds bank robberies in the old-fashioned way. In fact,
most bank robberies now are taking place through technological
advances also. Nobody is walking into a bank with a gun
anymore.
Mr. Mueller. We still have those.
Mr. Watt. Yes, I know you do, but everything I have heard
suggests that a lot more money is being stolen from banks
electronically----
Mr. Mueller. I would agree with that.
Mr. Watt [continuing]. Than in the old-fashioned with a gun
way.
I think I may be out of time. I had one other question, but
I don't want to abuse the privilege and I will yield back.
Mr. Sensenbrenner [presiding]. The gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Poe.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director, good to see you. In my other life, I was a judge
in Houston and I used to tell the FBI to bring me some
business, but we don't do that anymore. So it is good that you
are here and appreciate your work.
I want to talk about Brian Terry. Are you all taking the
lead role in the investigation of his murder? The border agent.
Mr. Mueller. Oh, yes, we are absolutely.
Mr. Poe. I understand the investigation is going on, but I
have heard through media reports that Brian Terry was armed at
first with a bean bag gun and had to fire that first before he
could use--to fire back at those drug cartel members that were
using AK-47's. I don't know if you can comment on that or not.
If you cannot, I understand. But can you say anything about
that?
Mr. Mueller. I cannot say anything about that, but I do
know that Janet Napolitano has addressed that particular issue
in her testimony before another panel.
Mr. Poe. Do you see a trend of those drug cartel members
that come in the United States becoming more aggressive and
violent?
Mr. Mueller. Well, I think over the last year, certainly we
have seen extremes in violence south of the border. I do not
believe that those extremes in violence have crossed the border
into the United States so far, but we have to be wary of that
and work together and by ourselves with ICE, Customs, and
Border Patrol and others who are responsible for law
enforcement on the border.
Mr. Poe. Let me address a specific concern on the Texas
border. 16 border counties in Texas consider themselves border
counties, and they have a tremendous problem with cross-border
crime. I don't want to use the term ``violent crime.'' I just
want to use the term ``crime.'' And periodically I will call
the sheriffs of those 16 counties and say how many people are
in your jail who belong to some other country. It doesn't make
any difference to me whether they are here legally or
illegally. And at any given time, on an inexact percentage, it
is anywhere from 37 to about 45 percent of the people in their
jailhouse belong to some other country. They are in the U.S.
They are not charged with immigration violations. They are
charged with cross-border crime.
I personally think that that is a tremendous amount of
folks that are housed in our local jails from foreign countries
that are committing crimes in the United States. Can you
address that? I mean, do you see that as a problem?21Mr.
Mueller. Well, that gets into an issue that is somewhat removed
from the FBI in terms of immigration and the like. And so I
prefer to just stay away from that.
Mr. Poe. Well, it is not an immigration issue. It is a
crime issue. People that cross the border from foreign
countries--it doesn't make any difference whether they are here
legally or illegally, and a lot of them are in our border jails
charged with crimes. Now, I know State and local crimes aren't
an issue of the Federal Government and the FBI, but I take a
little issue with the fact that there is not crime on the
border because the sheriffs are overwhelmed with cross-border
crime. And I would think that the FBI should be concerned about
that and should help out when they are needed to help out.
Mr. Mueller. I can tell you that we do help out. We
understand, particularly when it comes to violent crime. In
particular, to the extent that we can assist State and local
law enforcement, we want to be able to do that and we do.
Mr. Poe. The cooperation--candidly tell me what you believe
the cooperation with the Mexican law enforcement is in the
investigation of homicides of Americans in Mexico. I understand
there were 65 Americans killed last year in Mexico. To my
knowledge, none of those cases have been solved. What is the
level of cooperation by them with the FBI in solving those
crimes?
Mr. Mueller. I think it fair to say that it depends on the
particular case and the individuals with whom you may have a
relationship across the border. We have border liaison agents
and officers that spend a great deal of time developing those
relationships with our counterparts south of the border. And in
many cases, we have a very good relationship and they will do a
very competent job and we will work a case well together. There
are other cases that do not work out so well.
Mr. Poe. Well, not solving 65 murders doesn't sound like a
very good clearance rate to me, and I would hope that you would
help us to determine how we can get the Mexican Government more
involved in helping you in solving these crimes of Americans
that are murdered.
My last question is this. The Los Zetas, one of the most
violent of all the criminal gangs--do you have an opinion or
give some insight on what you think we could do as Members of
Congress? Should we try to make them a member--or put them on
the foreign terrorist organization list so we could prosecute
them better when they commit the crimes in the U.S.?
Mr. Mueller. I am not certain that that would assist us.
Again, as I indicated before, I believe the answer to many of
these threats that we face today is the cooperative efforts of
State and local law enforcement working with the Federal law
enforcement, not only because of the skills and capabilities
that are brought to the table by these various entities, but
also by the use of both State laws as well as Federal laws to
address the activity. And so I would go back to, as opposed to
designating a group as a terrorist group where it may not fit
that particular category, one focuses on developing incentives
for us to work together, particularly financial incentives to
work together on task forces to address these.
Mr. Poe. Thank you, Director. I appreciate it, Mr. Mueller.
Mr. Smith [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Poe.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Quigley, is recognized.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, Director. Again, thank you for your service.
I guess I can't get off that issue. Again, talking about
the border issues, Secretary of State Clinton said that the
vast majority of the guns being used are coming from the United
States. I can't help but want to ask you a little bit more
about how those purchases are taking place, the straw
purchasers and the difficulties there, but just across the
country in tracking weapons used because of limitations imposed
by the laws.
Mr. Mueller. Well, I would have to defer to my counterparts
in ATF who are much more knowledgeable in terms of the flow of
guns to Mexico from the United States. From our perspective,
whenever we have a case that may involve guns that have been
purchased through straw purchasers or there may be other
indicia implicating wrongdoing in the purchase of that
particular weapon, we coordinate with ATF. We make use of the
ATF databases, and our agents are alert to the fact that this
is a substantial issue. We have to prohibit the guns, prevent
the guns going south of the border, and we do that in
coordination with the ATF.
Mr. Quigley. But you have no problems tracking weapons used
in crimes across the country. There is no limitations that you
can speak of today?
Mr. Mueller. In terms of tracking weapons----
Mr. Quigley. From their original purchases.
Mr. Mueller [continuing]. Again, I cannot think of
limitations in terms of our ability to do it, but of course----
Mr. Quigley. Language that was passed before limiting
access and serial numbers and use of purchase--through
purchasers.
Mr. Mueller. I am not familiar with the intricacies of that
discussion.
Mr. Quigley. At least perhaps gun shows, the fact that
there is no background check required in a gun show.
Mr. Mueller. I know that is a subject of discussion in
Congress, yes.
Mr. Quigley. Wouldn't it be a subject of concern for you
and your agents?
Mr. Mueller. To the extent that we can track weapons back
to individuals and trace weapons, it is beneficial to us in
doing our job.
Mr. Quigley. All right. Well, we will shift gears here.
The Supreme Court struck down the honest services law that
helped your agency deal with public corruption. How much of a
gap do you see this having left in the laws you need? Do you
have any suggestions as to specific aspects? The Court said it
needed to be less vague, but specific issues there that you
feel should be included in any new legislation?
Mr. Mueller. I have not looked at this issue in a while. I
know there was discussion about additional legislation that may
partially fill the gap or be responsive to the concerns of the
Supreme Court. We, along with the Department of Justice, have
gone back and looked at every case that has been affected by
the decision, and for the most part, the individuals were
prosecuted on mail fraud or other charges as well and most of
the convictions have stood up. So in terms of impact on past
cases, I think it has had a relatively marginal impact on past
cases. And I would have to get back to you on whether or not we
need some additional legislative fix to fill that hole.
Mr. Quigley. Earlier the lone wolf provisions were brought
up, the PATRIOT Act. From my perspective, many of the lone wolf
issues have been not foreigners but American citizens. You
probably heard about the fake bomb put near Wrigley Field just
this last year, a block from my house. So it is near and dear
to home. Do you feel that you have enough tools to deal with
the lone wolves who are just American citizens that pose the
same threat?
Mr. Mueller. I am not certain it is a question of
additional resources. We are focused very intently on lone
wolves, domestic lone wolves, and have been certainly ever
since 1995 and McVeigh who was responsible for the Oklahoma
City bombing. And we utilized all of our techniques to try to
identify the lone wolves, but it is very, very difficult. I am
not certain I could say to you today that we need additional
resources that I would put here which would improve our ability
to identify the lone wolf. We are going to have to adapt
additional capabilities and techniques to identify the
mechanisms of radicalization so that we then can identify the
persons who are the lone wolves.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King, is recognized.
Mr. King. Thank you.
Director, on your left wing over here.
Mr. Mueller. Sorry, sir.
Mr. King. Thank you. I am not in the middle of the action
here, but I am connected to what is going on.
I appreciate your service to this country and your
testimony here today and your responses to your questions.
I would like to take you to a question that deals with
Khalid Ali-M Aldawsari. I see you recognize his name even
though I might not have pronounced it right. It is my
understanding that he arrived here on a student visa, but he is
under a charge of attempted use of a weapons of mass
destruction. In his journal he wrote, the need to obtain forged
U.S. birth certificates, multiple driver's licenses, and U.S.
passports. And it is my understanding he planned to use those
driver's licenses to rent several cars and to do so with a
different license so he could have a different name on each one
in order to confuse law enforcement authorities.
Are the driver's licenses and passports and fraudulent--are
they a useful tool for terrorists?
Mr. Mueller. Well, let me start by saying that there is a
gag order in that case that has been issued by the judge in al-
Dawsari. So I cannot specifically speak to that case.
But speaking more generally, apart from that case, the use
of driver's licenses as what we call a seed document that
builds a separate identification, yes, that is a problem, has
long been a problem, and one that we are knowledgeable about
and in every case look to see whether that has been the case
that a person's identification has been developed as a result
of a seed document such as a driver's license.
Mr. King. I remember that language now. I hadn't brought it
up in some years, but the seed documents from low standards for
issuing driver's licenses or false identification that might
result in a passport turns into a useful tool for terrorists in
this scenario that is generally speaking that you have spoken
to.
Mr. Mueller. True.
Mr. King. Thank you, Director.
I would go on to something maybe a little bit easier and
that wasn't actually hard. These are just a series of
questions, but is it common for local law enforcement to work
closely with the FBI? And yes. And I grew up in a law
enforcement family and I respect that relationship that is
there.
And do local law enforcement routinely conduct
investigations that result in indictments under Federal
charges?
Mr. Mueller. Yes.
Mr. King. And do they have the authority to do so?
Mr. Mueller. Yes.
Mr. King. And so I take this to this point which is that
includes immigration law.
Mr. Mueller. I guess I don't understand the question.
Mr. King. The question would be then local law enforcement
routinely works with the FBI. They routinely do investigations
that result in indictments under Federal charges. So they do so
with Federal law and they do so routinely with Federal
immigration law as well. And the follow-up question to that is,
is it your position that local law enforcement has the
authority to investigate and cooperate in the enforcement of
Federal immigration law?
Mr. Mueller. I think that is an issue we would have to get
back to you on. It is a little bit removed from the usual issue
that we deal with day in and day out when we are looking at a
narcotics trafficker and the like. Again, I am not sufficiently
well versed in that aspect of the law. We would have to get
back to you.
Mr. King. I would ask you to do that and then I would ask
you also to review a couple of circuit court cases, Tenth
Circuit. They both happen to be U.S. v. Santana Garcia and the
other one is U.S. v. Vasquez Alvarez that I believe are on
point for that. And I think it is useful for us to understand
that relationship and the cooperative effort between Federal
and local law enforcement.
Another subject matter that I am curious about is that
there are estimates out that there are roughly 1,200 mosques in
the United States, and we are seeing homegrown terrorists
emerge, people that have American citizenship by birth that
turn against their country. I believe that there is jihad being
preached in some of those mosques. Can you tell me is the FBI
restrained from investigations in a public setting like that?
Can they go into the mosque, listen, report, record? Are you
constrained in any way from that type of activities? It might
give us a better sense of how the homegrown terrorists are
being radicalized.
Mr. Mueller. I am not certain about the figures that you
use, but I will say that we are not constrained in undertaking
investigations, but we are exceptionally sensitive to the fact
that the First Amendment does protect speech and association.
And so we are not constrained in following a predication of an
individual regardless of where they may be; who may be
contemplating involvement or engagement in supporting terrorism
or a terrorism act.
Mr. King. Does it require a warrant for an FBI agent to sit
in a mosque with a tape recorder in a public setting?
Mr. Mueller. It depends on the circumstances, but generally
I would say no.
Mr. King. Thank you. That helps me a lot.
Mr. Mueller. In the same breath, I would say that there has
to be predication for utilizing that particular technique.
Mr. King. And just one brief question, if the Chairman
would indulge.
Mr. Smith. Please be brief.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And that is, Director, do you know of even a single case
where an individual had their rights to privacy usurped under
the PATRIOT Act that has any potential of being successfully
litigated on constitutional principles?
Mr. Mueller. I don't believe so. I am not aware of one.
Mr. King. And I don't either. Thank you, Director. I
appreciate it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. King.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, is recognized for
her questions.
Ms. Chu. Director Mueller, I have similar questions but
from a different perspective.
I believe that you have stated that protecting America
requires the cooperation and the understanding of the public.
You have also emphasized that since 9/11, the FBI has developed
an extensive outreach program to Muslims, South Asian, and Sikh
communities to develop trust, address concerns, and dispel
myths in those communities about the FBI and the U.S.
Government. And as part of this effort, in 2009 the FBI
established the Specialized Community Outreach Team, composed
of special agents, analysts, community outreach specialists,
and personnel with language or other specialized skills.
Now, as you know, last week the House Homeland Security
Committee held a controversial hearing on the extent of
radicalization in the Muslim community focusing only on one
community. I am deeply concerned about the attempts to
marginalize an entire minority group in this country, and the
reason I am sensitive to it is that I know that targeting like
this can result in great tragedy. For instance, the words
``national security'' were used to send 120,000 Japanese
Americans to prison camps throughout America during World War
II, making them lose everything that they had, and in the end,
not a single act of espionage was proven.
So considering the efforts to be concerned about improving
national security, I would like to ask you if you agree with
Congressman King's assessment that American Muslims are not
cooperating with law enforcement, especially since Sheriff Lee
Baca stated in that hearing that Muslim Americans helped foil 7
of the 10 plots that were launched by al-Qaeda in the U.S.
Mr. Mueller. Well, I would prefer not to comment on the
representations of others. But if the question is to what
extent has the Muslim community cooperated with the FBI since
2001, I can say in a number of cases the Muslim community has
either initiated or cooperated with the investigation
throughout the course of the investigation leading up to a
successful disruption of the terrorist plot, often with
consequent arrest and prosecution.
Ms. Chu. And is it true, as Sheriff Lee Baca said, that
Muslim Americans helped foil 7 of the 10 plots that were
launched by al-Qaeda in the U.S.?
Mr. Mueller. Again, I am not certain of the statistics. I
will say that the Muslim community has helped in a number of
cases that we have addressed since September 11th.
Ms. Chu. Well, according to a study by the Triangle Center
on Terrorism and Homeland Security, the number of Muslim
Americans involved in terrorist acts against the U.S. dropped
by more than half in 2010 compared to 2009, which seemed to
indicate that perhaps we are going in the opposite direction
with regard to Muslim Americans being radicalized, as was
alleged in the hearing. 20 Muslim Americans were arrested for
terrorism crimes last year, which is down from 47 the previous
year, and more non-Muslim Americans were involved in terrorist
plots last year than Muslim Americans, according to the study.
I would like to have your comments on the findings of this
study.
Mr. Mueller. I have not had an opportunity to review the
study, so it would be difficult for me to comment on it.
Ms. Chu. Well, then could you comment on how you think the
relationship between the FBI and the Muslim community might be
improved?
Mr. Mueller. I think we continuously have to work at
outreach. The FBI certainly does, and I think we have made
substantial efforts and they have been successful since
September 11th, but it is an ongoing process. Actions of the
FBI could be misinterpreted. We use every opportunity we have
to explain what we do and why we have done it. Occasionally it
is shrouded in secrecy because either the subject matter or the
techniques are classified. But to the extent that we can be
transparent and point out why we undertake certain actions, the
results of those actions, then we find that whether it is
members of the South Asian or Muslim or Sikh or Arab American
community, there is understanding and we develop, I would say,
a very good relationship. We have, I believe, very good
relationships with the Muslim community around the country.
I will say, as I have said before often in testimony, that
the vast, vast majority of Muslim Americans are no different
than any other American sitting in this room or as patriotic
and express that in ways that are appropriate in terms of
assisting us in our investigations. And we continue to develop
the relationships.
One other thing I do believe is the worse thing that could
happen to the Muslim community is to have another terrorist
attack, and members of the Muslim community understand that,
respond to it, and for the most part, are cooperative.
Ms. Chu. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Chu.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Quayle, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Director, both for your service and for
being here today.
Now, we have the PATRIOT Act reauthorization for a certain
number of provisions. I just have one question regarding the
roving wiretaps.
Now, when an order authorizing the roving or multi-point
wiretaps, what type of reporting to the court is required when
a new communications facility is actually identified?
Mr. Mueller. Would you excuse me just a second?
Mr. Quayle. Yes.
Mr. Mueller. Yes. I wasn't familiar with the details, but
apparently we make a return within 10 days of the new phone
number. So there is a responsibility to get back to the court
and alert the court as to the fact that there was a new number.
Mr. Quayle. And this is after they have already gone to
court to get the initial authorization.
Mr. Mueller. Yes, sir.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you.
And moving on to a different topic, cyber security is going
to be a potent threat going forward. It already is now, but
going into the future, it is going to be even more dangerous.
What is the FBI's role in assessing and investigating various
cyber threats?
Mr. Mueller. One of the difficulties with a cyber intrusion
is the immediate attribution. You do not know whether it is
another government who is seeking to exfiltrate information
from the national services or from the military or what have
you. You don't know whether there is a group of individuals
that have come together, maybe a terrorist group, or a high
school student across the street that is responsible for it.
We established several years ago the National Cyber
Investigative Joint Task Force in which we, along with other
members of the intelligence community, law enforcement
community, have this task force in a separate place where we
take each intrusion and immediately try to determine how best
to investigate it, utilizing the capabilities of both the
intelligence community, as well as the law enforcement
community, and then investigate it either as a criminal threat
or a counter-intelligence threat. So we are at the hub of the
attribution and investigation side.
The Department of Homeland Security is responsible for
alerting and protecting the private side of the Internet, and
quite obviously, NSA and the new Cyber Command are responsible
for protecting the Government entities, particularly when it
comes to the military.
Mr. Quayle. So when you assess a threat and you determine
whether it is criminal or whether it is more counter-
intelligence, then criminal goes toward the FBI and counter-
intelligence goes to----
Mr. Mueller. It may well be but there may be----
Mr. Quayle. Some overlap?
Mr. Mueller [continuing]. Expertise in any one agency. In
other words, there may be expertise in the NSA. Ultimately it
may turn out to be a criminal threat and we may want to go to
court which requires different treatment. On the other hand, we
may have expertise here that is helpful to the military. Or
what happens more often than not in this day and again, it is
cross-jurisdictional. The victims may be in the United States,
the actors outside; or the actors in the United States and the
victims outside. And consequently, the cyber threat, more than
any other, because of the difficulty of attribution at the
outset, requires us to work together in the task force concept
to make certain that we gather all the information we can and
then make a determination how best to address the threat
whether it be through prosecution or through some sort of
activity on the part of the intelligence community.
Mr. Quayle. When you were talking with Mr. Watt earlier,
you were talking about IP theft that is pretty much rampant
right now on the Internet, and you mentioned that the FBI had
gotten increased funding in, I think it was, fiscal year 2009
and 2010 for specific agents that were specifically tasked with
going into IP theft. There are reports out that there haven't
been any increased investigations related to IP theft. And I
would just want to know is it just because you are ramping up,
or what is the reason that there is not increased
investigations when more allocated resources have been given to
the FBI?
Mr. Mueller. Well, actually, we have over 460
investigations ongoing in intellectual property at this point
in time. Some of them probably predated the addition of the 20
agents. And I would have to get back to you as to where they
are and what particular investigations they are undertaking.
But in the last year or so, we have undertaken a review to
better allocate our resources to maximize the impact. But as I
say, we have over 460 ongoing investigations. That is probably
not enough given the extent of the crime out there, but we have
to prioritize and we do the best we can in terms of
prioritizing.
Mr. Quayle. Okay, great. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Quayle.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch, is recognized.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Mueller, thank you for your service. I will be
sorry to see you go this fall.
I want to get back to an exchange you had earlier with Mr.
Conyers. Last year, the FBI had identified mortgage fraud as
its most significant white-collar crime issue and noted that
the number of investigations of mortgage fraud against
financial institutions had been rising annually, and in fact,
earlier this morning, you recited some statistics about the
number of ongoing investigations.
Could you describe the results of those investigations thus
far?
Mr. Mueller. I think they have been very successful. I
don't believe there is a month or 2 months that goes by without
a substantial takedown of individuals who were involved in some
sort of scheme relating to mortgage fraud. But I would have to
get those statistics for you.
Mr. Deutch. I would appreciate that.
Mr. Mueller. I think we have been quite successful and
actually we have had a number of press conferences when we have
taken down a number of particular cases around the country. So
I will get you that information, sir.
Mr. Deutch. I appreciate that.
Does the FBI have sufficient resources to combat financial
fraud and mortgage fraud?
Mr. Mueller. We have over 3,000 mortgage fraud cases. We
again do have to look at them through the working groups and
the task forces that we have around the country. We try to make
certain that we address each one either at the Federal level or
at the State level. We have periodic reviews with each of our
field offices at least twice a year in which I am asking about
their mortgage fraud caseload and how they are addressing the
mortgage fraud caseload and where the cases are in the course
of investigation and prosecution, and if we can't do it, who is
doing it. So I believe that has been successful in addressing
this particular issue.
Mr. Deutch. As you do that analysis and make the
determination that if you can't do it, who is doing it, what is
the answer to that question that will satisfy you when you try
to determine who else is doing----
Mr. Mueller. If it is being addressed either by a local
district attorney's office or in many cases the attorney
general's office.
Mr. Deutch. Which then leads in to my next question.
Beginning in the fall of last year when reports started to
surface that certain mortgage services were submitting false,
improper, or fraudulent court documents in support of
foreclosure actions, there were reports that raised concern
that the mortgage lending industry may have pursued--there may
have been thousands of foreclosures unlawfully. At that time,
the Justice Department indicated it was considering an
investigation into whether there may have been criminal
violations concerning the conduct of mortgage servicers.
If you could speak to the role of the FBI in the ongoing
settlement talks and prosecutions, investigations surrounding
the mortgage servicing industry specifically your interaction
with, as you just pointed out, the State attorneys general in
particular.
Mr. Mueller. Our role would be to investigate allegations,
accusations of illegal criminal activity in the mortgage
services industry. I do believe we have ongoing investigations,
but to the extent that there is discussion about settlements,
it would be outside our realm. It would be the U.S. Attorney's
office, the State attorney general, or other regulators.
Mr. Deutch. And just a change in direction, again this
being your last time up here before the Committee. You touched
briefly in your exchange with Mr. Quayle on some cyber issues.
The Director of National Intelligence told the House
Intelligence Committee last month that the cyber environment
provides unprecedented opportunities for adversaries to target
the U.S. due to our reliance on information systems.
If you could just speak to, one, whether you share Director
Clapper's concern that the cyber environment presents these
unprecedented opportunities for our adversaries and, two,
whether you believe security of the system should be enhanced?
Again, that is based on the investigations that the FBI may
have been conducting addressing specifically the cyber security
issues.
Mr. Mueller. Well, I do agree with General Clapper. I think
he is absolutely right in that the opportunities for intrusions
and illegal cyber activity are growing exponentially as
technology grows and that every one of us has an obligation to
address security within their particular institutions or even
within one's particular household. The Government as a whole, I
know, is working. The Administration is working to continue to
address this.
Our role, as I indicated before, is generally to
investigate the intrusions and determine attribution, and then
if it is someone over whom we have jurisdiction, to arrest,
indict, and convict. We actually have had cases where we have
had extradited from other countries persons who have undertaken
illegal cyber activity and the victims are here in the United
States. So not only is it a growing problem, it is a growing
international problem where we cannot be content to reside in
our own jurisdictions and just address what is happening in our
jurisdiction because often the players, the actors are not in
our jurisdiction but the victims may well be. So it will be a
huge challenge in the future.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Director.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Gallegly, is recognized.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Director Mueller, it is great to see you here this morning.
You know, after just completing 8 years on Intel and seeing the
diversity and the complexities of what you have to deal with
every day, I have incredible respect for you and the job you
have done. I have to say that I miss being on Intelligence, but
there is an 8-year term limit. So we will find other
challenges.
I know, as I was coming in this morning--and I was a few
minutes late. But I know that there was some discussion as it
relates to health care fraud. I recently had a group of folks
from Los Angeles County's law enforcement agencies, county
sheriffs, former DA's, and so on that had been working Medicare
fraud in the greater Los Angeles area and in and around that
regionally. It is mind-boggling to me the information that they
passed on to me as it relates to Russian gangs, identity theft,
and particularly with doctors, identity being taken and false
claims being paid to doctors through these clinics that were
using other doctors' names, and then these doctors not knowing
about it until they get a letter from the IRS about not paying
their income tax. I mean, it is a very complicated situation.
However, it gets beyond that. I would just like to maybe
hear from you what your understanding of the depth of this
problem is. I have had numbers that seem to be from credible
sources that the fraud amounts on Medicare alone could be as
much as $60 billion a year, which plays a major role in the
success and the challenges of Medicare. Issues like women that
are preyed on, particularly illegal immigrants, that are paid
$25-$30 to go in and take mammograms two-three times a week and
the concern, of course, on their health is an issue. Pharmacies
that are selling three and four times as many drugs each week
as they actually buy. So it is a revolving door where they are
working in conjunction with some of these clinics that are
nothing more than a computer front.
I just would like to know if you have some comments about
how you are working with the identity theft and particularly
the impact that it is having on Medicare.
Mr. Mueller. I would hope that you had a briefing from a
task force who is addressing it because in Los Angeles, as well
as elsewhere, we address Medicare fraud, health care fraud
together with State and local law enforcement.
One of the things you do point out which we have found
recently is the intersection of organized crime with health
care fraud. I would say there has been a substantial growth in
the last 4 to 5 years of organized crime recognizing that
health care fraud is a fertile field for activity. We had a
series of arrests about a month, month and a half ago which
laid out, at least, one substantial organized crime group that
has spent substantial time and received substantial monies from
Medicare fraud. So being aware of the intersection with
organized crime is one aspect.
Another aspect is what you will find is if there is a
scheme that has found a home in Tampa, which we identify and we
prosecute and take down in Tampa, inevitably it will show up in
Texas or Arizona or elsewhere. And so we have used the
intelligence capabilities that we have developed frankly to
address terrorism to make certain that we anticipate the
schemes and prevent them from taking root elsewhere.
And so a combination of understanding the intersection with
organized crime, the ability to try to get ahead of the scheme
as it tries to take root elsewhere in the country, and lastly
again I would go back to we cannot do this alone. It takes the
combination of local district attorneys, State attorney general
offices, as well as our agents and agents from the Postal
Service, HHS, a number of the other agencies to work
cooperatively in the task force or working group concept to
address this particular threat.
Mr. Gallegly. One thing I asked, Director Mueller, was that
it was represented to me that a major problem, at least in the
greater Los Angeles area, are groups that are referred to as
Russian gangs and there are other gangs. But is it your
understanding that that is clearly a problem where a lot of the
money is going offshore as they are getting it through these
fraudulent ways here in the U.S.?
Mr. Mueller. Let me just clarify one thing.
I would say more generally Eastern European, not just
limited to Russia. Certainly Russian organized crime has been a
player over the years, but the recent takedown, if I am not
mistaken, was not Russia. It was an Eastern European country.
Mr. Gallegly. And a lot of that is going back. Money is
going offshore.
Mr. Mueller. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Gallegly.
The gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, now
serving as Ranking Member, is recognized for her questions.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Nothing like going from last to
first, Mr. Chairman. Thank you very much.
Director Mueller, it is good to see you again. Over the
years, it has been a pleasure to work with you on the
implementation of the Protect Our Children Act of 2008. I want
to touch briefly on some of the issues surrounding that.
And I know Chairman Smith mentioned his concerns about data
retention earlier in his questions. I share those concerns. And
I want to make sure that we get some answers from you just to
shed some light on the challenges that you face at the FBI and
then within the larger Department of Justice. But I look
forward to working with Chairman Smith on advancing a
bipartisan bill that will help make sure that law enforcement
can connect the dots when we are dealing with child
exploitation investigations.
So the issue is that too many of these child exploitation
investigations will go cold because of the lack of connectivity
logs that link anonymous IP addresses to specific individuals
that are often deleted by the time a criminal investigation
ensues and the request is made. And it ranges from as small and
as short as 7 days to as long as 90 days, but really that is an
inadequate amount of time if the crime isn't discovered before
that point.
So you had mentioned previously when I have asked you this
before, but do you still favor giving law enforcement this
additional tool to allow them to get access to those
connectivity logs within a reasonable period of time?
Mr. Mueller. Absolutely. It goes to the larger issue of
records retention which is essential to our ability to conduct
the types of investigations----
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you.
And are you aware of cases that ran cold or that law
enforcement ran up against dead ends because they couldn't get
access to connectivity logs?
Mr. Mueller. Yes.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. The law now has sort of a standard.
Why is the preservation scheme under the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act not strong enough currently?
Mr. Mueller. It goes back to what you indicate. The
connectivity logs would be an essential part of it, but email
addresses, use of email address, past emails, past attachments
that have crossed the Internet--that is the kind of records
that would give us the capability to successfully conduct an
investigation on an individual who is using every effort he or
she can to avoid scrutiny by the authorities.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Now, I have a very strong record on
privacy going all the way back to Terry Schiavo. So it is hard
to be second to me on the importance of privacy. But this is
such a critical issue because for literally--I mean, we could
say thousands of cases potentially go cold because of the lack
of that access. Wouldn't it certainly be preferable for the
industry to come up with their own uniform reasonable standard?
Mr. Mueller. It would. In my mind there ought to be a
dialogue with Congress with the private sector. You come up
with a rational records retention policy. It used to be that
storage was a problem, but with the advances in technology, I
have not heard recently a company avert to storage as being a
problem. But it is the privacy and the privacy interests in my
mind can be protected adequately with a records retention
policy that gives us the tools we need to conduct successful
investigations.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. And the Chairman had the hearing
with the industry here in which we indicated and urged them to
please press forward on a voluntary standard. I am for making
them do it if they don't do that.
But just last but not least, because I know we are pressing
up against votes, how is the lack of predictable data retention
by service providers a significant hindrance and even an
obstacle in certain investigations? And can you give us some
specific examples of cases that have gone cold because of the
lack of access to that data?
Mr. Mueller. Well, I can get back to you with cases where
they have gone cold, but anybody that looks at it and compare
it where we were when telephone toll records were readily
available for years and years and years and you compare to--
because the billing is so different at this juncture, there is
no incentive for companies to keep these records. There has to
be some mechanism that either voluntarily or mandatorily
requires them to keep them.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Just in closing, Mr. Chairman, I
mean, we are literally jeopardizing children's lives by not
having adequate access to this information, and I really look
forward to working with you on making sure that we can get it.
Mr. Smith. I agree. Thank you, Ms. Wasserman Shultz.
The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino, is recognized.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good afternoon, Director. It is good to see you.
I think, as you know, I was a district attorney and a
United States attorney, and I had the pleasure of working with
the Bureau in many cases, and it was a distinct honor. And I
want to compliment you and the Bureau because you certainly
have significantly increased the effectiveness and efficiency
and the prestige of the Bureau, and thank you for your work.
Mr. Mueller. Thank you.
Mr. Marino. Sir, I want to revert back a little bit here to
the PATRIOT Act, the Senate's version that is coming up. The
Senate bill requires a showing of specific facts for NSL's,
national security letters, and 215 orders other than library
and bookseller records. Has the term ``specific fact'' been
defined by the FISA Court or by the Bureau?
Mr. Mueller. No, I don't believe it has. You can read into
it what you want. Again, my preference would be that the
PATRIOT Act, as it sits, be reauthorized as it is now without
the modifications or the insertion of, I would say, a somewhat
confusing phrase to which you allude.
Mr. Marino. Do you think that if the FBI is required to
include a statement of specific facts, does it open up for
interpretation by the Inspector General whether a particular
set of facts was specific enough, and what problems would this
cause the Bureau?
Mr. Mueller. I think that is a possibility, although we
work very closely with the Inspector General. I see what you
are alluding to. I do think that is a possibility.
Mr. Marino. Well, you have no reservations that something
like that could be worked out, given the relationship that you
have?
Mr. Mueller. We would work through it if it were passed
into law. Again, my preference would be that we have worked
with these three provisions, and reauthorization of those three
provisions would be appropriate in my mind. Adding additional
provisions relating to the NSL's or something else would put it
into different ball park.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, and I yield back my time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Marino.
We will now go to the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert,
for his questions.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Director. Nice to see you back.
You had mentioned earlier that--and it is in your written
statement--the FBI has developed extensive outreach to Muslim
communities. In an answer to an earlier question, I had
understood you to say that Muslim communities were like all
other communities. So I am curious, as a result of the
extensive outreach program the FBI has had to the Muslim
community, how has your outreach program gone with the Baptists
and the Catholics.
Mr. Mueller. I am not certain of necessarily the thrust of
that question. I would say that our outreach to all segments of
a particular city or county or society is good.
Mr. Gohmert. Well, do you have a particular program of
outreach to Hindus, Buddhists, Jewish community, agnostics, or
is it just an extensive outreach program to----
Mr. Mueller. We have outreach to every one of those
communities.
Mr. Gohmert. And how do you do that?
Mr. Mueller. Every one of those communities can be affected
by facts or circumstances----
Mr. Gohmert. I have looked extensively and I haven't seen
anywhere in anyone from the FBI's letters, information that
there has been an extensive outreach program to any other
community trying to develop trust in this kind of relationship.
And it makes me wonder if there is an issue of trust or some
problem like that that the FBI has seen in that particular
community.
Mr. Mueller. I would say if you look at--one of our more
effective tools are what we call ``citizens academies'' where
we bring in individuals from a variety of segments of the
territory in which the office operates and if----
Mr. Gohmert. Okay. Well, Director, I have only got 5
minutes and so I need your answers to be very quick.
Mr. Mueller. Look at the citizens academies, the persons
there. They are a cross section of the community. They can be
Muslim. They can be Indian. They can be Baptists.
Mr. Gohmert. Okay, but no specific programs to any of
those. You have extensive outreach to the Muslim community and
then you have a program of outreach to communities in general
is what it sounds like.
But let me ask you, are you aware of the evidence in the
Holy Land Foundation case that linked the Council on American-
Islamic Relations, CAIR, the Islamic Society of North America,
and the North America Islamic Trust to the Holy Land
Foundation?
Mr. Mueller. I am not going to speak to specific
information in a particular case. I would tell you, on the
other hand, that we do not have formal----
Mr. Gohmert. Are you aware of the case?
Mr. Mueller. We do not have any formal relationship with
CAIR because of concerns----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, I have got the letter from the Assistant
Director Richard Powers that says in light of the evidence,
talking about during the trial evidence was introduced to
demonstrate a relationship among CAIR, individual CAIR
founders, including its current president emeritus and
executive director and the Palestine Committee. Evidence was
also introduced that demonstrated a relationship between the
Palestine Committee and Hamas which was designated as a
terrorist organization in 1995. In light of that evidence, he
says the FBI suspended all formal contacts between CAIR and the
FBI.
Well, now it was my understanding--and I have got
documentation and I hope you have seen this kind of
documentation before. It is a public record. And also the memo
order from the judge is turning down a request that the
unindicted co-conspirators be eliminated from the list. And he
says the FBI's information is clear. There is a tie here and I
am not going to grant the deletion of these particular parties
as unindicted co-conspirators.
So I am a little surprised that you are reluctant to
discuss something that has already been set out in an order,
that has already been in a letter saying we cut ties in light
of the evidence at this trial. I am just surprised it took the
evidence that the FBI had being introduced at the trial in
order to sever the relationships with CAIR that it had that
showed, going back to a 1993 meeting in Philadelphia, was tied
to a terrorist organization. So I welcome your comments about
that.
Mr. Mueller. Well, as I told you before, we have no formal
relationship with CAIR because of concerns with regard to the
national leadership.
Mr. Gohmert. All right.
And are you familiar with the evidence from the Holy Land
Foundation trial that showed that the founders of CAIR, Omar
Ahmad and Nihad Awad, attended a mosque meeting in Philadelphia
in 1993?
Mr. Mueller. I am generally familiar with that case, sir.
Mr. Gohmert. All right. Well, thank you. I see my time has
run out.
One last question, though. Are you going to miss having to
come testify at these Committees? [Laughter.]
Mr. Mueller. That is the one question I will give a ``no
comment'' to. [Laughter.]
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Gohmert.
Director Mueller, thank you for your testimony today. Thank
you for your 10 years of service as FBI Director and also for
your many years of public service before that, including
service in the military and your very distinguished career
there as well. We very much appreciate it. We wish you well in
your future endeavors too and appreciate all you have done.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit additional written questions for the witness and any
additional materials for the record.
With that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:11 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


