- RAISING THE AGENCIES' GRADES

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RAISING THE AGENCIES' GRADES--PROTECTING THE ECONOMY, ASSURING
REGULATORY QUALITY AND IMPROVING ASSESSMENTS OF REGULATORY NEED

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COURTS, COMMERCIAL
AND ADMINISTRATIVE LAW

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 29, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-34

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

----------
U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

65-485 PDF                       WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Courts, Commercial and Administrative Law

HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina, Chairman

TREY GOWDY, South Carolina, Vice-Chairman

ELTON GALLEGLY, California           STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TOM REED, New York                     Georgia
DENNIS ROSS, Florida                 MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois

Daniel Flores, Chief Counsel

James Park, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 29, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Howard Coble, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Courts,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     2
The Honorable Steve Cohen, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Tennessee, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Courts,
Commercial and Administrative Law..............................    13

WITNESSES

Jerry Ellig, Senior Research Fellow, Mercatus Center, George
Mason University
Oral Testimony.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Richard A. Williams, Director of Policy Research, Mercatus
Center, George Mason University
Oral Testimony.................................................    70
Prepared Statement.............................................    72
Robert L. Glicksman, J.B. and Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of
Environmental Law, George Washington University Law School
Oral Testimony.................................................    80
Prepared Statement.............................................    82

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a
Representative in Congress from the State of Michigan, and
Ranking Member, Committee on the Judiciary.....................     4

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Jerry Ellig, Senior
Research Fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason University; and
Richard A. Williams, Director of Policy Research, Mercatus
Center, George Mason University................................   105
Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Robert L. Glicksman, J.B.
and Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of Environmental Law, George
Washington University Law School...............................   134

RAISING THE AGENCIES' GRADES--PROTECTING THE ECONOMY, ASSURING
REGULATORY QUALITY AND IMPROVING ASSESSMENTS OF REGULATORY NEED

----------

TUESDAY, MARCH 29, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Courts,
Commercial and Administrative Law,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 4 p.m., in Room
2141 Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Howard Coble
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Coble, Gowdy, Gallegly, Reed,
Ross, Cohen, and Johnson.
Also Present: Representative Conyers.
Staff Present: (Majority) Daniel Flores, Subcommittee Chief
Counsel; John Hilton, Counsel; Johnny Mautz, Counsel; Allison
Rose, Professional Staff Member; Ashley Lewis, Clerk;
(Minority) James Park, Subcommittee Chief Counsel; and Susan
Jensen Lachmann, Counsel.
Mr. Coble. Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. The
Subcommittee will come to order.
As we strive for economic recovery, one thing is clear,
overregulation and poor regulation can stunt economic growth;
and, most importantly, job creation. Oftentimes when the
Federal Government implements inefficient or unnecessary
regulations, capital that could be used to invest in new jobs
is alternatively used for compliance or withheld to cover
anticipated regulatory costs.
Recently, the Mercatus Center published the results of its
regulatory report card project which evaluated the government's
compliance with the rulemaking process and assessed agencies'
performance formulating and promulgating regulations. The
results regrettably show that the Federal agencies are not
doing an adequate job formulating and promulgating regulations.
According to the Mercatus study, agencies routinely fail to
implement well, or even follow some of the basic steps of good
rulemaking practice, including practices prescribed by
executive orders on regulation. As one can see from the detail
and complexity of the Mercatus report, there is no silver
bullet that will resolve all of the problems that have been
created by ineffective or unnecessary regulations. It is our
hope, my hope, that we can extract a few common principles from
today's hearing that can be incorporated into future
legislation that will improve regulatory consistency,
efficiency, and predictability so that it will yield better
regulation when it is needed.
We will also explore today two potential reforms that
already have begun to emerge from the results of the report
card project, our earlier hearings, and even President Obama's
recent statements on rulemaking. The first reform would create
an additional procedure in the rulemaking process before the
agency has settled on its course of regulation. Professor Peter
Strauss, a witness at our last hearing, told us that the agency
commitments during this phase of rulemaking, before a proposed
rule is even published, often convert the Administrative
Procedures Act notice and comment procedures into nothing more
than a farce.
The second potential reform would implement stricter
requirements for agencies to demonstrate a need to regulate
before it issues regulations. Common sense tells us that just
because an agency can make a new regulation does not mean that
it should make a new regulation.
The first step in the process should be to ask whether a
problem exists. If no problem requiring regulation does in fact
exist, then the agency should proceed no further, it seems to
me, to coin the old adage, ``if it ain't broke don't fix it.''
You have heard that many times.
Congress must have assumed, when it enacted the APA, that
agencies would only regulate when they could identify a problem
that needed regulation. Executive orders, moreover, have long
spelled out that agencies should identify specific market
failures before they regulate. Astonishingly, however, the
regulatory report card project showed that the single
rulemaking step at which agencies performed the worst is
demonstrating that there is a need for regulation at all. This
suggests that it is time to include in the APA itself stricter
requirements to demonstrate regulatory need. These and other
reforms should help us to protect the economy and improve the
quality of the regulatory agencies' work.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses. I reserve the
balance of my time.
I am pleased to recognize the distinguished gentleman from
Michigan, the former Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Mr.
Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Coble. We come together
this afternoon for the fifth consideration of the subject of
the burden of regulation on business. The title of the hearing
is Raising the Agencies' Grades--Protecting the Economy,
Assuring Regulatory Quality and Improving Assessments of
Regulatory Need.
This is a very weighty subject since in the interim, we
have not been creating more jobs for Americans, unemployment is
the last economic indicia to be affected positively as we try
to move out of a recession and in some places, a depression in
others. We are not dealing with the 4-year ongoing mortgage
foreclosure crisis, giving agencies less resources to protect
health and safety of the air we breathe and the food that we
eat.
And so I am beginning to wonder about the objective at the
end and the effectiveness of a cost benefit analysis because
these unverifiable assessments are probably as good an opinion
as anybody else's around, but it may very well not be
dispositive.
Now, we are in the process of trying to determine about the
effects of regulatory failure. You know, there were regulations
involved in the Japanese meltdown. We just heard today that
they discovered that there are leaks that are now increasing
the fear of contamination since they have been found in the
foodstuffs, and other environmental tragedies.
Only last week we observed the 100th anniversary of that
tragic New York fire that triggered so much regulation that we
now are worried about overburdening businesses. And so the
benefits of regulation are not, to me, contemplated, and I
invite my witnesses, our witnesses, to share this part of my
presentation with the rest of the Committee because benefits
frequently far exceed the costs of regulation. And so if we are
only talking about costs in terms of dollars and cents, one can
miss the full impact of regulation.
I am hoping that this conversation will lead us to look at
the incredible number of activities in which tragedy occurred,
since the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire which has come down
through a lot of activities, going back to the exploding gas
tanks in the Ford Pinto discovered by a young attorney, Ralph
Nader, the Three Mile Island nuclear meltdown, major bus
crashes where people died because of a lack of regulating seat
belts, coal mine explosions in West Virginia and so on. I will
put the rest in the record.
I welcome our witnesses to a genuine discussion about this
matter, and I thank Chairman Coble for the generosity and the
time that has been allotted me.
Mr. Coble. I thank the gentleman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conyers follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Coble. We have now been joined by the distinguished
Ranking Member, the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Coble. Pardon my tardiness.
Today we consider the regulatory report card project
undertaken by the Mercatus--Mercatus Center, not exactly on the
tip of my tongue on a regular basis. These report cards purport
to assess the quality of agencies use of regulatory analysis by
assigning numerical grades from zero to five for each of 12
questions used to assess performance of agencies for a possible
60 points if you hit the top five for 12 times. The hearing
title implies that Mercatus' grades, ``are accurate based on
sound methodology.''
The title also suggests we should, therefore, focus on
changing the existing regulatory system based on this finding
by the Mercatus Center. By Mercatus' own admission, however,
the report cards, ``are subjective and its grading is not
transparent or capable of any third-party replication.''
Although Mercatus says it has instituted a process to
address these concerns, that process appears to involve only
Mercatus scholars verifying each others conclusions, not any
objective third-party analysis and intervention.
To the extent that the majority seeks to premise changes to
the rulemaking process based only on Mercatus' findings, I find
this, and I think the Nation would find it troubling. Perhaps I
would be more comforted if it were not for the fact that
Mercatus does not approach the issue of regulatory reform with
a neutral perspective, the way that maybe, say the
Administrative Conference of the United States might approach
something. Mercatus was founded and is funded by the Koch
brothers, not the beverage that we all enjoy but Charles and
David Koch, the owners of Koch Industries, the second largest
privately held company in the country, a company which has
large oil and lumber interests among others. Oil and lumber are
industries not normally desirous of any government regulation
at all. They like to cut trees and decide when and how they
will replenish their forests and take from the earth as much
oil as they can, and we saw with Deepwater Horizon how good it
is not to regulate oil drilling. Mercatus continues to be
heavily funded by donations from some of the Nation's largest
corporations, all of which have an interest in stifling
economic health and safety regulations.
According to The Wall Street Journal, 14 of the 23
regulations that President Bush put on his regulatory hit list
had been recommended first by the Mercatus Center. A lawyer
described Mercatus' strategy this way: You take corporate
money, you give it a neutral sounding think tank, hire people
with pedigrees and academic degrees who put out credible-
seeming studies, but they all coincide perfectly with the
economic interests of their founders, kind of like an academic
middle person. Mercatus' regulatory report card may or may not
turn out to be accurate. The problem is we will never really
know because there is no way to verify a subjective conclusion
versus in-house doctoring.
We need to guard against enacting what might turn out to be
needless analytical requirements based on possibly faulty
findings by a think tank with a known regulatory agenda and
contributors who have a particular desired outcome that they
seek.
As I have said before, agencies must retain the ability to
act to protect Americans' public health and safety and ensure
the soundness of our Nation's economy and to guarantee that
Americans' civil rights are not infringed upon. While
recognizing that regulation can impose costs, we understand
that, we should not ever forget that the benefits far outweigh
the costs. America has had some of its greatest years of
economic and job growth under the current regulatory system. At
a minimum, that seems to point to the conclusion there is no
inconsistency in the regulatory system we have and economic and
job growth. We ought to keep that in mind and proceed
cautiously before further hampering agency rulemaking.
I yield back the balance of my time, and thank you for the
allowance.
Mr. Coble. I thank the gentleman from Tennessee. We have
been joined by the distinguished gentleman from South Carolina,
Mr. Gowdy, and the distinguished gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Ross. Good to have you all with us. We will proceed with the
hearing. I will give you some background on our witnesses who
will appear today.
Mr. Richard Williams is the Mercatus Center Director of
Policy Research. He served in the Office of Management and
Budget for 27 years as the director of Social Sciences and the
Center For Food Safety and Applied Nutrition in the Food and
Drug Administration. Dr. Williams is a expert in benefit cost
analysis and risk analysis, particularly related to food safety
and nutrition. He has published in risk analysis and the
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, and has counseled
foreign governments, including the United Kingdom, South Korea,
and Australia. A Vietnam veteran, Dr. Williams received his
Ph.D. and his MA in economics from Virginia Tech and his B.S.
In business administration from the Old Dominion University. He
has served as an adviser to the Harvard Center For Risk
Analysis and taught economics at Washington and Lee University.
Mr. Jerry Ellig is a senior research fellow at the Mercatus
Center at George Mason University where he has worked since
1996. Between August 2001 and August 2003, he served as deputy
director and acting director of the Office of Policy Planning
at the Federal Trade Commission.
Dr. Ellig also has served as a senior economist for the
Joint Economic Committee on the U.S. Congress and as an
assistant professor of economics at George Mason University.
Dr. Ellig directed the Mercatus Center's regulatory report card
project which assesses the quality of agency performance in
promulgating major regulations. Dr. Ellig has published
numerous articles on government regulation and business
management in both scholarly and popular periodicals, and has
coauthored and edited several books on competition, regulation,
and environmental energy. He earned his Ph.D. degree and his
M.A. in economics from George Mason University and his B.A. in
economics from Xavier University.
Our third witness is Professor Robert L. Glicksman.
Professor Glicksman has published widely on the subject of
environmental and administrative law. Before coming to George
Washington University in 2009, he taught at the University of
Kansas School of Law where he was the Robert W. Wagstaff
distinguished professor of law. A graduate of the Cornell
School of Law, prior to joining the academy, Professor
Glicksman worked in private practice at a firm in Washington,
DC where he focused on environmental, energy and administrative
law issues.
Professor Glicksman joined the Center For Progressive
Reform in 2002, and has sat on its board of directors since
2008.
Our three witnesses bring glowing credentials to the table.
We are glad to have you all with us. We try to go by the 5-
minute rule that we apply to you all, and we try to apply it to
ourselves as well. You will see when the amber light appears,
that is your notice that time is evading. You will have 1
minute after that. When the red light appears, if you could
wrap up shortly thereafter, we would be appreciative.
Dr. Ellig, if you would start us off.

TESTIMONY OF JERRY ELLIG, SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW, MERCATUS
CENTER, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Mr. Ellig. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cohen,
Members of the Committee. My name is Jerry Ellig. I am a
research fellow at the Mercatus Center at George Mason
University. As the Chairman indicated in his introduction, I
have also served in two out of three branches of the Federal
Government. I probably won't get into the third. But each time
I have left government and gone back to academia, I have walked
out with a long list of studies I wished someone had done,
experts I wished we had been able to consult if we had only
been able to find them, to answer questions in order to make
better policies and make better decisions in government. And
that is really the genesis of the Mercatus regulatory report
card, trying to figure out what is it that agencies actually do
when they sit down to make decisions about regulation, and how
well do agencies do the things that Presidents of both
political parties have been telling them to do for several
decades.
Some time ago in our schooling, most of us probably learned
that there are a few basic things that we are supposed to do
before making important decisions that affect us or affect the
lives of other people. Really basic things, like identify the
goal that we are trying to achieve, what outcome do we want,
identify the nature of the problem we have to overcome to
achieve the goal. Identify the various alternative ways of
achieving that goal, and then weigh the pros and cons of
alternatives. You might call that Decisionmaking 101.
Well, regulatory analysis, as required by Federal executive
order, is simply Decisionmaking 101 applied to regulation. What
we are trying to do in the Mercatus regulatory report card is
assess how well agencies do these basic things that you would
do before making any big decisions. We have examined all of the
proposed economically significant regulations issued over the
past few years, those are the really big ones. We used criteria
drawn from the executive order that governs regulation, an OMB
Circular 8-4 that lays out best practices for regulatory
analysis. We look at the quality of the analysis, and we also
look at the extent to which the agency claims to have used the
analysis when it made decisions about the regulation.
So what do we find? We find that agencies do a lot of good
things in their regulatory analysis. We also find that the
average quality is low, the best ones are not stellar, there is
wide variation in the quality of regulatory analysis, we see a
lot of best practices in agency regulatory analysis, but they
are not widely shared and no analysis does everything well. And
we also see that often the regulatory analysis produced by
agencies reads as if it were written after the major decisions
about the regulation were made.
You might call this the ready fire aim approach to
regulation. And these findings are consistent with the findings
of other scholars at other institutions, other universities,
resources for the future, other respected places, who have
looked at smaller groups of regulations to try to figure out
what is the quality of the analysis and what do agencies do
with it.
Most importantly for the topic of this hearing, the biggest
single deficiency we find in many agency regulatory analyses,
not all, is insufficient definition and an explanation of the
systemic problem that the regulation is supposed to solve. Now,
that is a big mouthful of jargon. Let me give an analogy.
A couple of years ago I walked into the bathroom and found
water on the floor. That wasn't the problem, that was the
symptom. We had to do some analysis to solve the problem. We
found out that there was a crack in a plastic pipe that, in
turn, was caused by the fact that the toilet wasn't leveled and
it was rocking back and forth and that is what cracked the
pipe. After we did the analysis, we could solve the problem at
minimal cost.
Now when I sit down to read agency regulatory analyses,
they frequently read like somebody walking into a bathroom
saying well, the problem is obvious, there is water on the
floor. And the solution is obvious. We are going to make
everybody buy a mop, and we will now take public comment on
what types of mops we should require people to buy and how long
the handle should be. Anyone who disagrees with the favored
approach is accused of wanting to allow children to slip on wet
floors.
Now, lest you think I am exaggerating, I have examples in
my written testimony of a number of cases where we read agency
regulatory analyses looking for the definition of the systemic
problem; and essentially, there is either an assertion of a
problem with no underlying cause-and-effect theory, no
underlying empirical analysis, a symptom gets misdiagnosed as a
problem, or the problem is simply stated as the purpose of this
regulation is to implement such and such Public Law.
More broadly, about half the regulations we looked at
scored a zero or a one on this criterion, indicating that there
was a little bit of a perfunctory look at a problem or an
assertion, but not much real analysis. Now, some did well; but
about half of them just didn't do much.
We also find when we looked at the quality of the analysis
that there isn't much difference across Administrations. So
this is not a partisan issue or a political problem, it is an
institutional problem that can only be solved with changes in
the incentives that agencies face to do good analysis. So
instead of ready-fire-aim, the system should be look before you
leap.
Thank you for your time.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Professor.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ellig follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Coble. Dr. Williams.

TESTIMONY OF RICHARD A. WILLIAMS, DIRECTOR OF POLICY RESEARCH,
MERCATUS CENTER, GEORGE MASON UNIVERSITY

Mr. Williams. Chairman Coble, Ranking Member Cohen, and
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to
testify today. My name is Richard Williams. I have been
involved in rulemaking and the regulatory process for over 30
years, first as a regulatory analyst, and then as a senior
manager for the Food and Drug Administration, and those are
issues I continue to care deeply about. I also worked briefly
in the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. Today, I
serve as director of policy studies at the Mercatus Center at
George Mason University.
From my experience in research, I believe the regulatory
process we have today is not what was originally intended 60
years ago when we passed the Administrative Procedures Act,
which was to create a rational, transparent, and inclusive
process. When the APA was passed, then-Senator Pat McCarran,
who was the Chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary, called
it a widely heralded advance in democratic government.
But one of the biggest problems with our regulatory process
is that decisions are made first without any analysis or
whether or not we know regulation is needed. And more
importantly, without stakeholders being involved in that
decision. By the time a proposal is generated, most of the
significant issues have been decided and rules are steamrolled
through to the final rule. The reason regulatory agencies
decide early is that their incentives are to crank out new
regulations, whether needed or not.
After all, passing regulations is the business of
regulatory agencies, and their success is measured and rewarded
based on this activity. The problem with deciding early is that
we are regulating in the dark, that is without sufficient
knowledge of whether a regulation is needed or will work. This
isn't just FDA.
In a paper I did interviewing senior economists in many
regulatory agencies, I discovered that virtually all agencies
make decisions early, and anyone inside or outside the agency
who tries to suggest that regulation is not necessary generally
finds that view unwelcomed.
Analyzing that problem is part of what economists do in
regulatory impact analyses; but if your goal is to regulate as
opposed to solving a problem, there is no reason to wait for
analysis. Perhaps that is one reason why my colleague, Dr.
Ellig, shows that defining the problem is one of the agency's
biggest issues: if you are vague about the problem you are
trying to define, then no one can accuse you of failing to
solve a problem.
Another problem with deciding early is that stakeholders
end up commenting on decisions, not problems. Now some
stakeholders do get their voices heard in agencies prior to
decisions being made, but these are often firms or activists
who want a particular regulation to serve their own ends. As
this also advances what the agency is trying to do, those are
welcomed voices. But those that are confined to the comments
after proposals have been issued will find any objections they
raise to regulating will receive a short and decisive
dismissal. And it normally goes something like: the agency
disagrees or you didn't provide enough information to convince
the agency.
The result of all this activity is that we end up
regulating far too often when it is not effective or not
needed. That is why we now have 226 volumes of regulations,
taking up 163,000 pages of rules, and we still continue to add
4,000 new regulations each year with this broken process.
Certainly one tragic outcome of this, beyond our effect on
competitiveness, is we can't focus our resources on regulations
that are truly needed and effective. We can fix this by
changing the incentives that agencies face. However, we can no
longer rely on executive orders as every President since
Richard Nixon has tried to do.
Only Congress can fix this. One way they can do it is by
statutorily insisting that agencies start with a step to
determine if a regulation is necessary. This would be something
like a preproposal publication that the agency would
investigate and contain elements like a clear definition of the
problem that the agency seeks to solve and the evidence that it
relied on to define the problem, an explanation of and evidence
for why the problem warrants Federal intervention, an
exploration of a range of options that the agency believes
might solve the problem, and a preliminary estimate of benefits
and costs of each option.
All of this would be published to provide stakeholders and
the public an opportunity to evaluate the agency's data and
research, and contribute additional information. As OIRA
Director Sunstein says, they can take advantage of the fact
that knowledge is widely dispersed in society, and public
officials can benefit from access to that dispersed knowledge.
In commenting on a preliminary analysis like that, stakeholders
and the public are much more likely to comment broadly from
their collective wisdom and expertise on both what the actual
problem is and whether or not it needs a regulatory solution.
Use of this knowledge will help us solve our problems much more
effectively than our current process. While much more needs to
be done to address institutional barriers to problem-solving,
an essential first step will be in the establishment of some
kind of an evidence-driven and inclusive process for defining
the problem and the potential options to address it.
Thank you.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Dr. Williams.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________
Mr. Coble. We have been joined by the distinguished
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson. Good to see you, Hank.
Professor Glicksman, good to have you with us.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT L. GLICKSMAN, J.B. AND MAURICE C. SHAPIRO
PROFESSOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW, GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY
LAW SCHOOL

Mr. Glicksman. Chairman Coble, Ranking Member Cohen,
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to
testify today.
My name is Robert Glicksman. I am the J.B. and Maurice C.
Shapiro Professor of Environmental Law at The George Washington
University Law School, although I am here today strictly in my
personal capacity.
The premise of the Mercatus Center's regulatory report card
project is that the Federal rulemaking process is flawed, and
the best way to fix it is for agencies to engage in more
rigorous regulatory analysis to provide better justifications
of the need for and content of. More regulatory analysis, the
idea is, particularly at the initial stages of regulation,
would help avoid unnecessary regulation. The report card also
reflects the conviction that cost benefit analysis is essential
for identifying counterproductive regulations.
My first response is that the framing of the problem is not
one I would agree with. And to begin with, cost-benefit
analysis, in my view, is itself a flawed technique for
distinguishing between useful and counterproductive
regulations. More fundamentally, the problems arising from the
current regulatory process, for the most part, are not the
result of regulations lacking justification or whose costs
exceed their benefits. Instead, the primary problem is
inadequate resources to allow agencies to fulfill their
statutory responsibilities and fulfill their tasks of achieving
public policy goals.
In addition, the regulatory process already allows those
affected by regulation to identify flaws in agency regulatory
proposals, and affords both regulated entities and agencies
opportunities to fix problems, such as overly costly or unfair
regulation.
I want to make five points.
First, I think the presumption that we can get better
regulation if we make cost-benefit analysis more rigorous is
just wrong. Cost-benefit analysis is inescapably limited by the
difficulty of predicting and quantifying regulatory costs and
benefits. Quantifies cost-benefit analysis requires agencies to
reduce regulatory benefits, such as lives saved, to a crude
dollar figure, so that the monetized benefits of regulation can
be measured against its monetized costs. Some agency estimates
of monetized regulatory benefits are absurdly low, and I have
given some examples in my statement.
Beyond that, inconsistencies in how agencies monetize
benefits cast doubt on the usefulness of the effort. Cost
benefit figures, therefore, provide a misleading aura of
precision and rationality. Monetization of benefits often
depends on arbitrary assumptions that tend to undervalue social
benefits of regulation that are hard to quantify. Efforts to
reform the methodology for cost benefit analysis will at best
yield only marginal improvements in regulatory decisionmaking.
And, therefore, cost-benefit calculations should be used with
caution and with an acknowledgment of their limitations.
Second, the real problem to which Congress should be
directing its attention is not insufficient agency focus on
cost-benefit methodologies, but the destructive convergence of
funding shortfalls, demonizing political attacks and outmoded
legal authority, all of which have set the stage for
ineffective enforcement and unsupervised industry self-
regulation. Examples, some of which were pointed out by
Representative Conyers and Representative Cohen already today,
include the Deepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mexico; the
mine disaster at the Upper Big Branch Mine, West Virginia; a
peanut products tank tainted by salmonella; glasses
contaminated by cadmium sold to children at fast food
restaurants; Code Red smog days when parents are warned to keep
their children indoors; and the recall of widely used
pharmaceutical drugs found to create risks of heart failure.
All of these instances reflect agencies unable to do their
jobs in protecting the public interest. More analysis will not
fix these flaws. If anything, more analysis will only make
things worse by slowing agencies down without demonstrably
improving the quality of their regulatory decisions.
Proponents of cost benefit analysis remain focused on
perfecting formulas, assumptions, models, and data sets. If we
really want to fix the regulatory system, we should, instead,
focus on finding ways to help agencies effectively and
efficiently achieve their statutory missions of protecting and
the environment.
Measures that I think would move us in that direction
include providing agencies with the resources they need and
enhancing their legal authority in situations in which it has
become outmoded.
Third, current law provides ample opportunities to address
uncertainty, unnecessary or ill-advised regulation without
heaping on agencies already stretched to the limit more onerous
analytical responsibilities. The Administrative Procedure Act,
in particular, provides notice and comment process which
affords regulated entities and others opportunity to provide
input before a regulation goes into effect.
Fourth, even if agencies get it wrong during initial rule
promulgation, the regulatory process allows those affected by
regulation in unintended or counterproductive ways to seek
relief from the agency in the form of waivers and exceptions.
Fifth, agencies can revise rules that don't work out as
intended, either because they turn out to be too weak or too
strong. And, finally, judicial review provides a check on
unjustified regulation.
I will just close by quoting from two former EPA
administrators, Ruckelshaus and Whitman, who made this
statement just last Friday in an op-ed in the Post: Our country
today needs what it needed in 1970: a strong, confident,
scientifically driven, transparent, fair, and responsible set
of protective agencies, such as the EPA. Congress should help
America achieve that.
They also warned that those who do not support those goals
should be aware that the American public will not long stand
for an end to regulation that have produced their health and
quality of life.
Thank you for the opportunity to talk to you today.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Professor. And to all witnesses,
thank you for your testimony.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Glicksman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Coble. Gentlemen, as I said, we try to apply the 5-
minute rule to us, so if you all can keep your response to a
terse manner, we would appreciate that.
Failure is unfortunate. Some people indicate that those of
us who want to refine the regulatory system or improve it,
including President Obama has said that, we are not trying to
compromise safety in doing this. At least that is my take on
it. I think that needs to be fully appreciated.
Dr. Ellig, in 2008, the average Bush administration agency
score on your report was a failing 27.31 out of 60 possible
points. In 2009, the average Obama administration score was
also a failing mark of 27.02 out of 60. Is it fair then to
conclude that the failure of good decisionmaking is a
systematic problem across the Republican and Democratic
administrations?
Mr. Ellig. Yes. Statistically, there is no difference
between those two figures. We are getting about the same
results for both years.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir.
Professor Glicksman, in your book, Risk Regulation At Risk,
you write that agencies are more acquainted with the day-to-day
details and difficulties of regulatory decisions than the
communities of inquiry that operated the White House, Congress
and the Federal judiciary, which are not specialized in the
same way. Because agencies are much less accountable than the
other branches of government, should we not be doing even more
to ensure that their decisions are made transparently and on
the record?
Mr. Glicksman. I certainly support transparent
decisionmaking by agencies, and the tools that are provided by
the Administrative Procedure Act to ensure transparency. Beyond
that, both of the other branches of government, the Congress
and the courts, do have ways of holding agencies accountable
through, for example, amending statutes that Congress decides
agencies have implemented in ways that don't conform to
congressional intent. The courts are often called upon to
review regulations issued by agencies, and they have the
responsibility, as well as the authority, to overturn
regulations that lack adequate justification or are not
supported by scientific evidence. And they do so on a regular
basis.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir.
Dr. Williams, under your view, agencies really don't have
an incentive to seek and heed input from those who suggest no
regulation is needed. Instead, all of the incentives are to
listen and those who want more regulation, whether or not more
is needed. What are the most important ways in which we can
reform the APA to restore agencies' incentives to solve
problems rather than just regulate for the sake of regulating?
Mr. Williams. Thank you for the question. I think what
happens now is that agencies are rewarded with budgets for
passing regulations, and they are not penalized for passing
regulations that are ineffective or unwanted. I think the first
thing you have to look at are what are the incentives that need
to be changed with agencies. I would start with the process
that I outlined earlier where you separate out agencies,
defining the problem and taking public input on what the
problem is before they go ahead and make a decision. But
somewhere down the road, you are going to have to address the
incentives that agencies face, and particularly with budgets.
Mr. Coble. Dr. Ellig, let me try to beat that red light.
The first and most important step in any good decisionmaking is
to identify the problem one is attempting to solve. Is it
really true that you found agencies did the worst job of all at
this most basic step of decisionmaking?
Mr. Ellig. Yes. The average score on our criterion for
evaluating the systemic problem was around a 1.8 out of 5. So
on average, that was with the worst criterion. And about half
of the time we found it wasn't really that well addressed at
all.
Mr. Coble. I will now recognize the gentleman from
Tennessee for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Has the Mercatus group ever studied the Justice
Department's regulations or policies?
Mr. Williams. Not to my knowledge, sir.
Mr. Ellig. We included several Justice Department
regulations in our regulatory report card if they were proposed
in 2008 or 2009. And at some time in the past, one of many
independent scholars at Mercatus may have done some comments on
Justice Department some time in the past 20 years.
Mr. Cohen. Mercatus has been around for 20-30 years; right?
When did you start your report card?
Mr. Ellig. This regulatory report card project started with
the year 2008 a couple of years ago. A precursor project
examined the quality of analysis of all regulations issued by
the Department of Homeland Security since its inception. And
that was done a couple of years ago.
Mr. Cohen. So you had a report card in 2008?
Mr. Ellig. We started with the proposed regulations for
2008.
Mr. Cohen. Did you have a report card for the year 2008? Or
was the first report card in 2009?
Mr. Ellig. Just to clarify, we don't have really a single
document that we call a report card. The project is a wide
variety of evaluations of individual regulations which are all
available on our Web site, along with a set of notes which
justify each score. This is the most transparent way this kind
of a project has ever been done in the United States. We have
that.
For the past 2 years, we have produced a paper summarizing
the results for the year, and we have a paper from 2008 and a
paper from 2009 that also compares the 2008 and 2009 results.
Mr. Cohen. Who is on your board of directors?
Mr. Ellig. Who is on our board of directors?
Mr. Cohen. Yes.
Mr. Ellig. I can name a few folks. Honestly, I can't name
them all.
Mr. Cohen. Name a few of them.
Mr. Ellig. I can name a few. Vernon Smith, Nobel Laureate
in economics.
Mr. Cohen. From industry, which industry people are on your
board?
Mr. Ellig. From industry, the last time I looked, Charles
Koch was on the board. Industry, I am not sure if a former Fed
vice chairman counts as industry.
Mr. Cohen. No, it doesn't.
Is Charles Koch your largest funder?
Mr. Ellig. I honestly don't know. I don't care and it is
not----
Mr. Cohen. I care. The issue is I care. Is he your largest
funder?
Mr. Ellig. I do not know.
Mr. Cohen. Is he one of your largest funders?
Mr. Ellig. I do not know, and it is not relevant to my
work. On our Web site, we have a policy on the independence of
research from funding.
Mr. Cohen. Dr. Williams, do you know who your largest
funders are, the largest funders of the Center?
Mr. Williams. No, sir. I am also on the analytical side,
and we have a very strict separation of who funds us and how we
choose our analysis. I basically do analysis that I care deeply
about, and most of it stems from the work I did at the Food and
Drug Administration. And I still work intensively on those
issues because I care about the food and safety issues.
Mr. Cohen. The issues of food and drug, we have had spinach
scares and we have had lettuce scares and chickens we had to
get rid of and the Asian flu. We have had other problems with
food. Are you concerned that a lessening of regulation might
not subject the American people to more and more contaminated
foods?
Mr. Williams. No, sir.
Mr. Cohen. You are not?
Mr. Williams. My concern is when too often the agency
either wants to or is forced to regulate before we have
solutions to problems. What that means is we end up putting out
regulations, people have to comply with those regulations, and
we don't solve the problem. For the 27 years I was in the Food
and Drug Administration, we did not see food-borne illness
decrease by one food-borne illness. We put out a number of
regulations that were ineffective. What I am here to do today
is to try to get effective regulations; not more, not less,
effective regulations.
Mr. Cohen. Professor Glicksman, Robert Reich, former Labor
Secretary, said that those who argue that regulations kill jobs
ignore an important fact: lack of adequate regulation kills
people. You made some reference to that in studying effects,
whether it is just dollars and cents or human lives. Do you
think some of the changes in regulations that have been
proposed might affect people's lives in having more
contaminated food?
Mr. Glicksman. Certainly, I think watered-down regulation
or repeal of regulation is likely to have adverse effects on
the public health and safety and the environment, which can
translate into a downturn in economic productivity. There is
often a dichotomy that is set up between regulation that is
designed to protect the health and safety and the environment
and economic productivity. I think it is a false dichotomy.
They go hand in hand in the same direction in many instances.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you.
Mr. Coble. I thank the gentleman.
The distinguished gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ellig, in the course of 5 minutes, it struck me that
both the motive and the methodology have been questioned by
some of my distinguished colleagues from the other side. If you
would, please, would you tell us about your methodology? Why
who is on your board doesn't influence your research? Go ahead
and say what you wanted to say when my colleague from Tennessee
was questioning you.
Mr. Ellig. Basically, the way we are set up at Mercatus,
fundraising is separate from research. And those of us who do
research have the freedom to call them as we see them. That is
what I like about working there. If it were organized in some
other way, I probably wouldn't want to work there.
Now, as far as the scorecard goes, let me take off on the
use of the word ``subjectivity,'' since the Ranking Member
mentioned that in his introduction of our scorecard.
We said in the paper we wrote that a critic might claim
that this evaluation method is subjective and we have gone to
great pains to try to minimize the problems that might occur as
a result of that. And the actual word we used in our 2008 paper
was ``intersubjective,'' which is a term from philosophy of
science which means different people may be doing an evaluation
and rendering a subjective opinion, but what counts for a 2
when I look at a regulation is the same as what counts for a 2
when Richard looks at, what counts for a 2 when our colleague
John Morrall, a 29-year veteran of the Office of Information
and Regulatory Affairs, looks at it, and so forth. So we try to
get a common understanding of what types of performance in
these analyses counts for what kind of a score.
Then we put the scoring notes and the scores all up on our
Web site so anybody can go look at it, and we welcome other
folks to look at it, to read it and dialogue with us. And if
they think we missed something, tell us. That is what it is
about in academia. We won't get upset; but just tell us what
the specific issue or the problem is.
Mr. Gowdy. Well, it strikes me that you gave equally
abysmal scores to both Administrations. So the notion that you
are biased in favor of one Administration or the other, I would
be embarrassed at either score that was given. Let me ask you
this to hopefully end on a happy note. The Department of
Justice got the highest ranking that you gave. What are they
doing that the Social Security Administration is not?
Mr. Ellig. I don't think we have enough data yet to say
well, this agency generally does a good job; and this agency
generally does a bad job. We have a small number of agencies
that will issue six or seven or 10 big regulations a year. But
a lot of the other ones will be one or two or three, and there
are different sub-entities within the agencies, some of which
may do better or worse analysis than others. I don't know that
we can generalize from our results at this point to say this
agency does a good job and this agency does a not-so-good job.
Mr. Gowdy. Mr. Chairman, in a rare move, I yield back the
balance of my time.
Mr. Coble. I thank the distinguished gentleman from South
Carolina.
The distinguished gentleman from Michigan is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the panel, I appreciate your comments.
Do you have any familiarity with legislative Acts that are
attempting to reform the regulatory process by the Congress?
Mr. Ellig. My understanding is all kinds of stuff have been
introduced.
Mr. Conyers. Anything in particular?
Mr. Glicksman. I am somewhat familiar with the proposed
REINS Act.
Mr. Conyers. What about you, Dr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. I also heard about the REINS Act as well.
Mr. Conyers. Have you heard anything good about it?
Mr. Williams. My understanding, sir, is that Congress, a
number a years ago, voted itself the right to turn back
regulations, and that they have used that authority one time in
something like 15 years. And that the Reins Act would reverse
that.
Mr. Conyers. Do you have any particular recollection, Dr.
Ellig, about any proposals currently before the Congress, in
this 112th Session?
Mr. Ellig. I have heard of the REINS Act. I have heard of a
piece of legislation that essentially took President Clinton's
Order 12866 and wants to write that into law so it is a
requirement for all agencies rather than just an executive
order.
I remember hearing a few days ago there was a piece of
legislation introduced that would have--that would essentially
almost overturn a key Supreme Court precedent on direct wine
shipment and give the States more latitude in how they choose
to regulate interstate commerce in alcohol. So, yes, a lot of
different things have been introduced.
Mr. Conyers. For experts in regulatory reform, your
attention to some of the excessive amounts of time we spend on
the debates is a little bit disturbing to me. This is the
fourth hearing--this is the fifth hearing on regulatory reform.
Have you ever heard anything about our hearings in this
Committee, in the Judiciary Committee?
Mr. Ellig. I am aware of one previous hearing. I have to
say as a regulatory specialist who used to work in a Federal
regulatory agency where the general--a lot of issues of
regulation I work on rarely get much attention in Congress, so
I am delighted that it is finally going to get some attention.
Mr. Williams. My expertise is actually in regulatory
agencies for 27 years. And the things I testified about today
are things I came to realize over really three decades. I pay
some attention to the bills that are going on in Congress. But
also as an analyst, I am familiar with the fact that many bills
are introduced but not passed.
So my concern today is to try to fix the problems where
agencies are making decisions first, and then getting
stakeholder input.
Mr. Conyers. Well, I am a little perplexed about your
expertise, but in the storm that is going on these first 3
months about regulatory reform, this Committee has spent more
time on this subject than anything else. You spent your careers
working in the field. And now we meet here this afternoon and
you know almost little or nothing about what is being
contemplated. How can we be expected to take your advice
seriously if you don't even have any knowledge of what we are
doing to try to improve the regulatory process of which you
complain pretty strenuously?
Mr. Williams. It is not my understanding that we were
called here to talk about individual, proposed statutes. In
fact, because of our status, we actually can't advocate for or
against any particular law.
Mr. Conyers. You can't? Well, let me ask you this: Who are
the agencies that are doing so poorly that they get zero or one
ratings? Are you able to reveal that?
Mr. Ellig. Well, it is all revealed on our Web site. So, it
is certainly already public knowledge.
Mr. Conyers. Yes, but you are here in front of me right
now. Let's talk about it.
Mr. Ellig. The zeros or the ones were just on one criterion
which was----
Mr. Conyers. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for one
additional minute.
Mr. Coble. Without objection, one additional minute.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much.
Mr. Ellig. The zeroes and the ones were on one particular
criterion which was definition of the systemic problem.
Mr. Conyers. Just name the agencies you are talking about?
Mr. Ellig. An agency that had a lot of regulations that
were zeros or ones was Department of Health and Human Services.
Typically in the annual regulations, the Department issues
recalculation of Medicare payment rates and various other
things like that.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you for that one.
Name a second one?
Mr. Ellig. Let's see. In 2008, there was a Social Security
Administration regulation on setting the time and place for
appearances before administrative law judges that just didn't
say anything about the issue.
Mr. Conyers. What agency are you referring to, sir.
Mr. Ellig. Social Security Administration.
Mr. Conyers. You have got a list of maybe about 15, I will
just ask you to submit them for the record.
Mr. Ellig. Each year there were about half of the
regulations that got zeroes or ones, so that would be about 20
to 25 a year.
Mr. Conyers. Right. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Coble. You are welcome. The distinguished gentleman
from Georgia is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With all due respect,
I must wonder why it is that we are holding this hearing today.
Purportedly, it is going to give the Members an opportunity to
discuss ways in which Federal agencies can improve their grades
on the regulatory report cards issued by the Mercatus Center.
And this Mercatus Center was founded by Rich Fink, correct? Do
you know who Rich Fink is?
Mr. Ellig. Yeah, yes. I know who Dr. Fink is.
Mr. Johnson. And Dr. Fink is former president for the Koch
Family Foundation , isn't that correct?
Mr. Ellig. I don't know what title, I know he works for
Koch Industries. I don't know what other titles he might have
accumulated.
Mr. Johnson. Now Koch Industries is led by the brothers
David and Charles Koch, and it is a $100 billion per year
conglomerate. Isn't that a fact?
Mr. Ellig. It is a big company, yes.
Mr. Johnson. The second largest private industry in the
United States of America.
Mr. Ellig. Yes. Sometimes the news reports say second,
sometimes they say first.
Mr. Johnson. A $35 billion fortune that the brothers
control, and out of that 35 billion, isn't it a fact that they
contributed about $30 million to the George Mason University,
much of which went into funding for the Mercatus Center?
Mr. Ellig. I don't know because we keep research separate
from fundraising, and I am on the research side of----
Mr. Johnson. You wouldn't disagree with that, would you?
Mr. Ellig. I am saying I do not know.
Mr. Johnson. Okay, well, I will tell you if it is true, and
I have reason to believe that it is, doesn't that put the
credibility of the Mercatus Center and its report card at
issue? Is that something that the public should be able to
understand who is doing the grading and perhaps the fact that
they are grading is influenced by their monetary interest in
what they are grading?
Mr. Ellig. Well, I don't pay any attention to it. And as
far as whether that has any effect on the credibility, I am
quite happy to have the credibility of this project stand on
the quality of the research results we produce, the quality of
the process we put together, and the reviews and comments that
we get as we submit the papers from this project for peer
review in academic journals.
Mr. Johnson. Well, Dr. Williams, you have said pretty much
essentially that agencies justify their very existence by
issuing regulations. And oftentimes, there is no justification
for the regulation that they promulgate. And you are saying, or
can it be said also that legislators justify their existence by
introducing legislation some of which may not be prudent, is
that correct?
Mr. Ellig. Well, what I know about is regulatory agencies.
I have 27 years in the Food and Drug Administration.
Mr. Johnson. Do you mean to tell me that you think that the
average agency employee comes to work every day with the sole
purpose of deciding what kind of regulation I am going to
propose today?
Mr. Williams. I can't testify to all agencies. I know that
the employees of the Food And Drug Administration are some of
the finest people I have ever meet. However, I do know----
Mr. Johnson. It is the Department of Energy, though, that
you really want to get at. Tell me this. If you really want to
get, since the Kochs are in the energy business, have a lot of
concerns in the energy business, you are trying to make it more
difficult for the Department of Energy and other departments to
issue regulations which would govern the conduct of this for-
profit corporation.
Mr. Williams. Far from it. What I am concerned about, the
same thing I was concerned about throughout my entire career is
that we get effective regulations, that we not have ineffective
regulations that crowd up compliance with the effective ones so
that we can actually solve our social problems. That is my
concern.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Coble. We have been joined by the distinguished
gentleman from California, Mr. Gallegly.
Mr. Gallegly. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Dr. Ellig, could you maybe give us a little assessment
about what steps the Congress should take to ensure agencies
consider the economic impact of all regulations, report
regulations are imposed?
Mr. Ellig. Well, I don't think there is a silver bullet
because the regulatory process is complex but there are some
things that could help. One is to find some way to ensure that
agencies actually do the analysis before they make decisions
about regulations.
Now, I know some folks say, oh, that is going to slow down
the process, paralysis by analysis. I only know of one
empirical investigation that tried to figure out whether that
is actually true or not. It is a classic little article by a
gentleman named Tim Muris. He is a distinguished law professor
at George Mason. He was chairman of the Federal Trade
Commission. And back in the 1980s, he wrote an article in which
he looked at Federal Trade Commission rulemaking and pointed
out that one of the most famous regulations in which the FTC
took its time to develop a theory of the systemic problem and
then investigate empirical evidence, the eyeglass rule to
prevent bans on advertising of eyeglasses, the rule was done in
3 years.
Another rule, a famous rule the FTC issued that was not
really accompanied by a very good systemic theory of what the
consumer harm was and didn't have much empirical analysis and
was essentially based on some anecdotes, was the FTC funeral
rule. It took 10 years to issue this thing. So I would suggest
that maybe, just maybe, agencies can sometimes do a quicker job
or at least a better job of regulating when they actually have
to take the steps to understand what they are doing before they
do it.
Mr. Gallegly. When you mentioned the concern for slowing
down the process, I am not sure that that is necessarily a bad
thing sometimes. In fact, it would almost appear to me that
without doing some of this analysis, it is almost a ready-
shoot-aim type situation. And ultimately, the cure may be worse
than the disease. So maybe there should be more of an attempt
to understand the consequences, not that in the end the results
may be the same, but at the same time, I would think that
should be an integral part of the equation. I hope somebody
agrees with that.
Dr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. I agree. I certainly agree and as I said in
my testimony, I think that too frequently we are making
decisions first without knowing what the impacts of those
decisions are, we are basically regulating in the dark.
Mr. Gallegly. Professor Glicksman.
Mr. Glicksman. I would just remark the regulations which I
am most familiar the ones issues by EPA and Federal land
management issues the BLM, the Forest Service and the Park
Service are not characterized by lack of identification of
regulatory objectives. It is quite clear when you read the
preamble to an EPA regulation that seeks to control emissions
of a cancer-causing pollutant that what the Agency is trying to
do is to limit exposure to dangerous chemicals emitted by
companies that, absent regulation, have little or no incentive
to control their emissions in ways that will increase the
regulatory compliance costs.
When an agency like the Forest Service issues regulations,
it is quite clear that what they are trying to do is to enhance
recreational opportunities for people like hikers, hunters,
fishermen. So I just, in my experience, have not seen this
problem of regulating without understanding what the objective
of the regulation is going to be.
Mr. Gallegly. I don't know that any of us would really
object to the objectives that you have just identified with.
However, there sometimes are other issues that the economic
impact could be more applicable than maybe the examples that
you used.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Coble. You are indeed welcome, sir. We have been joined
by the distinguished gentleman from New York, Mr. Reed. You are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Reed. I am going to yield at this point in time, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, sir. Gentlemen, we thank you for your
testimony today. Without objection, all Members will have 5
legislative days to submit to the Chair additional written
questions for the witnesses which we will forward and ask the
witnesses to respond as properly as they can do so and that
their answers may be made a part of the record. Without
objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days to submit
any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
Again, gentlemen, thanks to each of you, and this hearing
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:05 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Jerry Ellig, Senior Research
Fellow, Mercatus Center, George Mason University; and Richard A.
Williams, Director of Policy Research, Mercatus Center, George Mason
University

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Response to Post-Hearing Questions from Robert L. Glicksman, J.B. and
Maurice C. Shapiro Professor of Environmental Law, George Washington
University Law School

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


