- CYBERSECURITY: INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO CHALLENGING PROBLEMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CYBERSECURITY: INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO CHALLENGING PROBLEMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,
COMPETITION, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-38

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-541 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2011

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
[Vacant]

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman

BEN QUAYLE, Arizona, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
Wisconsin                            JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JUDY CHU, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          TED DEUTCH, Florida
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     JERROLD NADLER, New York
TED POE, Texas                       ZOE LOFGREN, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                MAXINE WATERS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             [Vacant]
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
[Vacant]

Blaine Merritt, Chief Counsel

Stephanie Moore, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MAY 25, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet...........     1
The Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet........     3
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet..................................     4

WITNESSES

James A. Baker, Associate Deputy Attorney General, U.S.
Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................     6
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Greg Schaffer, Assistant Secretary for Cybersecurity and
Communications (CS&C), National Protection and Programs
Directorate, Department of Homeland Security
Oral Testimony.................................................    14
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Ari Schwartz, Senior Internet Policy Advisor, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce
Oral Testimony.................................................    15
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     8
Robert W. Holleyman, II, President and CEO, Business Software
Alliance (BSA)
Oral Testimony.................................................    31
Prepared Statement.............................................    33
Leigh Williams, BITS President, The Financial Services Roundtable
(FSR)
Oral Testimony.................................................    44
Prepared Statement.............................................    47
Leslie Harris, President and CEO, Center for Democracy and
Technology (CDT)
Oral Testimony.................................................    56
Prepared Statement.............................................    58

CYBERSECURITY: INNOVATIVE SOLUTIONS TO CHALLENGING PROBLEMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Bob Goodlatte
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Quayle, Coble, Issa,
Chaffetz, Griffin, Marino, Adams, Watt, Conyers, Lofgren, and
Jackson Lee.
Staff present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Counsel; Olivia Lee,
Clerk; and (Minority) Stephanie Moore, Subcommittee Chief
Counsel.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good morning. The Subcommittee on
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet will come
to order.
And I will recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today we are holding a hearing on cybersecurity. This is a
complex issue that cuts across several Federal agencies and
connects a multitude of stakeholders. The issue may be complex,
but the consequences of failure are fairly direct.
The Federal Government's computers are attacked by hackers,
many from abroad, on a regular basis. Though most of these
attacks are thwarted, some end up breaking through. And not all
of these attacks are sophisticated. Sometimes it is the low-
tech attack that wreaks the most damage as demonstrated by the
WikiLeaks case where thousands of classified State Department
documents were released online. Had basic cybersecurity
practices been followed, it would not have been possible for
someone to remove such a large volume of data from those
classified computers.
Despite the fact that the Federal sector grabs the
headlines, in many respects it really is the private sector
that stands on the front lines of cybersecurity. More than 90
percent of our Nation's critical infrastructure is operated by
the private sector. Even though the Federal Government has an
important role to play, we need to make sure we hear from the
private sector and ensure that their hands are not tied due to
obtuse regulations and increased bureaucracy.
In 2004, worldwide economic damage from digital attacks was
between $46 billion and $56 billion, according to a
Congressional Research Service estimate. In 2009, the
Administration's cyberspace policy review estimated that losses
from data theft in 2008 were as high as $1 trillion. It is
clear that the stakes are high and we must take steps to
bolster our cybersecurity now.
Again, while the Government has a crucial role to play, any
policy to improve private-sector cybersecurity should not run
against or impede our economic prosperity. Regulatory mandates
are unlikely to lead to private-sector cybersecurity
improvements and will likely hinder economic growth.
The regulatory process is a slow one, whereas the
escalating cyber threats our country faces are extremely
dynamic problems. Cybersecurity threats and online technologies
change quickly, so quickly that any regulations for
cybersecurity could be outdated by the time they are finalized.
Further, a burdensome regulatory framework that increases
costs for U.S. businesses puts them at a distinct competitive
disadvantage to their foreign competitors. Likewise, any
efforts by the Government to take control of the Internet
through a kill switch should be strongly resisted. The idea of
a kill switch harkens to the type of control abused by
dictators, as we most recently saw in Egypt.
I believe that Congress and the Administration need to set
general parameters and then look for ways to encourage the
private sector to do more to protect its infrastructure from
cyber attacks. However, in doing so, we need to ensure that a
one-size-fits-all mandate from the Federal Government is
avoided. Entangling companies in a morass of red tape will not
solve the problem and will actually stifle innovation.
Companies are on the front lines in this fight, and the private
sector is the best equipped to match the increasingly
sophisticated threats to our cybersecurity with sophisticated
counter-efforts. To be successful, any solutions in this area
must unleash the creativity and resourcefulness of the private
sector to combat the problem.
One way to accomplish this would be to provide limited
liability protection to companies that take steps to improve
their cybersecurity capabilities. Providing civil liability
safe harbors to businesses that demonstrate compliance with
cybersecurity best practices would encourage the private sector
to adopt effective measures.
Additionally, I believe that Government has a role to play
in public engagement, working with companies to help them
understand and appreciate the potential losses that can occur
through a cyber intrusion. When folks better understand the
potential ramifications, it becomes clearer that it is in their
best economic interest to improve their cybersecurity
capabilities. Part of this public/private engagement means that
companies will need to share experiences and best practices to
help identify vulnerabilities and solutions.
As we look at these innovative solutions, I think that we
also need to examine the criminal code to ensure that our laws
track with the threats posed by hackers and other cyber
criminals. Our Nation's law enforcement agencies should have
the necessary tools to investigate, apprehend, and prosecute
cyber criminals.
Though these ideas are not exhaustive, I think this
framework will help us steer the debate toward solutions that
address the complex and challenging problems posed in the
cybersecurity sphere. I am currently working on legislation
along these lines and look forward to continuing to work with
Members of this Committee and industry on that effort.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses today
and hope that we can have a spirited discussion on the
Administration's cybersecurity proposal and the best steps
Congress can take to ensure that our security in the digital
era is strong and effective.
And now it is my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member
of the Subcommittee, the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Watt.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
Chairman convening this hearing. I am little disappointed that
we don't have our colleagues here from the Crime Subcommittee,
especially in light of the Chairman's last few paragraphs
suggesting that this may be more readily addressed by dealing
with the issue on the criminal side. But I am sure there are
other implications here and I am happy to try to explore them
hopefully without being as firm in my opinions yet since I am
not an expert in this area as the Chairman seems to be. I am
not sure that I think the private sector can solve every public
problem we have, but that is a subject of a long debate in
many, many different contexts.
The protection and security of our Nation's digital
information infrastructure is among the highest priorities we
face as the transformation of global communications networks to
cyberspace continues. As the Administration noted over 2 years
ago in its cyberspace policy review, quote, cyberspace touches
practically everything and everyone. It provides a platform for
innovation and prosperity and the means to improve general
welfare around the globe. But with the broad reach of a loose
and likely regulated digital infrastructure, great risks
threaten nations, private enterprises, and individual rights.
Closed quote.
The Administration's answer to these challenges was
released last week, and I commend the Chairman for scheduling
this hearing promptly so that we can begin to debate these
issues in earnest.
Over the past few years, news reports of breaches in the
digital security of our businesses, for example, Google, Sony,
and PlayStation, or breaches of the digital security of the
Government have increased at an alarming rate. Although
WikiLeaks has become the face of security breaches within the
Government, the more significant breaches are those where
Government computers are attacked and infected with malicious
code, as was the case last fall when a foreign intelligence
agency using a flash drive spread a rogue program through a
military computer network of classified and unclassified data.
Various officials and commentators have sounded a clarion
call for Congress to address this threat or risk a
sophisticated cyber attack that could cripple the U.S. computer
networks, including our financial institutions, energy, and
electricity systems and transportation networks.
Others have rightly highlighted the fact that we must
continue to value individual privacy as we develop effective
protocols to secure our digital infrastructure from attack.
The Administration's proposal has been met with mixed
reviews. On the one hand, the proposal seems to have received a
generally positive reception in the Senate, but at least one
critic and former Bush administration official has dubbed the
proposal as less than ``weak tea,'' saying ``I would call this
weak tea except the teabag doesn't seem to have actually
touched the water. The privacy and business groups that don't
want to do anything serious about the cybersecurity crisis have
captured yet another White House.''
I am hopeful that both panels today can provide us with a
response to that criticism.
In closing, let me say I look forward to learning more
about the aims of the Administration's proposal but must note
one concern that I am sure Ranking Member Bobby Scott of the
Crime Subcommittee and I would share: the inclusion in the
proposal of mandatory minimums. Particularly in an area rife
with adolescent mischief, it seems to me that there may be
missed opportunities if there is no flexibility to educate and
take advantage of the genius, albeit sometimes misguided or
manipulated, of our youth who may not know that they are
committing a cyber crime.
We have two impressive panels today, so I will yield back
and look forward to their testimony. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
And the Chair is pleased to recognize the Ranking Member of
the full Committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte and our Ranking
minority Member, Mel Watt.
I want to join in the request that the Subcommittee on
Crime have hearings on this subject since we are not doing it
together, and I think it is better that we do it separately
anyway, but especially with this mandatory minimum in here.
Now, there may be a mandatory minimum that I like, but I
have never met one yet. And to be putting this in, rushing this
in without ever clarifying what it is we are putting a
mandatory minimum on is not a good way for a Committee on the
Judiciary to proceed. And so I think we ought to take that out,
and I think that ought to belong to the Subcommittee on Crime
to help us get to that.
Now, I am going to be drafting a national law that doesn't
have that in it but that will be a lot more particular, and I
am hoping that we can get to this. California has the strongest
laws on the subject, and I think it is very important. But I
don't think that we can do this without taking into
consideration some of the other State laws. And I think there
has to be one law that supersedes all the State laws unless we
have some particular kinds of carve-out that would allow some
of them to exist. That is the question I am interested in
today. Should we have a national law or should we have
exceptions within the national law?
And I will yield back the balance of my time, Chairman
Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
And I want to assure both the gentleman from North Carolina
and the gentleman from Michigan that while the Administration's
proposals are deserving of very careful consideration, there
will be, I want to assure you, no rush to judgment on them with
or without mandatory minimums.
We have two very distinguished panels of witnesses today,
and each of the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety. I ask that each witness
summarize his testimony in 5 minutes or less, and to help you
stay within that time, there is a timing light on your table.
When the light switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute
to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it
signals that your time has expired.
Before I introduce our witnesses, I would like them to
stand and be sworn.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. You can be seated.
Our first witness is Mr. James Baker. Mr. Baker serves as
Associate Deputy Attorney General in the Department of Justice.
Mr. Baker is responsible for a range of national security,
cybersecurity, and other matters. He previously served as
counsel for intelligence policy at the Department from 2001 to
2007 where, among other things, he was in charge of
representing the United States before the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court. In addition, he served as a Federal
prosecutor with the Department's Criminal Division from 2008 to
2009. Mr. Baker was Assistant General Counsel for National
Security at Verizon Business. He has also taught national
security at Harvard Law School and was a fellow at the
Institute of Politics at Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government. He is a graduate of the University of Notre Dame
and the University of Michigan Law School.
Our second witness is Mr. Greg Schaffer. Mr. Schaffer
serves as Assistant Secretary for Cyber Security and
Communications at the Department of Homeland Security. Mr.
Schaffer works within the National Protection and Programs
Directorate to lead the Department's cybersecurity efforts. He
works with public and private sectors as well as international
partners to prepare for, prevent, and respond to catastrophic
incidents that could degrade or overwhelm the Nation's
strategic cyber and communications infrastructure. Mr. Schaffer
previously served as Senior Vice President and Chief Risk
Officer for Alltel Communications. Before joining Alltel, Mr.
Schaffer worked at PricewaterhouseCoopers and served as a
prosecutor at the Department of Justice. He received his B.A.
from George Washington University and his J.D. from the
University of Southern California Law Center.
Our third witness is Mr. Ari Schwartz. Mr. Schwartz serves
as Senior Internet Policy Advisor for the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, NIST, at the Department of Commerce.
As part of the Commerce Department's Internet Policy Task
Force, he provides input on areas such as cybersecurity,
privacy, and identity management. He also works on IT-related
issues for the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy Cross Agency Working Groups. Mr. Schwartz came to NIST
on August 30, 2010 after serving over 12 years as Vice
President and Chief Operating Officer of the Center for
Democracy and Technology. At CDT, Mr. Schwartz worked to
improve privacy protections in the digital age and expand
access to Government information via the Internet. He also led
the Anti-Spyware Coalition, anti-spyware software companies,
academics and public interest groups dedicated to defeating
spyware. He was also named one of the top five influential IT
security thinkers of 2007 by Secure Computing magazine.
Welcome to you all and we will begin with you, Mr. Baker.

TESTIMONY OF JAMES A. BAKER, ASSOCIATE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Baker. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Watt,
and Members of the Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify today on behalf of the Department of Justice regarding
the Administration's cyber legislation proposals.
As the President has stated and as this Committee well
knows, the United States confronts serious and complex
cybersecurity threats. Our critical infrastructure is
vulnerable to cyber intrusions that could damage vital national
resources and put lives at risk. Intruders have stolen
confidential information, intellectual property, and
substantial amounts of funds.
Cyber crime is on the rise and criminal syndicates are
operating with increasing sophistication to steal from innocent
Americans. Even more alarming, these intrusions might be
creating future access points through which criminal actors and
others can compromise critical systems during times of crisis
or for other nefarious purposes.
Over the past few years, the Government has made real
progress in confronting these threats. At the Justice
Department, our investigators and prosecutors have established
new units such as the National Cyber Investigative Joint Task
Force, or NCIJTF, to pull together the resources of many
different agencies to investigate and address cyber threats.
Despite the good work that has been going on in this area,
the problem is far from resolved. It is clear that new
legislation can improve cybersecurity in a number of critical
respects as described in the Administration's legislative
proposal. I would like to take a moment to highlight two parts
of the Administration's legislative package that is aimed at
protecting Americans from cyber crime.
First, data breach notification. Data breaches frequently
involve the compromise of sensitive, personal information and
expose consumers to identity theft and other crimes. Right now,
there are 47 different State laws requiring companies to report
data breaches in different situations and through different
mechanisms.
The Administration's data breach proposal would replace
those 47 State laws with a single national standard applicable
to all entities that meet the minimum threshold set forth in
the proposal. If enacted into law, this proposal, we believe,
would better ensure that companies notify consumers promptly
when sensitive personally identifiable information is
compromised and that they inform consumers about what they can
do to protect themselves. The proposal would empower the
Federal Trade Commission to enforce the reporting requirements.
It would also establish rules for what must be reported to law
enforcement agencies when there is a significant intrusion so
that, for example, the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service can work
quickly to identify the culprit and protect others from being
victimized. The national standard would also make compliance
easier for industry, we believe, which currently has the burden
of operating under the patchwork of all these different State
laws that I mentioned.
Second, the Administration's proposal includes a handful of
changes to a variety of criminal laws aimed at ensuring that
computer crimes and cyber intrusions can be investigated and
punished in the same way and to the same extent as other
similar or analogous criminal activity. Of particular note, the
Administration's proposal would make it clearly unlawful to
damage or shut down a computer system that manages or controls
a critical infrastructure, and it would establish minimum
sentence requirements for such activities. This narrow, focused
proposal is intended to provide strong deterrence to this class
of very serious, potentially life-threatening crimes. Moreover,
because cyber crime has become a big business for organized
crime groups, the Administration's proposal would make it clear
that the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or
RICO, applies to computer crimes.
Also, the proposal would harmonize the sentences and
penalties in the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act with other
similar laws. For example, acts of wire fraud in the United
States currently carry a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison,
but violations of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act involving
very similar behavior carry a maximum of only 5 years.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, this is an
important topic and thank you for holding this hearing today.
The country is at risk and there is much work to be done to
better protect critical infrastructure and stop computer
criminals from victimizing and threatening Americans.
I look forward to answering your questions today, and thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Baker, Mr. Schaffer,
and Mr. Schwartz follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Baker.
Mr. Schaffer, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF GREG SCHAFFER, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR
CYBERSECURITY AND COMMUNICATIONS (CS&C), NATIONAL PROTECTION
AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Watt,
and Members of the Subcommittee. It is a pleasure to be here
this morning and an honor to be able to testify on this
important topic.
No security issue is more pressing to the Nation than
cybersecurity today. We face known and unknown vulnerabilities
that are being exploited by an expanding set of threat actors
with strong and rapidly expanding threat capabilities. They are
acting in an environment where we have limited awareness of
what they are exploiting on our networks, but through the
limited visibility we do have, we know one fact, which is that
in cyberspace, offense wins and defense tends to lose. As a
consequence, personal privacy is routinely invaded,
intellectual property of American companies is continuously
siphoned off to points unknown, and as we attach more and more
of our critical infrastructure to the networks for the
efficiency that they can bring, the power grid, the financial
sector, transportation networks, we put more and more of our
systems at risk to attacks that can literally impact our way of
life. This is a national security issue. It is an economic
security issue, and it is a homeland security issue.
We believe that government, industry, and individuals
working together will be necessary in order to reform our
practices in order to execute a solution to these problems, and
the Administration's proposal recently submitted to Congress is
designed to do that.
I will focus my comments on two parts of the proposal, one
focused on protecting the Federal Government and the other on
protecting critical infrastructure.
Under the heading of protecting the Federal Government, the
proposal would solidify DHS's responsibilities with respect to
leading protection for Federal civilian networks. It would
establish protection service capabilities like intrusion
detection and intrusion prevention, red teams, and risk
assessments for Federal Departments and agencies. It is some of
the work that we are already doing today, but it clarifies our
authority and it removes the necessity to enter into
complicated legal agreements and arrangements in order to
execute in our mission space.
It also would modernize the Federal Information Security
Management Act, or FISMA. It is similar to many bills that have
been presented over the last couple of years to go away from
paper-based compliance exercises and move in the direction of
real risk reduction through continuous monitoring and
operational improvements.
We would also be ensuring that DHS has the cybersecurity
hiring authorities in order to get the best people in order to
execute in this mission space. As you know, it is extremely
competitive to hire people in this space. DOD had some
authorities that allows them to move more quickly to do the
hiring and pay arrangements that the private sector often can
pay more and hire faster. This would simply expand DOD's
existing capabilities and apply them to DHS.
Under the heading of protecting critical infrastructure, we
believe that the proposal enhances collaboration with the
private sector through both voluntary and mandatory programs as
well as improving the opportunities for information sharing.
Under the heading of voluntary assistance, it enables DHS
to quickly work with the private sector, State, local, tribal,
and territorial governments by clarifying our legal authority
to provide certain kinds of assistance, including alerts and
warnings, risk assessments, onsite technical support, and
incident response.
For information sharing, it again clarifies the authority
of businesses, State, local, tribal, and territorial
governments to provide information that they learn about
through operating their own networks which can be useful to
help cybersecurity for the Nation. That would be done with
immunity when the sharing is done, but it would also be done
under mandates for a robust privacy oversight and controls.
Mandatory parts of the provision in the bill would really
focus on critical infrastructure mitigation of risk. In this
space, the plan is to work with the private sector to develop
the kinds of entities that would need to be covered as critical
infrastructure to develop frameworks to identify risks,
mitigate those risks, and then have the individual companies
come up with plans to apply those frameworks to their
infrastructure. We would then be able to make that information
available to the marketplace. We would also be in a position to
get notices of breaches when they happen so that we can have
situational awareness across the ecosystem, as well as being
able to provide assistance to those companies when breaches do
occur.
We believe that these provisions will help improve security
across the entire ecosystem, and I thank you again for the
opportunity to testify and I stand ready to answer your
questions.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Schaffer.
Mr. Schwartz, welcome.
__________

TESTIMONY OF ARI SCHWARTZ, SENIOR INTERNET POLICY ADVISOR,
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY, U.S. DEPARTMENT
OF COMMERCE

Mr. Schwartz. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, Representative Conyers. Thank you for inviting me to
testify on behalf of the Department of Commerce on the
Administration's cybersecurity legislative proposal.
The main goal of this proposal is to maximize the country's
effectiveness in protecting the security of key critical
infrastructure networks and systems that rely on the Internet
while also minimizing regulatory burden on the entities that it
seeks to protect and while also protecting the privacy and
civil liberties of the public.
I will briefly address five parts of the proposal: first,
creating secure plans for covered critical infrastructure;
second, promoting secure data centers; third, protecting
Federal systems; fourth, data breach reporting; and fifth,
privacy protections.
One of the most important themes of the proposal is
accountability through disclosure. In requiring creation of
security plans, the Administration is promoting the use of
private sector expertise and innovation over top-down
Government regulation.
The covered critical infrastructure entities will take the
lead in developing frameworks of performance standards under
the proposal and, therefore, will look to create these
frameworks working together with industry and can also ask NIST
to work with them to help create these frameworks. There will
be strong incentive for both industry to build effective
frameworks and for DHS to approve those created by industry.
The entities involved will want the certainty of knowing that
their approach has been approved and DHS will benefit from
knowing that they will not need to invest the resources of
taking an intensive approach through developing a Government-
mandated framework unless the industry fails to act.
Rather than substituting the Government's judgment for
private firms, the plan holds the covered entities accountable
to the consumers and the marketplace. This encourages
innovation in mitigation strategies, improving adherence to
best practice by facilitating greater transparency,
understanding, and collaboration.
In that same spirit, the Administration also seeks to
promote cloud services that can provide more efficient service
and better security to Government agencies and to small
businesses and a wide range of other businesses. To do so, the
draft legislation proposes to prevent States from requiring
companies to build their data center within that State except
where expressly authorized by Federal law.
The proposal also clarifies roles and responsibilities for
setting Federal information security standards. Importantly,
the Secretary of Commerce will maintain the responsibility for
promulgating standards and guidelines which will continue to be
developed by NIST in cooperation with the private sector.
My colleague from the Justice Department, Mr. Baker, went
into great detail about the data breach reporting standard. On
that I will just highlight a few pieces.
First of all, we have learned quite a bit from the States,
selecting and augmenting those strategies and practices we felt
most effective in protecting security and privacy. The
legislation will help build certainty and trust in the
marketplace by making it easier for consumers to understand the
data breach notices that they receive, why they are receiving
them, and to take action upon them once they receive them.
Also, the Department of Commerce last year held a notice of
inquiry under the Internet Policy Task Force set up by
Secretary Locke, and through that notice of inquiry, we
received many, many comments from a wide range of businesses.
They were unified in their stance that a nationwide standard
for data breach will make compliance much easier for all those
businesses that must follow the 47 different legal standards
today.
Finally, I would like to point out that many of the new and
augmented authorities in this package are governed by a new
privacy framework for Government that we believe would enhance
the privacy protections for information collected by and shared
with the Government for cybersecurity purposes. The framework
would be created in consultation with privacy and civil
liberties experts and the Attorney General, subject to regular
reports by the Department of Justice Privacy Office working
with the Department of Homeland Security Privacy Office, and
overseen by The Independent Privacy and Civil Liberties
Oversight Board. Government violations of this framework would
be subject to both criminal and financial penalties.
Thank you again for holding this important hearing and I do
look forward to answering your questions.
__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Schwartz.
I will recognize myself for a few questions, and I will
direct this first one to all of you. What new tools will law
enforcement get in the Administration's proposal to investigate
and prosecute cyber intrusions and other cyber crimes? I will
start with you, Mr. Baker.
Mr. Baker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So the first thing, as I mentioned in my opening, was a
proposal to create and make a clear crime with respect to
efforts, either completed efforts or attempted efforts, to
damage critical infrastructure systems, and in situations where
the damage causes substantial impairment of the systems. So
that is one. That is the one that would have the mandatory
minimum provision in it, and I can come back to that if you
wish.
The other thing is our experience has shown that
increasingly cyber crimes are committed by groups of people
that are organized. So they are organized criminal activity.
And we think, under those circumstances, it is appropriate to
make clear that we can use the tools available to us under the
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO, to
go after those people. They pose a significant threat to the
country. They are well organized, and they are effective in
terms of being able to steal lots of money and compromise
information from lots of people.
The other thing we believe is this will harmonize and bring
more, I guess, uniformity to parts of the criminal code with
respect to the penalty provisions.
So those are some of the key things that we are looking at
here. If I can just come back to the first one that I
mentioned, the damage to critical infrastructure systems.
Our objective there is deterrence. What we are focused on
is trying to prevent people--encourage people to not engage in
those types of activities. That is what we are really after in
that situation because when you have damage to a critical
infrastructure system, people are going to be harmed, and that
is what we want to avoid through these tools.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Schaffer?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I won't speak to the
particular provisions that Mr. Baker mentioned, but I will say
from a Department of Homeland Security perspective, the
improved situational awareness that we would expect through the
clarity of the voluntary provisions to ask for and get
assistance, to have information sharing from the private
sector, and the clarity around what the Federal Departments and
agencies can disclose and report will, I think, improve the
situation for law enforcement across the board. We work
cooperatively today with law enforcement agencies within the
Department of Justice, within DHS, and otherwise, and that
growing interagency cooperation to know what is happening in
the ecosystem I think benefits law enforcement. It benefits
network defense. It is good across the entire ecosystem.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Schwartz?
Mr. Schwartz. I will just briefly add. My two colleagues
covered the main areas, but briefly just to give kind of more
of a general overview, really the goal is to get the incentives
right. We have to make sure that we have a deterrence for those
that are doing wrong, that criminals do pay for their crimes,
and that companies and entities that need to do the right thing
in the space have incentive to do so as well. We think that
this package moves us further in that direction. We are happy
to work with you further to make sure that we have those
incentives right.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
The Administration's proposal appears to mandate technical
standards for almost any aspect of the private sector. Should
the American people feel comfortable with giving the Homeland
Security Department the ability to designate any enterprise as
covered critical infrastructure? And subject to DHS mandates,
are there any avenues for an enterprise to appeal their
classification? Mr. Schaffer?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
question.
I think that the way that the statute is set up, that
process of identifying critical infrastructure would be done
through a rulemaking, and because it would be done through a
rulemaking, the private sector would have an opportunity to
participate in the process, to comment on the criteria that
would be established in order to identify which entities should
be a part of critical infrastructure, and then would be in a
position to participate in the process of identifying both the
risks that needed to be mitigated, the frameworks for
mitigation of those risks, and then develop plans to execute on
that risk mitigation. So they have got significant roles in the
private sector. This is not DHS going out and doing it on its
own.
Mr. Goodlatte. Right, but if they want out, can they get
out?
Mr. Schaffer. Again, I think that would be part of the
rulemaking process to get to the ultimate rules that would make
a determination.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, let me just add to that. I am not
aware of any modern system that isn't reliant on some form of
information infrastructure to operate, and if the Secretary
decides for any reason that a particular system could weaken
our economy, security, or safety, then he or she has unfettered
authority to regulate them. Quite frankly, a lot of that seems
like regulation for regulation's sake.
My question--I will address it to all of you since it is
the Secretary of Homeland Security who seems to have the
primary authority here. But do you think that Congress and the
American people want to have their cabinet agencies turned into
quasi-fiefdoms with absolute authority over the private sector?
Mr. Schwartz?
Mr. Schwartz. I want to take issue with this point that you
raise about technical mandates. The frameworks that are being
designed here are not at all technical mandates. These are
performance measures. These are performance standards that
industry will come together to design for themselves. That is
the goal. There are no technical mandates and no technical
standards within that framework whatsoever. Once industry has
built those performance measures, they then create their own
security plans to meet those performance measures. So they come
up with what technology is needed, what standards they need to
follow in order to meet those performance plans. It is
purposely, specifically set up to avoid the kind of technology
mandates in other bills.
Mr. Goodlatte. Each company can have a separate standard?
Mr. Schwartz. Each company could build their own--decide
what technology they need to meet those performance measures.
They could have completely separate technologies if they want
to. It would obviously make sense----
Mr. Goodlatte. Maybe we are engaged in semantics here,
though. You call them ``performance measures.'' I call them
``technical standards.''
Mr. Schwartz. No. Those are two completely--coming from the
National Institution for Standards and Technology, we focus on
standards in terms of measurements. The goal is to come to a
performance measure or a technical standard. Those are two
separate things. A performance measure is to say that we need
to make sure that we cut down on the number of breaches, that
we act in a certain way when breaches happen, and that is tied
to something that can be measured as opposed to a technical
standard which is we take information in a certain way, we use
a certain kind of technology, we are trying to get at a certain
problem in a very specific way. We see those as two different
things. And we have separated the framework that needs to be
built, which is the higher performance standard framework, from
the technical security plan. The security plan is built by the
company not by the industry at large, not by DHS. And that is
where we think the separation is.
It is exactly that reason that we think that innovation in
the marketplace can grow in this space through this plan as
opposed to the other bills that we have seen out there in this
space that have DHS make the decisions. So we completely agree
with you. DHS should not be making the decisions.
Mr. Goodlatte. Let me give you an example, a real-time
example. You have the recent Sony PlayStation attack. It could
cost the company hundreds of millions of dollars. We don't know
what the outcome is going to be there yet. With that type of
impact on the economy, would Sony's PlayStation network fall
under the ``covered critical infrastructure''?
Mr. Schaffer. I think as conceived, there would be a
process to make determinations as to what would fall under. I
wouldn't, as I sit here today, think that that would have been
identified as critical infrastructure, but again, those
regulations haven't be written.
I do think, as a former CISO and CSO, a chief information
security officer and chief security officer, for a Fortune 260
company, this kind of arrangement where the companies get to
participate in identifying the risks, designing the frameworks,
and then writing their plans to meet those frameworks is
flexible enough and allows for innovation. It doesn't tell a
CISO, chief information security officer, what to do to solve
the problem. It simply identifies the problems that need to be
addressed and then gives them significant flexibility in coming
up with a solution.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, you are asking for a lot of trust from
the Congress and from the American people on this. So I guess
what we will have to decide is will we want to trust the
bureaucracy or are we going to try to write that much detail
into legislation that clearly defines what is and what is not
covered by so-called critical infrastructure.
At this time, it is my pleasure to yield to the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Watt.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let me address the circumstance under which we are here
today because it is a little unusual. We have three Government
witnesses here. You have submitted joint testimony, and it
leads me to raise the question who is really in charge of this.
I mean, most of the time, when we are doing this stuff, we have
one person who is the go-to person. My understanding is that
you all kind of insisted that you had to have three witnesses
from the Government side. I know there are different aspects to
this, but who is in charge of coming up with where you all got
to? Where does the buck stop? I know it stops at the
President's desk. Don't tell me that. Who is running the show?
Mr. Baker. If I could, I will start with that, Congressman.
Mr. Watt. I don't need three answers to it. I just need one
answer to it.
Mr. Baker. At the end of the day, you are right. The
President and the White House are in charge.
The proposal that we have put forward reflects a whole-of-
government approach. Many aspects of the Government participate
in the development of this proposal and have various
``equities,'' if I can use that word. The Attorney General
plays a certain role. The Secretary of Homeland Security plays
a certain role. Different officials play different roles
throughout the proposal, and what we are trying to do is bring
forward something that does reflect a whole-of-government
approach because the whole of government is responsible----
Mr. Watt. So every time we want some information about
anything here, we are going to have to have three of you all
come talk to us?
Mr. Baker. The Department of Justice has a longstanding
relationship with this Committee. If you let us know what you
need, we will work to make sure we get the right people here
for you.
Mr. Watt. All right.
You talked about, Mr. Baker, the Federal preemption issue.
I am always a little leery of Federal preemption. We have dealt
with it in a number of contexts, and generally I am leery of it
because the Federal law waters down what some States have done
and waters up what some States have done. So you get to some
fairly vanilla middle ground.
Does your proposal provide an exemption from Federal
preemption for stronger State laws?
Mr. Baker. I think the answer is no, Mr. Chairman. the idea
is that we are establishing----
Mr. Watt. Have you adopted the strongest State standard
that is out there?
Mr. Baker. The answer is I am not sure that I could tell
you what all 47 statutes require, but I believe that we have
looked at all the statutes and other proposals, because there
have been a number of different proposals in this area both
from----
Mr. Watt. Well, what is the compelling Federal interest in
having a Federal standard for protecting all data, private
citizen data? There are a number of things that the States have
authority to do, and we are operating in a Federal system here.
Why should we be preempting a State law on my personal
information, breach of my personal information that is stronger
than what you think the law should be?
Mr. Baker. The compelling interest is the cybersecurity of
the Nation. This is----
Mr. Watt. No. This is about my personal--this is about the
personal part of my information now. I understand when it comes
to national defense and homeland security, you have got a
national, Federal compelling interest.
But you know, this is like consumer law, it seems to me.
You know, we have gone through this debate in the financial
services context. They tried to preempt every State law. The
State laws in a lot of cases were a lot more robust and
aggressive than the Federal law that we were trying to impose.
Why would I want to do that?
Mr. Baker. Well, again, as I said, we are trying to make
this a uniform standard that makes it easier and faster that
consumers find out what is going on and are aware of what has
happened and makes it easier for companies to comply. So we are
trying to get the balance right here.
I would say, with respect to this proposal in its entirety,
we are here and we are happy to work with you.
Mr. Watt. Okay. This is the first time I am seeing this. I
mean, it is a fairly new statute. But these are some of the
things that I think we have got to work through.
Let me draw another parallel, if I have a little time, Mr.
Chairman. You have got an immunity from liability for private
industry people that seems to me to be as broad as it would be
as if the Government itself were acting. This is under section
246 of this proposed legislation. And it basically says, okay,
if you do what we tell you to do under section 244(e), then you
are given immunity from any kind of liability. 244(e) says that
it authorizes the Secretary to request and obtain the
assistance of private entities that provide electronic
communications or cybersecurity services in order to implement
this program. That is pretty damn broad.
And it reminds me, to some extent, of the same thing that
the Federal Government was asking us to do under the PATRIOT
Act. The Government told you to do something. Therefore, it
must be good. Therefore, you are exempt from liability. So are
we setting up the same framework here?
Mr. Baker. I will defer to----
Mr. Watt. I didn't support it there either.
I am assuming this is a legal issue.
Mr. Baker. It is a combination, sir, and so it is liability
protection, but it is if they act consistent with this
subtitle, the subtitle that includes the sections you
referenced. So they need to act in conformance with the law or
have a good faith belief that they are doing so. Then they get
liability. If they go off the reservation and do something that
is not authorized, they don't get liability protection.
I will defer to Mr. Schaffer.
Mr. Watt. Okay, Mr. Schaffer. Help me.
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, Congressman. The provision really goes
to the disclosure of any communication record or other
information or assistance provided to the Department pursuant
to 244(e). So what really this is trying to do is to allow the
Department to work with a private sector entity that has
identified an issue and wants to bring that forward for the
benefit of all to protect the ecosystem.
Mr. Watt. Well, how is that different--you know, the
Justice Department or somebody went out and told all the
telecoms to tap anybody's phone, even though we thought it was
unconstitutional to do that. And then you came back and said,
well, give them immunity for doing that because we told them to
do it. I mean, how is this different than that?
Mr. Schaffer. The statute doesn't authorize them to
disclose anything that was not obtained legally. It doesn't
authorize them to----
Mr. Watt. But once you tell them it is legal to obtain it,
doesn't that give them complete immunity? That was the argument
you were using the last time under the PATRIOT Act.
Mr. Schaffer. Sir, I cannot speak to what argument was made
with respect to the PATRIOT Act, but I know that here the
intent is to address a problem that is ongoing which is we
routinely interact with a company like Sony or other companies
who have had breaches, know that there is an ongoing matter of
concern, and want to provide information to the Government that
can be used to help that company and can be used to help a
whole range of other players who are potentially at risk. In
those moments, we sometimes are delayed by days or weeks in
negotiation with those entities around what they can or cannot
provide to the Government in that moment.
Mr. Watt. It sounds like exactly the situation you all were
in. Those companies said I am not going to tap these phones
because we think it is unconstitutional. You said, oh, no, it
constitutional. We will give you immunity for it. So the
company then is able to do something that they believe is
unconstitutional just because you told them it was
constitutional. And they had some ambiguous Justice Department
memo that said that.
I am having trouble differentiating this. I mean, these are
issues that I think we are going to have to address here. I am
way over my time.
This is a little bit more than a teabag I think. This has
some implications that go well beyond, I think, what has been
well thought out. So I guess that is why we are here.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. I appreciate the Chairman being
generous with----
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Issa, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Issa. I doubt that I will be as spellbinding as the
previous inquisitor, but I will agree with him.
I have got a deep concern here. Mr. Baker, why is it that
this draft legislation doesn't envision the third branch of
Government having a significant role? Why is it you believe
that you have to essentially grant immunity without court
interaction?
Mr. Baker. Well, I guess I would have to think through--I
mean, various parts of the proposal do involve the third branch
of Government, for example, the critical infrastructure
prohibition that----
Mr. Issa. No, but I am talking specifically here. Look, if
you go to Sony or you go to Facebook or you go to anybody, they
have vast pools of information that are personal. And the
Ranking Member and I share this. The tradition in this country
has been you want to see it. I want you to have to make a good
faith test to the third branch who stands there prepared to
doubt your good intentions. It has what has kept 1984 from not
happening in this country, is that you have got to go to that
third branch, and they are just a little more cynical about
your power grabs as a branch. We are supposed to be your
balance, but without their interplay, you are going to be doing
this for years to come, and all it will take is--well, you
don't have two-thirds in both houses to stop a President from
doing it in his Administration.
So tell me why specifically if you feel that you need to
grant immunity to anybody for their cooperation, the third
branch of Government should not be included?
Mr. Baker. First of all, the provision I think you are
talking about is a voluntary provision. So it only allows
sharing of information in a voluntary----
Mr. Issa. Look, I know what voluntary is. I did vote for
the PATRIOT Act. I did sit on the Select Intelligence
Committee. I did participate in that broad granting of immunity
and pushed to get it into the bill retroactively to make it
clear that we needed to put September 11th emergencies behind
us.
But having said that, look, let's get back to it. You are
asking for cooperation with the force of your ability to make
life miserable on private sector companies behind closed doors
is not a voluntary act. You can be very, very convincing.
Wouldn't you agree?
Mr. Baker. The Government can be very convincing,
certainly.
What I would say is what we are trying to do and what we
really tried to do in this whole proposal is get the balance
right between the need to provide security, the need to allow
for innovation and foster innovation, and the need to protect
privacy.
Mr. Issa. My only question to you is, as we go through this
legislation, wouldn't you agree that adding in--even if it is a
special court, if it is judges that are ready and quickly able
to understand a comparatively complex new area of security,
wouldn't you say that having that third party is a protection
that this side of the dais should be interested in seeing that
your side of the dais has?
Mr. Baker. Congressman, we are happy to work with you on
that. We have never said that this is a perfect proposal in all
respects, and we are happy to work with you and the other
Members of Congress because, on a bipartisan basis, we want to
make sure that we get this legislation right.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Schaffer, he got the easy question. You are
getting a little tougher.
The Department of Homeland Security has politicized FOIA.
It has actually taken FOIA requests by the press and others,
handed them over to political appointees to create an enemies
list to know who was asking for what, to deny it or to spin it
before it is ever released. Why is it, you think, the
Department of Homeland Security is the primary place to get
commercial information, not firewall to the bad guys outside
our country, not terrorists within? Why do you think that you
are the best place to put Facebook and Google and Microsoft and
all the other providers and Sony, obviously--why is it you
think you should have anything to do with it? Where do you have
the standing under Homeland Security?
And by the way, why is it Mr. Schwartz wouldn't be more
appropriate? Why is it that that portion isn't as much Commerce
as it is this new and sometimes dysfunctional Department of
Homeland Security?
Mr. Schaffer. Thank you, Congressman.
I think that DHS has spent a considerable amount of effort
over the course of the last several years building its
relationships with the private sector in this particular
subject-matter area. Under the National Infrastructure
Protection Plan, DHS has a major role in working with the
sectors, the 18 critical infrastructure sectors, on a wide
range of protection and security-related issues. With respect
to cybersecurity, DHS, in particular my organization at Cyber
Security and Communications, has responsibility with respect to
the IT sector, the communications sector, and the Cross Sector
Cybersecurity Working Group.
We work through those structures and several others to
build an ongoing relationship where we actually have private
sector participation on the watch floor that we use to handle
cyber incidents under the National Cyber Incident Response
Plan. And that relationship has been growing. We have been
adding the information security analysis centers from the
different sectors, participating also on the watch floor,
sending representatives because they want to participate.
Mr. Issa. Okay, I get it. I am going to be a little short
only because my time has actually expired.
Mr. Schwartz, obviously, Commerce and State really have a
presence overseas, and a lot of what we need to do is to reach
out at all levels.
What role do you think that you should be included in a
more robust way than you are under this proposal?
Mr. Schwartz. Well, I think this proposal does lay out ways
that NIST and Commerce can be deeply involved, but it involves
the private sector bringing us in for those cases. So, for
example, in the critical infrastructure plans piece, if they
want to invite NIST to help work with them to plan
international standards to help them build the framework so it
can lead to security plans and figure out how that can work
better together and they want NIST to participate in that, the
private sector can bring us in to do so. Obviously, we have
limited resources to be able to get involved in every different
critical infrastructure area, but that is one place----
Mr. Issa. So you currently see you are going to be
reactive, not proactive because of the nature of it. Wouldn't
it be better for you to have a mandate to be proactive?
Mr. Schwartz. There are some places working with the
Federal Government agencies, for example, where we are setting
standards for the Federal Government, where we are being very
proactive. And some of those are then ending being used by the
private sector. So in terms of the question of protecting the
critical infrastructure as it relates to the private sector, we
need to be brought in for that. For the Federal Government, we
are much more proactive. And I think we want it that way. We
don't want to be setting technical standards for the private
sector, as I said to the Chairman earlier. I think that is very
important that we are working with the private sector
cooperatively and we are setting standards that can work for
Government, and then we can figure out how those can be used
together.
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Conyers.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Schaffer, the notice would have to be given to an
entity of the Department of Homeland Security. That is a
national standard requirement for reporting breaches of private
consumer data. What entity of the Department of Homeland
Security?
Mr. Schaffer. I think, as we are currently constructed, it
is the NCIC and U.S. CERT entity. I think that the drafting
recognizes that names of entities can change over time, but the
notion is that that portion of my organization at Cyber
Security and Communications would be where those central
reports would flow.
Mr. Conyers. So everybody has got to come back and read
this transcript to find out what the answer to my question is.
Mr. Schaffer. I apologize, sir. The United States Computer
Emergency Response Team is part of the Cyber Security and
Communications organization, and there is a watch floor called
the National Cyber Security and Communications Integration
Center that works with U.S. CERT to be a collection point for
information aggregation and dissemination.
Mr. Conyers. So we just go to some entity and that is what
it is. So now we know.
All right. Who is going to have primary responsibility to
investigate criminal violations as between the FBI and the
Secret Service?
Mr. Baker. As it is today, it is a variety--the two of them
work it out. They coordinate their activities to determine who
is going to investigate a particular offense. They have
overlapping jurisdiction. They have to coordinate their
activities, and so that is how it is done with those agencies.
It is common to do that with a variety of different law
enforcement agencies that exist in the Federal Government.
Mr. Conyers. Well, they have enough differences of opinion
often enough as it is.
Mr. Baker. They may have differences of opinion. At the end
of the day, they don't get to go to court unless they come
through the Department of Justice. The Department of Justice is
in control of what cases get indicted and what cases are
brought forward and how appeals are handled and so on and so
forth. So at the end of the day, it is the Attorney General.
Mr. Conyers. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
And the Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arizona,
Mr. Quayle.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to all the
witnesses for being here.
One thing I want to know--it is for all of you and whoever
best can answer this just pipe in. Can you explain exactly how
you plan to address some of the duplicative regulation work
that might be happening here? Because NIST has historically
been the lead agency in setting standards, especially working
with industry to create those standards. But the
Administration's proposal seems to shift that responsibility to
DHS.
For example, will DHS first assess the cybersecurity
requirements of the various Federal agencies to determine if
they are adequate before creating their own regulations, or do
you intend that DHS just creates their own regulations and then
waits for the request from various agencies for exceptions?
Mr. Schwartz. Let me just briefly talk about NIST's role
because I think there is a misunderstanding there about what
NIST's role currently is. NIST today sets the standards for the
Federal Government. Then OMB takes that and approves them for
the agencies.
Under this proposal--and there has recently been a memo
that also passed some of that authority to DHS. So this would
codify the ways that things are actually currently being run,
which is that NIST would still write the standards. In fact,
the Secretary of Commerce publishes those standards. It is very
clearly in the proposal. Then DHS can draw on those to decide
what the agencies should do specifically.
So NIST is still writing the standards the way that we have
and we will continue to write the standards in that way and, in
fact, gain slightly more independence in that because OMB has
traditionally just passed on exactly what we have said to the
other agencies. This will allow DHS to tailor better to
different agencies and hopefully create better technical
standards that can be tied to performance standards as well so
that we can react better more quickly over time inside of the
Federal Government.
Mr. Quayle. But so then is DHS then going to take the
various standards that NIST comes up with and then implement
them through the other various Federal agency, or is the
Federal agency going to be able to use NIST standards to create
their own cybersecurity framework within that agency and then
have to get approval from DHS?
Mr. Schaffer. As Mr. Schwartz said, this really codifies
the way things are operating now through delegations of
authority. So NIST would continue to draft the standards. DHS
would take those standards and would be applying them to the
Departments and agencies. If Departments and agencies had
specific issues that needed to be addressed in some special
way--the standards are not written for each individual agency,
they are written holistically--then we would be in a position
to work with an agency and come up with a set of requirements
that made sense specifically for the set of threats or risks.
But ideally we would be working starting from the NIST
standards just as we are today, and as Mr. Schwartz said, that
was being done by OMB recently delegated through a memorandum
to DHS. But the statute would just codify that oversight
authority moving to DHS.
Mr. Quayle. And, Mr. Schwartz, when you are talking about
the standards that are being developed by NIST, that kind of
does conjure up a very static procedural way that we are not
going to be able to have the flexibility to respond to various
cyber threats which evolve very quickly in the future. How is
NIST going to develop those standards and do them in a way that
allows for the flexibility to have best practices from various
areas to come in and make sure that, instead of just being
reactive, we are being proactive to make sure that we are still
using the best standards to address cybersecurity threats?
Mr. Schwartz. One of the problems we have today under FISMA
is that the focus has been on trying to cover all of the
different controls that NIST puts out, so the IG, the Inspector
General, has said you have to make sure that you cover all of
these controls rather than saying we need to focus the controls
that work best for each agency, which is what NIST really says
in our guidance on the subject. So this structure helps to get
that point across better, that we are really aiming at
performance here and not at you have to follow every single
standard that NIST puts out.
As NIST puts these out, we do think that we have
flexibility and we spend a lot of time with some more technical
standards. Encryption is a good example of that, which we try
to think very far ahead in trying to make sure that things are
done, and the world depends on the NIST encryption standards
for that reason because it is so thought out, et cetera. There
are others that we try to act much more quickly, try to be
reactive, et cetera, and get things out very quickly. So we try
to have that kind of flexibility so we can do both.
But we need the independence also of not having to answer
every agency question that comes in on every topic. We need
someone to be able to do that. We work with the agencies as
clients, et cetera, and work with them on the standards, but
there is a different piece of it in terms of performance and
getting the performance measures out. It is good to have
another body do that. OMB was doing that role before. Now that
is moving more to DHS.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Adams, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Earlier I heard you, Mr. Schwartz, say ``performance
measures.'' Can you give me your definition for performance
measures?
Mr. Schwartz. What we are aiming at is trying to figure out
exactly how to improve the actual way that the Internet is
protected so that we can come up with measures that show when
we have been successful in protecting cybersecurity as opposed
to ``technical standard,'' which is to say that you must follow
a certain set of controls in order to come up and make sure
that you are interoperable with other types of controls.
Ms. Adams. So that is your explanation of performance
measure.
Mr. Schwartz. Again, performance measure is something that
can be measured that shows that you are continually improving
the cybersecurity as we know it, that we can show continued
positive performance over time.
Ms. Adams. Well, I have to tell you that your description
kind of concerns me because you had to grapple at what it was.
So it concerns me when an agency is going to decide what the
performance standards are when they are still grappling with
what are the performance standards, how do you define
performance standards.
Mr. Schwartz. Again, I am not the technical person that is
going and writing these technical standards, and I am not the
person that is writing the performance standards. What a
performance standard will be will be a particular number or a
particular set of--particular targets.
Ms. Adams. So that is not static.
Mr. Schwartz. It is not static, exactly. It is something
that is not static. It is something that can change over time,
something that can be revisited, whereas a technical standard
is something that is written, people need to be able to follow
it and be able to interoperate.
Ms. Adams. And following along what--Mr. Watt I believe was
the one that brought it up on the Federal preemption with Mr.
Baker. You said that you had not reviewed all 47--that they had
been reviewed, but you had not reviewed them. So you don't know
if the Federal preemption would preempt a State that actually
might have a better system than what the Federal Government
would come up with. Is that correct?
Mr. Baker. That is correct.
Ms. Adams. So you still advocate for Federal preemption
even though you could actually do more harm than good?
Mr. Baker. Well, our folks have looked at it carefully and
we believe that this is the right balance. If there are State
standards that Members of Congress feel should be included in
the Federal legislation, we are happy to work with you on that.
We have tried to get the balance right. If you think we should
add things, we are happy to work with you and look forward to
that because we want to make sure that----
Ms. Adams. Well, I am happy to hear that agencies want to
work with us on legislation that we would be drafting. That is
a good thing. I would hate to think that you would think you
could draft the legislation.
Let's see. Mr. Schaffer, I believe. You are from DHS? Do
you believe that there should be limits to the power that the
Secretary of Homeland Security can exert on private industry?
Mr. Schaffer. I am sorry. I missed the last phrase.
Ms. Adams. Do you believe that there should be limits to
the power that the Secretary of Homeland Security can exert on
private industry?
Mr. Schaffer. I am sorry, ma'am. I believe----
Ms. Adams. That is a yes or a no?
Mr. Schaffer. Yes, and I think they are in the statute.
Ms. Adams. Would the Administration's plan give the
Secretary unfettered authority over any business?
Mr. Schaffer. No, it certainly wouldn't give unfettered
authority.
Ms. Adams. Maximum authority?
What large industries would be excluded?
Mr. Schaffer. Ma'am, the way the statute is configured--and
I assume that we are talking about the critical infrastructure
portion of the statute because other portions have a different
scope.
Ms. Adams. Are there any that have been excluded so far?
Mr. Schaffer. I certainly don't think that every large
enterprise would be part of critical infrastructure under this
construct.
Ms. Adams. How about under cybersecurity as a whole that
would be monitored under this?
Mr. Schaffer. Certainly the statute is designed to improve
cybersecurity across the entire ecosystem, but the critical
infrastructure piece is, indeed, intended to be focused on
critical infrastructure, those infrastructures which, if
disrupted through a cyber attack, would have cascading and
devastating effects across a significant portion of our day-to-
day lives.
Ms. Adams. Mr. Baker, do you know any that would be
excluded?
Mr. Baker. I am sorry.
Ms. Adams. Any industries that would be excluded outside
the critical infrastructure? Large corporations.
Mr. Baker. Categories of industries. I mean, I guess it
depends on the facts and circumstances and how they
interrelate, but I think I----
Ms. Adams. How would you define that? Would that be clearly
defined in what you were doing?
Mr. Baker. In the proposal that I was talking about earlier
on the critical infrastructure, we have got a fairly specific--
--
Ms. Adams. I am sorry, Mr. Chair. I guess I have overrun my
time.
But I am just curious. If you are outside the critical
infrastructure, you are on the cybersecurity issue, is there
any of that that falls into the exclusion?
Mr. Baker. Any that would fall into the exclusion in terms
of the--well, with respect to the proposal I was referring to,
we couldn't use it if it didn't meet the test that was set
forth in the statute, and that would be determined at the end
of the day by a court. We would have to make the case to the
court that it was part of the----
Ms. Adams. You think it might end up in court.
Mr. Baker. Well, this one, the one I am referring to,
absolutely would, yes, because it would be a criminal offense
and we would have to show that it was vital to the country.
Ms. Adams. I was actually talking about the statute if we
were to pass it.
Mr. Baker. The statute what? I am sorry.
Ms. Adams. The law, if we were to pass it. I thought you
meant you thought it would be in court.
Mr. Baker. I am sorry. I couldn't hear, Congresswoman. I am
sorry.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
And the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino, is
recognized for 5 minutes. The gentleman has no questions.
We will thank our panel then. This has been very
interesting, and I think it is just the beginning of a lot of
discussion about the Administration's proposal and potential
legislation that I and others are working on here in the
Congress. So we very much appreciate your contribution, and we
will thank all of you and excuse you and move to the second
panel.
We will now move to our second distinguished panel of
witnesses today, and as I advised earlier, each of the
witnesses' written statements will be entered into the record
in its entirety. And I ask that each witness summarize his or
her testimony in 5 minutes or less, and to help stay within
that time, there is a timing light on your table. When the
light switches from green to yellow, you have 1 minute to
conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, that is it.
Before I introduce our witnesses, I would like them to
stand and be sworn, and we would ask you to do that at this
time. It is the custom of the Committee to swear in our
witnesses.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much.
Our first witness is Mr. Robert Holleyman. Mr. Holleyman
serves as the President and CEO of the Business Software
Alliance. He has headed BSA since 1990, expanding their
operations to more than 80 countries and launched 13 foreign
offices, in addition to their D.C. headquarters. Mr. Holleyman
has been named one of the 50 most influential people in the
intellectual property world by the international magazine,
Managing IP. He was also named by the Washington Post as one of
the key players in the U.S. Government's cybersecurity efforts
for his work on behalf of industry on national cybersecurity
policy.
Before joining BSA, Mr. Holleyman served as counsel in the
U.S. Senate and was an attorney with a leading law firm in
Houston, Texas.
He earned his bachelor of arts degree at Trinity University
in San Antonio, Texas and his juris doctor from Louisiana State
University Law Center in Baton Rouge. He also completed the
executive management program at the Stanford Graduate School of
Business.
Our second witness is Mr. Leigh Williams. Mr. Williams
serves as BITS President for the Financial Services Roundtable.
Since 2007, Leigh Williams has served as President of BITS, the
technology policy division of The Financial Services
Roundtable, focusing on improving operational practices and
public policy in the financial sector. Previously Mr. Williams
was a senior fellow at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government
researching public and private sector collaboration in the
governance of privacy and security.
Mr. Williams worked for many years at Fidelity Investments
in various risk, security, privacy, and policy roles, including
chief risk officer, chief privacy officer, and senior vice
president for public policy.
Mr. Williams earned a bachelor of arts in economics from
Rice University and a master of public and private management
from Yale University where he currently serves as the Yale
School of Management Alumni Association President.
Our third witness is Ms. Leslie Harris. Ms. Harris serves
as the President and CEO of the Center for Democracy and
Technology. Ms. Harris is responsible for the overall direction
of the organization and serves as its chief strategist and
spokesperson. Ms. Harris has worked extensively in policy
issues related to civil liberties, new technologies,
cybersecurity, and global Internet freedom. In 2009, she was
named one of Washington's ``tech titans'' by Washingtonian
Magazine.
Prior to joining CDT, Ms. Harris founded Leslie Harris and
Associates, a public policy firm. She has also worked for the
People for the American Way and the American Civil Liberties
Union.
Ms. Harris received her B.A. from the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and her law degree from the Georgetown
University Law Center.
I want to welcome all of you and we will begin with Mr.
Holleyman.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT W. HOLLEYMAN, II, PRESIDENT
AND CEO, BUSINESS SOFTWARE ALLIANCE (BSA)

Mr. Holleyman. Thank you. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Watt, BSA appreciates the opportunity to work with this
Committee on a variety of challenges that we face in the area
of cyberspace. These include the continuing problem of software
piracy and threats to cybersecurity. Indeed, the two issues are
connected because pirated software, which cost our industry
nearly $60 billion last year, is increasingly used to
distribute malicious computer code, and this puts companies,
governments, and consumers at risk.
Today I would like to address three issues: first, the
evolving nature of security threats; second, the link between
piracy and the spread of those threats; and third, specific
actions this Committee should take to address these problems.
Just 10 years ago, the primary threats to security online
were hackers and vandals, and they primarily chased notoriety
and the opportunity to take down systems through denial-of-
service attacks against entities like eBay and CNN.
But the stakes are now much higher. Organized criminals
have entered this arena and they are using the Internet to
distribute malware so that they can make big money. And today's
scams build off both fears and social trends, and they take
advantage of worms, viruses, adware, links to fake websites,
and other fraudulent activity, and they steal valuable data
from consumers and enterprises. It has been estimated that for
U.S. businesses alone, the costs of this are approximately $45
billion annually.
The link to software piracy is also evolving. The research
firm IDC estimates that fully one-third of illegally installed
software contains some form of malware, and organizations using
pirated software have a 73 percent greater chance of serious
security problems than companies that use licensed software.
Before turning to specific legislative recommendations, I
would like to note, and importantly for this Subcommittee and
Committee, that the U.S. Government does not yet have in place
a policy to require Federal contractors to use licensed
software, even though Federal agencies must. And, indeed, I
find it astonishing, given the security threats associated with
illegal software, that this action has not been taken. The
Administration is now considering an executive order that would
require Federal contractors to use licensed technologies, and I
urge this Committee to express its support for that order and
push the Administration to act in this area.
We believe this Committee can also bolster America's
cybersecurity in at least three additional ways.
First, by strengthening the hand of law enforcement and
prosecutors. As cyber criminals adapt, so must our cyber crime
laws, and BSA supports legislation to strengthen penalties and
expand the scope of offenses. We need new causes of action that
toughen the hand of prosecutors while, at the same time,
preventing opportunistic private litigation.
Second, we need clear, uniform Federal data protection and
data breach rules. Today more than 40 States have enacted such
laws. This patchwork is confusing for consumers and inefficient
for businesses. The Federal Government should require
notification of breaches that pose a genuine risk of harm. It
should preempt State laws, and it should prevent excessive
notification which can overwhelm and confuse consumers.
Importantly, notification should not be required when the
stolen data is worthless to the thief because it has been
rendered unusable through deployment of security technologies
such as encryption.
And finally, the law should provide specific incentives for
sharing information about cyber threats with Government
agencies. Companies should be able to share records and other
information with DHS about the specific nature of the threat
without the risk that sharing that information will lead to
suits against the company. Similarly, critical infrastructure
companies that comply with the security requirements of DHS or
act to mitigate risks identified by DHS should also be
protected from liability.
Lastly, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, Mr. Quayle, this
Committee is looking at the consequences of cybersecurity as
they affect the Nation's economy. The economic consequences of
this are greater for this Nation than any other because of the
way in which we deploy this technology throughout our society.
And by acting to deter cyber threats and to take more actions,
we can believe that the economy will be healthier by deploying
new resources to creating new jobs and overall strengthening
economic security.
So I look forward to working with this Committee as always
on these important issues. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holleyman follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Williams, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF LEIGH WILLIAMS, BITS PRESIDENT,
THE FINANCIAL SERVICES ROUNDTABLE (FSR)

Mr. Williams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Representative
Quayle, Ranking Member Watt, for the opportunity to testify on
the financial community's cybersecurity efforts, on the case
for new legislation and in support of the Administration's
proposal.
My name is Leigh Williams and I am President of BITS, the
technology policy division of the Financial Services
Roundtable. BITS addresses security, fraud, and public policy
issues on behalf of 100 of the Nation's largest financial
institutions, their hundreds of millions of customers, and all
of the stakeholders in the financial infrastructure.
From this perspective, I can assure you that cybersecurity
matters a great deal to financial institutions not because
regulations require it, although they do, but because good
business practices and customers require it.
At the industry level, BITS' 2011 agenda--set by chief
information security officers, by CIOs and CEOs--addresses
secure software, protection from malicious software, security,
in social media, cloud computing, and mobile computing, secure
email, and security education and awareness. While some of this
work can be done within the industry, more and more requires
cross-sector collaboration. For example, our sector council is
working with the Treasury Department and with our financial
regulators on cybersecurity exercises. We are working with law
enforcement in an account takeover task force led by our
Information Sharing and Analysis Center. And I thank you, Mr.
Baker.
Beyond our traditional circle, with DHS, we are developing
a pilot to offer expert assistance to institutions in the Cyber
Operational Risk review program. Thank you, Mr. Schaffer.
And broader still, we are working with NIST to implement
the National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace.
Thank you, Mr. Schwartz.
As the Committee considers legislative options, I urge
Members to leverage this existing body of work and the existing
controls, but also to strengthen our connections with our
Federal partners and our peers in other sectors. Talking this
through with my colleagues, I hear words like ``integrate'' and
``harmonize,'' ``align,'' and ``reconcile.'' I don't hear
``replace'' or ``substitute.'' And as I am sure you appreciate,
I don't generally hear ``add on'' or ``layer on.''
Even given this head start and our substantial momentum, we
think that cybersecurity legislation is warranted. We believe
that a comprehensive bill could improve security throughout the
ecosystem, including in the networks on which our institutions
depend. It could strengthen the security of Federal systems and
mobilize law enforcement and other Federal resources. It could
spur voluntary action through safe harbors and outcome-based
metrics.
Attached to my written testimony is a list of 13 policy
approaches that our sector council endorsed, along with three
that it found more problematic. I urge the Committee to
consider these consensus recommendations of the financial
community.
OMB recently transmitted to Congress the Administration's
proposal to improve cybersecurity. The Financial Services
Roundtable supports this legislation and we look forward to
working for its passage. We support many of the provisions on
their own merits, and we see the overall proposal as an
important step toward building a more integrated approach.
I will structure the remainder of my testimony around the
key provisions of the proposal.
We support the strengthening of criminal penalties for
damage to critical computers, for committing computer fraud,
and for trafficking in passwords. We also urge escalated
treatment for the theft of proprietary business information.
We support the adoption of a uniform national standard for
breach notification.
We strongly recommend full Federal preemption and
reconciliation with the existing banking regulations.
We support exemptions, as you have heard from BSA, for data
rendered unreadable and for situations in which there is no
reasonable risk of harm.
We support strengthening cybersecurity authorities within
DHS and codifying DHS's collaboration with the sector-specific
agencies such as the Treasury Department and with sector
regulators such as our banking, securities, and insurance
supervisors.
We support each of the seven purposes articulated in the
regulatory framework, including especially: enhancing
infrastructure security, complementing currently available
measures, and balancing efficiency, innovation, security, and
privacy.
We think this evenhanded approach will help calibrate the
effort, capitalize on existing oversight, and prevent the
release of public information.
In closing, let me just underscore how much we appreciate
your attention in this matter and commit that for our part we
will continue to work on cybersecurity with our members and
partners. We will support legislation that leverages existing
protections, and we will support and help to implement the
Administration's proposal.
Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Williams.
Ms. Harris, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF LESLIE HARRIS, PRESIDENT AND CEO, CENTER FOR
DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY (CDT)

Ms. Harris. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Watt,
Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
Charting a path forward on cybersecurity policy that makes
meaningful improvements in security and at the same time
protects privacy and innovation requires a very nuanced
approach that encourages collaboration between Government and
industry. One size does not fit all. Policies for Government-
owned systems should be distinct from those aimed at the
private sector. Government regulation needs to be limited very
narrowly to critical infrastructure, and importantly particular
caution has to be applied to systems like the Internet that
support Americans' rights to free speech. That means as a first
principle network providers--and not the Government--need to be
in the business of monitoring their own networks for
intrusions.
Here the Administration's bill rightly honors this
principal. No Government entity needs to be involved in
monitoring private communications networks as part of
cybersecurity. There is no evidence that the Government can do
this better and no need to move toward middle-of-the-network
solutions that would put civil liberties at risk.
Second, information sharing needs to be enhanced without
putting privacy at risk. There is a general agreement that more
sharing is good between Government and the private sector and
within industry. The White House proposal anticipates a very
sweeping, albeit voluntary, information sharing regime that
encourages sharing of information, including communications
traffic to DHS, regardless of whether the use or disclosure of
that information is otherwise restricted by law. And that means
that it effectively sweeps away protections of the Wiretap Act,
ECPA, FISA, FOIA--all statutes within the jurisdiction of this
Committee--and many, many more. We appreciate the bill's
promise of yet-to-be-articulated privacy rules, but we don't
see how they can adequately police such a vast sharing regime
in contrast to well understood statutory protections.
Third, the designation of critical infrastructure needs to
be very narrowly tailored. Getting the government role in
private cybersecurity efforts right first requires getting the
designation of critical infrastructure right. Here we believe
that the definition provided in the Administration's bill is
overbroad and that the ``debilitating impact'' standard is
simply too ambiguous and could sweep vast swaths of U.S.
industry into the critical infrastructure fold.
Fourth, Congress should not give the President shut-off
authority in cybersecurity emergencies. We certainly appreciate
the White House's implicit rejection of this power in its
proposal and hope that this puts this dangerous idea to rest.
After the Egyptian cutoff earlier this year, it should be clear
that a grant of presidential shut-down authority would set a
very dangerous precedent for the world.
Fifth, the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act law needs to be
tightened before we consider any new or enhanced penalties. It
is a very, very important component of our online trust
framework and it has given the Federal Government authority to
pursue cyber crime, hacking, and identity theft. But its vague
terms have led to troubling civil and more recently criminal
actions that have stretched the law far beyond what Congress
intended. Indeed, some courts have interpreted unauthorized
access so broadly that companies, when setting terms of service
that few users will ever read, are in effect getting to
determine what user conduct is criminal. So before there is any
expansion of the law or increase in penalties, we need to look
at those questions.
We also caution about ratcheting up penalties. The
mandatory minimums in CFAA were actually repealed in the
PATRIOT Act, and I think we have to know why before we put them
back in. And while we have no opposition to the law being a
RICO predicate, we are concerned about the consequences for
civil actions where triple damages may encourage civil
litigants to further pursue what we see as novel uses of this
statute.
Finally, we believe the White House proposal on data breach
provides a very good starting point for consideration of the
Federal law. The notification trigger we think is right. The
standards in the bill we think are right. But we will caution
that we are talking about preempting 46 State laws, and there
are some areas--for example, California has very specific
protections for health information--that are not reflected. So
when we are talking about the definitions in the law and when
we are talking about the extent of preemption, we would urge
you to be very careful.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify here today and
look forward to working with this Committee on this important
issue.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Harris follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Ms. Harris.
I will begin the questioning, and my first question is
directed to you, Mr. Holleyman.
To what extent has the Administration worked with the
technology sector and incorporated their best practices into
the cybersecurity legislative proposal?
Mr. Holleyman. We have worked closely with the
Administration throughout this process, have particularly
worked closely with NIST over a period of time. I think, in
large part, the Administration's proposals reflect ones that we
would endorse. There are other issues where we have proposed
recommended changes, as we submitted in our testimony and a few
issues that have not been resolved. So I think that the
inclusion of this effort from the Administration has been
helpful and it is good to see them come forward with a concrete
proposal.
Mr. Goodlatte. How can Congress encourage innovative
solutions to combat this dynamic problem and avoid the one-
size-fits-all regulation that Ms. Harris and others have
expressed concern about?
Mr. Holleyman. By making sure that there are technology
neutrality provisions that are always taken into place. There
is no one-size-fits-all technology that will work for every
solution, every customer, every government. We need to have the
flexibility to adapt and use new technologies as the nature of
the crimes adapt. So maintaining that principle is important.
And I think, secondly, by ensuring that the level of
Federal resources against cyber crime can be escalated in a way
that there is a greater deterrent, because we are all at risk,
and the Federal Government has a unique role in fighting cyber
crime.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Williams, what are banks proactively
doing to ensure that critical data is protected from hackers
and economic espionage by foreign competitors?
Mr. Williams. Individual institutions are doing a great
deal. They each have programs that are embedded within their
operational risk and their general risk management programs,
some of which are subject to review by regulators of the
banking securities or the insurance industries, others of which
exist solely on the basis of it being good practice. They also
conduct, through BITS and many other coalitions, a great deal
of industry-level work to ensure some consistency throughout
the industry and to help connect the industry--the sector with
other sectors.
Mr. Goodlatte. When there are data breaches, how are they
generally handled? Is it standard practice to provide public
notification or inform Federal authorities or both?
Mr. Williams. There are actually already, within the
banking subsector of financial services, uniform national
standards for preparing for, responding to, and notifying of
breaches, and over the last several years, as the industry has
gravitated toward that uniform approach, we have found it to be
very effective.
Mr. Goodlatte. Ms. Harris, do you think it should be
Government or the private sector to take the lead in
determining best practices for cybersecurity?
Ms. Harris. I think it should be the private sector, and I
think in this regard, the Administration's bill does a very
good job of putting the private sector in the lead for
developing these sectoral risk plans and then allowing the
companies to develop their own individual plans. Our only
concern is making sure that the definitions in this bill are
sufficiently precise so that as we go down the road to deciding
which sectors are cybersecurity infrastructure, critical
infrastructure, we don't come up with a definition that is
overbroad.
I think on the second part, whether they have gotten a good
balance between public and private, I think they have done a
pretty good job, but that is once you have been designated
``critical infrastructure.'' Our concern is not to have too
many industries swept into that basket.
Mr. Goodlatte. You are all saying that there is a good deal
of collaboration in writing this legislation, and that is good
to hear.
What can the Congress do to strengthen the ongoing
cooperation between private enterprise and the Federal
Government on cybersecurity? Does anybody want to tackle that
first? Mr. Holleyman?
Mr. Holleyman. Two things. One is to enable the private
sector to share more information about the specific nature of
threats, but we also very much feel that there needs to be
mechanisms by which the Federal Government shares information
with companies, particularly in the security space, about the
nature of the threats so that we can work in closer
partnership. Generally our companies do share a lot of
information. We think this proposed legislation would help
foster a better climate for more, but we would like to see more
from the Federal Government in appropriate circumstances that
could be shared with industry.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. Mr. Chairman, I would offer two responses.
First, I was very encouraged in the first panel to hear the
phrase ``providing opportunities for voluntary information
sharing.'' We think that they should be voluntary but enabling
those opportunities we think is very important.
The second thing I might say is that we already have very
strong information sharing within the financial services
sphere. Part of the reason, a great deal of the motivation, for
our supporting this comprehensive legislation is to extend
beyond our sphere, to extend to our service providers, to our
customers, to agencies other than our banking regulators to
ensure that the overall ecosystem is protected.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Ms. Harris?
Ms. Harris. So I agree that data sharing is important. We
have some very specific concerns, and those concerns are in the
way this law is constructed. Rather than trying to figure out
what aspects of the law, particularly ECPA, may not be adequate
to allow more sharing to occur, it simply sweeps away all of
these laws in favor of this broad voluntary mechanism.
So I think that this Committee is the right Committee to
try to figure out whether we can pinpoint in a serious way what
is the legal barrier that exists right now in our Government
information sharing laws and how do we narrowly fix that
without basically throwing out all those laws and other Federal
and State laws that touch on privacy. I just think this is the
right Committee to do that and that this is a big challenge. It
is, I think, not the right approach to simply say,
``notwithstanding any other provision,'' and sweep everything
away. It is this Committee's laws. It is health laws. It is
Gramm-Leach-Bliley. It goes on and on, and I don't think
anybody can tell us what the implications of that might be.
And second, this is a law enforcement Committee. I guess,
no, it is not because we switched Committees here. And getting
a law enforcement piece right is important. And I think I have
mentioned some of the changes that I think are necessary in the
CFAA before we start to take a look at penalties and other
changes.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt, is recognized.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am trying to get to this question that Ms. Harris has
touched upon here, the definition. And I think that is what is
troubling me here and probably what is troubling the Chairman
is where the divide is between what the Government should be
doing and taking control of and what is outside what the
Government should be doing.
So I am looking here closely at the legislation, and there
is section 242 which defines ``critical infrastructure'' that
refers us back to the emergency preparedness statute which
defines the word ``critical infrastructure.'' And then there is
a separate section which defines something new, I take it,
which is called ``critical information infrastructure,'' which
goes beyond the emergency preparedness thing.
I think we have probably all gotten comfortable with the
emergency preparedness part of this. That is the Government's
role clearly. I am not even second-guessing that. That has been
in the statute.
But this definition of ``critical information
infrastructure,'' a new term in this statute, seems to be very,
very broad. And I think we have got probably some very serious
work to do.
Can you help me, Mr. Holleyman, kind of understand what you
perceive to be critical information infrastructure? I mean, you
are familiar with these two things that I just talked about.
Right? Have you looked at the statute?
Mr. Holleyman. I am familiar with what you are talking
about, but I can't offer today a recommendation. I would like
to get back to you with some thoughts.
Mr. Watt. And I am going to tell you the one thing that is
troubling here--and I raised it with the first panel because
once you start defining ``critical information
infrastructure,'' if it is defined too broadly, it has a lot of
implications. And then you start talking about preempting State
laws with respect to any critical information infrastructure,
then you get into a whole other segment of things. Then when
you start saying the Government can demand or request certain
information and provide legal immunity for providing that
information, you get into a whole different set. And that is
very delicate territory.
Is my personal information, if it is breached in a
corporate computer--is that critical information infrastructure
or is it outside? Mr. Williams? Let's put it in the financial
services context. I serve on the Financial Services Committee
too. So I am very familiar with this. We have debating this for
a long time. Is a breach of my personal information by--
somebody craps into Bank of America or Mechanics and Farmers
Bank, which is where I bank, and breaches their--and they get
my personal--does that make that critical information
infrastructure?
Mr. Williams. If I might answer your direct question and
maybe extend it a little bit. I think the direct answer is yes.
If your personal information--collected, aggregated with the
personal information of a lot of the other customers of a
particular bank--is breached, it absolutely constitutes what I
think the legislation calls a risk to critical economic
security of the United States. If it is any one person, perhaps
not, but in the aggregate absolutely.
In extension, I would say that within financial services,
we have begun to think about what is and is not critical. As
you know, institutions now are subject to a designation by the
Treasury and the Financial Services Oversight Council of being
systemically important which we could think of as financially
systemically important or operationally systemically important.
We also, outside of our industry, have begun----
Mr. Watt. Okay. Well, let me just take this one step
further. My personal information, aggregated with other
people's personal information, can bring down the whole system.
I acknowledge that. But does that give the Federal Government
the right to preempt a State law that says it will protect my
personal information? Where does that fall?
Mr. Williams. I think in the narrowest sense, our banking
regulators have already said that we need to have notification
requirements and security requirements that protect single
individuals' information at the Federal level.
Mr. Watt. Yes. We are fighting that battle. I was involved
in drawing the preemption language in Dodd-Frank. It was an
absolute nightmare. I had consumer groups in the room. I had
bankers in the room. The Senate took it and referred it to some
case law, some case that had been decided by the Supreme Court,
and they are still fighting about what is preempted and what is
not preempted.
This is much, much, much broader than that, and we couldn't
even agree on what the Federal preemption standards should be
for the financial services bill. This is so much broader than
what we were talking about in the financial services bill. I
mean, something that is so vital to the United States that the
incapacity or destruction of such systems would have a
debilitating impact on national security, that is fine.
But when you talk about national economic security or
national public health or safety, this is a very, very broad
definition of how you are defining that. And I think it is that
discomfort with the Federal Government being too much in that
space that people start to say are we setting up a Big Brother
system here where the tail is wagging the dog basically.
I am sure people have been working on this, but we have got
a lot of work to do, I think, on this definition before we can
get the public comfortable with having Homeland Security call
up a company and demand that it give--well, they say they are
not demanding. They are just requesting it. But you heard Mr.
Baker say when the Government requests and you couple that with
giving immunity to the companies for providing the information
to the Government, then you are right back to where we were
under the PATRIOT Act. And people get very uncomfortable with
the Government being so powerful that it can then call up and
demand certain information and then provide immunity for
somebody when they provide that information because they don't
necessarily even want the Government to have immunity in that
case if they violate the standard that is applicable.
It is a very difficult line that we are walking here. We
can't define it today. I am way over my time, but I think that
is the most troubling aspect of what we have got to deal with
here, and it is providing discomfort on the left and it will
provide discomfort on the far right. That is when I used to
jokingly say I would quite often back around the circle into
Jesse Helms. I would be backing from the left and he would be
backing from the right, and all of a sudden, we would be
standing in the same place because both of us were suspicious
of too powerful a Government. And that is where we could get if
we are not careful.
Mr. Chairman, I am on a soapbox, so I am going to yield
back.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, I have enjoyed standing here listening
to you.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Quayle, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Williams and Mr. Holleyman, I am kind of going along
the same lines. My concern is that with the broad definition
for the covered critical infrastructure and how it is going to
apply to various small business, medium-sized businesses that
are starting to grow and then their inability to be able to
cover those expenses or at least they might be eating into
their margins because they don't have the ability like some of
the other large financial institutions that have the capital to
be able to comply with these various regulations.
How will this, because it is so broad--and I know that we
are talking about having to tighten up the language and all,
but my concern is how are we going to be able to make it so
that we are not going to be inhibiting growth in the private
sector. Because if the regulations are overly burdensome, we
are going to have a situation where companies are going to look
to see their cost-benefit analysis of whether they are going to
grow and then fall under that critical infrastructure or stay
the same size and not have to comply. That is one of my biggest
concerns, because this is overbroad and how that is going to
affect growth in the private sector.
Mr. Williams. I absolutely share your interest in setting
those criteria. I will leave it to the judgment of the Congress
how much of the specificity belongs in the legislation, in
regulation, or in judicial reviews as we heard earlier on this
point and on several other points.
What I will say is at least in financial services, we have
begun to set a fairly high threshold. So the systemically
important financial institutions are really the largest and the
most interconnected. The operationally significant financial
utilities are a small number of highly connected organizations
that I don't think would qualify in the small business category
that you----
Mr. Quayle. Kind of running on the same lines, if the
private sector is already addressing the situation, if like you
were saying, large financial institutions--you know, a lot of
their business is made at lightning speed transactions and they
make or don't make money based on that. And so having that
cybersecurity infrastructure within that framework is important
to them, but they are doing it on their own initiative.
So if you are saying that you are already having a lot of
these critical pieces of infrastructure doing it without the
regulatory framework in place, why don't we just leave it to
the people to do best practices and then be able to make their
own determination on what level? Because quite frankly, I think
that somebody who is banking with a Bank of America or a Chase
or whatever--they will be looking to those that have the
cybersecurity framework in place as a way to make a decision in
the private sector and let the market kind of take that
approach.
Mr. Williams. It does happen, we think, with a lot of
companies in a lot of sectors, many of whom are business
partners to financial providers, but we think it happens
unevenly. So we depend on electric utilities. We depend on the
telecom networks. We depend on software providers, many of whom
are strong and responsible but not all of whom operate with the
same level of resilience. We think raising that general bar
makes a lot of sense.
Mr. Quayle. Okay.
And Mr. Holleyman, you were mentioning a lot of the
trademark infringement that happens in the Internet and
elsewhere. That is rampant. Anytime you do a search, you can
find copyright infringed products out there.
But is this the right piece of legislation to be going for
that? Wouldn't it be a lot more effective to have independent
legislation that is outside of this larger regulatory framework
to address that situation? Because it doesn't seem like it goes
really hand in hand.
Mr. Holleyman. Well, I think that is a great question. We
do think that this is a piece of legislation that should
address the cyber framework. I was drawing into that, however,
one other area that this Committee has responsibility for which
is the area around intellectual property protection but
specifically the nature of software because fully a third of
the software that is used illegally and downloaded off the
Internet contains malware. And malware is providing a
penetration in the systems that has a pervasive impact well
beyond the intellectual property or the software industry.
And I was encouraging this Committee to encourage the
Administration to issue the executive order that requires
Federal contractors to use only legal software in the same way
that is required of Federal agencies, not only because it is
important for intellectual property protection, but because the
same type of vulnerabilities are being introduced into the
Federal network when Federal contractors are using illegal
software which oftentimes contains the type of malware that
poses a cybersecurity risk. So I am linking the two issues.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Lofgren.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, my apologies for not being here for this whole
hearing. We had a markup in the House Administration Committee
that I had to go to, but I have read all the testimony and it
is very, very helpful.
Ms. Harris, your testimony relative to the standards is
very, very useful.
And Bob--I mean, Mr. Holleyman--your preemption issue is an
important one. It is difficult, as the Ranking Member has
discussed, but I think we are going to have to address it in
terms of data breaches because the current situation is
chaotic. And that is going to be hard to do since all of us--
States have been aggressive about privacy. We are not going to
be able to go home if we don't maintain some similar types of
standards.
I credit the Administration for working with the technology
sector, but we are a long ways from where we are going to need
to be on this. The idea that we would waive all other law,
provide immunity. I mean, when the Government goes to the
private sector and asks for something, it is more than just
asking. I mean, there is an obligation. We have seen that in
many other contexts. There is no liability. Even with
liability, companies respond. If there is no liability and the
standards are as vague as this, we have created a big
Government nightmare, and we just can't go there.
On the other hand, cybersecurity and the threat to our
cyber infrastructure is very real. And I am wondering, as we
move forward, if we can make some distinctions not just on the
nature of the activity but the origin of the threats because
there are different levels based on where the threat is coming
from.
I am not an anti-government person, but I am mindful that
the Department of Homeland Security for over a year and a half
maintained a miniature golf site on its list of critical
infrastructure and wouldn't take it off. So let's not be
believing that the Department knows everything there is to know
about the critical infrastructure threat that we face. We tend
to over-categorize things in Government, and if we do that in
this case, we will see Government encroaching on really what
should be the private sector's primary responsibility and
certainly that of free Americans to be able to communicate
without fear of intrusion or monitoring by their own
Government.
So those are big-deal defects in what has been presented so
far, and I am hearing some bipartisan concern along those
lines. And I am confident that the Administration will want to
work with us to fix those items.
I am just wondering. Maybe all of you can comment on this.
To some extent, the Administration's proposal seems to put the
Government at sort of the center of the cybersecurity
information sharing. And I think it is true that the private
sector has given up more than they have gotten back, and that
has to change. But I am wondering whether that is really
optimal, whether we want the Federal Government to have that
man-in-the-middle centrality role or whether there is some
other way to structure it that might be more nimble.
Do you have any comment on that, the three of you?
Ms. Harris. So that is a question that we have been asking
as well, as to whether or not all information in and all
information out, which has been the model, really is the most
nimble way to share information and there are a variety of
private sector sharing groups going on. But I think it is worth
exploring whether or not that is--I mean, we have information
sharing already set up in the Federal Government, and in fact,
in the last couple of years, that has improved, I think, quite
a bit.
But, obviously, the civil liberties issues are ratcheted up
when all sharing has to go through the Government or is
encouraged to go through the Government. I need a better
understanding of sort of the value added. Obviously, the
Government needs that information for its own purposes, but the
question is whether or not everybody has to go to ``go'' first
before they deal with each other.
I know there is sectoral sharing. I find this very
difficult.
Ms. Lofgren. If I can just add in one other element, which
is some sectors that are, in fact, critical that an attack
would deal with systems and create cascading failures have
taken significant steps to protect themselves, the financial
sector among them. Other sectors, not so much. The ISACs--you
know, some have worked well, some not so well.
And so maybe one thing that we could do--I don't really see
a robust section here--is really even the assessment of--you
know, maybe it is the liability that ought to be imposed on
certain sectors--and they tend not to be the technology
sector--where they have not taken the minimal steps necessary
to protect themselves, and their lack of doing so puts the
Nation at risk. Maybe we ought to be doing some incentives in
the negative way for some of those sectors where the
catastrophe awaits us.
Mr. Williams. I certainly agree, ma'am, that the private
sector should be the primary locus of all of this work. We
within financial services, and I suspect in many other sectors,
have utilities that are entirely private and we have the ISACs
that are semi-private. And a great deal of the work occurs in
all of those places. There should be incentives and
disincentives that strengthen all of that private sector work.
I suspect that if we create more resources on the Federal
side and strengthen a hub of information sharing on the Federal
side, it will still allow for that rich private work to take
place. I would never support substituting all of the dispersed
private effort for a centralized Government effort, but I
suspect that there is room for both.
Mr. Holleyman. Ms. Lofgren, if I can mention two ideas.
One is we think that the most important role for the
Federal Government is to serve as a convener by bringing in the
interested parties together. We think in particular NIST and
others have done a great job in taking on that role.
Secondly, where critical infrastructure may ultimately be
defined, we think there are two hallmarks to it. One, it needs
to be a narrow definition, and second, there needs to be
flexibility around how entities in critical infrastructure use
security products to create the kind of security and deal with
the evolving nature of the threats.
Ms. Lofgren. I know my time is up, but in some cases that
includes--our own Government has failed to do even the minimal
thing. I remember a hearing on US-VISIT in the Homeland
Security Committee where we learned for the first time that
they hadn't even deployed intrusion detection software. I mean,
it was stunning.
So we have a long way to go, but this bill also has a long
way to go.
And I thank the Chairman for indulging me over my 5 minutes
and yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman.
And I am pleased to recognize the gentlewoman from Texas,
Ms. Jackson Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
To the witnesses, I was detained. We held, Mr. Chairman, a
hearing in Homeland Security that actually overlapped some of
the very questions that are being raised here from a different
perspective, and that is the in-depth use of cyber sites by
individuals intending to do us harm. So I think it is a two-
edged sword or focus in terms of the protection of data, but as
well as protection of the American homeland. And I raise my
questions accordingly.
And I would just like to put the President's remarks in the
record by reading them in part. His statement was: ``We count
on computer networks to deliver our oil and gas, our power, and
our water, rely on them for public transportation, air traffic
control. But just as we failed in the past to invest in our
physical infrastructure, our roads, our bridges, and rails, we
have failed to invest in the security of our digital
infrastructure and the status quo is not acceptable.'' And I
join him in that, which is I guess the basis of his plan and
initiative.
I want to start with Mr. Williams because I might not have
heard you correctly when you seemed to have been arguing
against a central Government plan which I took to be focused on
how to structure our security and data protection versus the
private sector involvement. Can you just expand on what you
were saying there, please?
Mr. Williams. Yes, ma'am. We certainly believe that
expanded authorities in the Department of Homeland Security and
an expanded role of the Government are appropriate. We think
that this is important, as we go through this arc that Mr.
Holleyman described where we have gone from very simple,
unsophisticated hackers to much more sophisticated attacks.
This warrants a more collective approach to protecting the
overall ecosystem.
What I would say--and maybe this is where that has softened
a bit--is that even if we build up that center, even if we
build those resources and improve our ability to take advantage
of that hub and that convening authority, we will still very
much have a widely dispersed expertise and set of resources
that are at the disposal of companies. Individual companies,
their utilities, their service providers, their nonprofits,
their coalitions I think probably will still be the primary
gravitational center of the work.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So it is important for the private sector
to develop cutting edge technology simply to provide
protection. Is that what you are saying? You should continue to
do research and develop that next level of software that
provides that protection.
Mr. Williams. Absolutely, absolutely.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me follow up on some of the materials
that we received in the previous hearing that spoke about some
of the either unknown or unattended to sites where the Taliban
in Afghanistan can, without hindrance, have friendly
conversations that may even intrude into the United States.
Let me ask all of you. Do you have an intensity with your
particular companies, those you represent where you are aware
of that usage of sites seemingly unimpeded? Do you cooperate
with, for example, the FBI? Do you believe the FBI has
sufficient tools on this? And I am saying this in the backdrop
of a very sensitive concern about civil liberties and civil
rights. So I am particularly concerned about sites that are
international that are able to pierce the cyberspace that we
have. Do you want to start, Mr. Holleyman?
Mr. Holleyman. Ms. Jackson Lee, I don't have any
information about the specific narrow question you posed.
Certainly in a variety of cyber crime activities, companies in
the software industry do cooperate with law enforcement, but I
can't comment on your specific question.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So you are not aware----
Mr. Holleyman. I am personally not in my role as the
president of our association.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. We do work very actively with law enforcement
at every level with both the U.S. authorities and with non-U.S.
authorities to ensure that our systems--financial services
systems--are not used for malicious purposes, to protect the
intellectual property that lives in those systems, to protect
the personally sensitive information that is in those systems.
We have a lot of good motivations for working actively with
people in the private sector and the public sector to protect
the financial infrastructure.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Do you have any comment, Ms. Harris?
Ms. Harris. Well, I represent a civil liberties
organization.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right. That is why I asked if you had a
comment.
Ms. Harris. Beyond that----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will move to my next question. Thank
you.
Ms. Harris. Okay.
Ms. Jackson Lee. The next question is the current trend of
technology is to place information onto the cloud of third
party operating systems and allows phones and computers to
access this information. How does this rapidly growing
dependence on storing information remotely in the cloud impact
the steps individuals, businesses, and the Government should
take to enhance cybersecurity? And how will the Government
address jurisdictional issues? I don't want to ask about the
Government, but what are you all doing with respect to that
concept?
Mr. Holleyman. Well, from a software industry perspective,
there are several things we are doing. One is companies that
are providing cloud services or hosting very much realize that
the security associated with their cloud offerings is going to
be critical not only to comply with a variety of laws, but also
to gain customer confidence. It is probably one of the most
important things that you can do, and they are very active at
the top of the list.
Second is that we are building awareness of the fact that
customers should be asking questions about where their data is
hosted and the level of security that that cloud service
provides.
And finally, if a cloud offering is, in fact, secure, we
believe it could provide a higher level of security than the
very dispersed nature of servers and networks that exist today.
So we are trying to make it clear that there is nothing
inherently problematic about storing information in the cloud.
In fact, it could be better in many circumstances, but you have
to ask the questions about how providers are securing
information and what steps are they taking.
Mr. Williams. We have specialists in a lot of different
disciplines active in our program, and people from every one of
those disciplines have asked about and worked on cloud. So we
have security specialists thinking about what the marginal
security requirements would be and what the security
improvements might be coming from a cloud-based infrastructure.
We have people who work with service providers who are
asking what contractual provisions can help protect information
and systems in the cloud in a way that might not have been
contemplated when servers were all in one location.
And we have people who work on public policy thinking about
what the right regulatory framework would be for looking at
cloud where geological boundaries make a little bit less sense.
Everyone has an interest in it and many of those interests,
we hope, will lead to cloud being not something that would ever
degrade security or degrade resiliency but would improve it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So you are not running away from that. The
business community is actively engaged.
Mr. Williams. We are absolutely engaged. I can tell you
that within financial services, firms are very reluctant to
move their information to a public cloud where the resiliency
standards are set on the basis of what is publicly appropriate
for relatively nonsensitive information. They are much more
likely to use proprietary clouds or industry-specific or
regional clouds where they can have elevated controls in place.
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Ms. Harris, was trying to answer. Could
she----
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, the gentlewoman will be
granted an additional minute.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman.
Ms. Harris. I think that security in the cloud certainly
with companies that are providing applications and storage and
other services, cloud services, to business, security is good
and getting better.
I think that the unanswered question here is security and
privacy and other rights for consumers in the cloud, and that
is certainly beyond the scope of this hearing. But it is far
less clear to me that as consumers are encouraged to move their
information to the cloud, that they can be guaranteed the same
level of security protections, nor can they be guaranteed the
same level of privacy protections. Our constitutional
protections, our Fourth Amendment protections, our ECPA
protections have been outstripped by technology. We don't have
consumer privacy laws in this country that broadly apply to
data. So there are a lot of issues for consumers in the cloud
that go sort of beyond what business has to face.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chairman very much. Mr.
Chairman, I just want to make this one comment, and I know that
we are speaking of software, but I really appreciate this
hearing. I am sorry I was not here for its entirety. But there
really is--besides the constitutional issues--Ms. Harris, I am
not ignoring that and the civil liberties. There really are
real challenges for cybersecurity and particularly unhosted
sites, and I would imagine that there would be overlap between
Judiciary and Homeland Security on these issues that have to do
with terrorism.
Mr. Goodlatte. Undoubtedly there is.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I have one additional question. I direct it
to Mr. Holleyman an Mr. Williams.
How worried is the tech industry about state-sponsored
hacking and theft?
Mr. Holleyman. The tech industry is certainly very worried.
It is probably one of the fastest growing forms of risk. I
can't quantify the extent today, but it is certainly something
that we work closely with Government in trying to identify
where those risks may be occurring.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Williams?
Mr. Williams. The financial services industry is very
focused on the most sophisticated threats with or without
attribution, whether they happen to be state-sponsored or
sponsored by some other malicious actor. We are very focused on
ensuring that the simplest, most unsophisticated threats are
absolutely taken care of, but we are more and more focused on
this more sophisticated tier.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
Mr. Watt?
Mr. Watt. I think I might pass except to observe that
having dealt with the systemic risk issue, it seems to me that
that is in the financial services sector. This bill seems to me
to be putting Homeland Security in a much, much, much more
powerful position on a much, much broader range of issues than
we dealt with with just financial services' systemic risk.
And one might wonder at some point whether the director of
Homeland Security is a lot more powerful than the chairman of
the Federal Reserve. I don't ask that. I was just wondering
aloud. Just wondering aloud. We will talk off the record.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
And I want to thank all of our witnesses. It has been a
very helpful contribution to this hearing. In fact, the entire
hearing has been very useful. It is very clear that this is a
wide-ranging subject that, in terms of the Congress tackling
it, is going to involve a lot of input from a lot of
Committees. But I think this Committee has a critical role to
play both the Intellectual Property, Competition and the
Internet Subcommittee, as well as the Crime Subcommittee, and
we look forward to working together to accomplish some good
legislation that would buttress the work of the Administration
and certainly give guidance to the private sector.
So without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative
days to submit to the Chair additional written questions for
the witnesses, which we will forward and ask the witnesses to
respond to as promptly as they can so that their answers may be
made a part of the record.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
With that, I would again like to thank our witnesses and
declare the hearing adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


