- UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 3, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-127

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov
_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

66-154 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
[Vacant]

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MAY 3, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......     1
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Committee on
the Judiciary..................................................     3

WITNESS

The Honorable Eric H. Holder, Jr., Attorney General, United
States Department of Justice
Oral Testimony.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Material submitted by the Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a
Representative in Congress from the State of North Carolina,
and Member, Committee on the Judiciary.........................    39
Response to Question posed by the Honorable J. Randy Forbes, a
Representative in Congress from the State of Virginia, and
Member, Committee on the Judiciary.............................    53

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Responses to Questions for the Record from the U.S. Department of
Justice........................................................    89

UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

----------

TUESDAY, MAY 3, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:17 a.m., in room
2141, Rayburn House Office Building, the Honorable Lamar Smith
(Chairman of the Committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Smith, Sensenbrenner, Coble,
Gallegly, Goodlatte, Lungren, Chabot, Issa, Pence, Forbes,
King, Franks, Gohmert, Jordan, Poe, Chaffetz, Griffin, Marino,
Gowdy, Ross, Adams, Quayle, Conyers, Nadler, Scott, Watt,
Lofgren, Jackson Lee, Waters, Cohen, Johnson, Quigley, Chu,
Deutch, Sanchez, and Wasserman Schultz.
Staff Present: (Majority) Sean McLaughlin, Chief of Staff
and General Counsel; Allison Halataei, Parliamentarian; Richard
Hertling, Deputy Staff Director; Crystal Jezierski, Counsel;
Jennifer Lackey, Staff Assistant; and Perry Apelbaum, Minority
Staff Director and Chief Counsel.
Mr. Smith. The Judiciary Committee will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a recess
of the Committee at any time. We welcome everyone here, but
particularly our guest today, the Attorney General of the
United States, Eric Holder. I am going to recognize myself for
an opening statement and then the Ranking Member for his
opening statement. This morning we welcome Attorney General
Eric Holder to the Committee for an oversight hearing on the
U.S. Department of Justice. First, I would like to thank the
Attorney General for supporting the reauthorization of the
expiring PATRIOT Act provisions. I also appreciate his support
of a mandatory data retention policy to help law enforcement
officials track dangerous pedophiles and keep children safe.
Although he may not want to take credit for this next item,
I should also thank the Attorney General for the decision not
to try certain terrorists in the U.S. It is the right decision
and will ensure justice for the families of the 9/11 victims.
Terrorists remain intent on carrying out their plots to destroy
America. The killing of Osama bin Laden is a victory in
America's efforts to combat terrorism. But the terrorist threat
does not end with Bin Laden's death. In the year since 9/11,
al-Qaeda has expanded and splintered into smaller groups and
rogue terrorists around the world. This makes it harder for us
to detect and deter plots against Americans both here, at home
and abroad.
Despite Sunday's victory, we cannot afford to leave our
intelligence community without the resources it needs to
dismantle terrorist organizations, identify threats from groups
and individuals and interrupt terrorist plots, so Congress must
reauthorize the PATRIOT Act. Our laws should keep pace with the
evolving terrorist threat, but they must also keep pace with
rapidly changing technology. Nowhere is this more apparent than
with the dramatic increase in the proliferation and exchange of
child pornography. Today pedophiles can purchase, view or
exchange this disturbing material with near impunity.
Child pornography on the Internet may be our fastest
growing crime in America increasing by an average of 150
percent a year. Better data retention will assist law
enforcement officers with the investigation of child
pornography and other Internet-based crimes. When investigators
develop leads that might save a child or apprehend a
pornographer, their efforts should not be impeded because vital
records were destroyed.
While I appreciate the Department's support on these
important matters, I am concerned that in some cases, this
Administration may have placed political and ideological
considerations above enforcing the law. Earlier this year, the
Department abandoned its obligation to defend the Defense of
Marriage Act, a Federal law enacted by Congress and signed by
President Clinton to protect the institution of marriage. It
seems the President's personal political views regarding the
law may have trumped the obligations of the Department of
Justice.
Another example of selective enforcement is the
Administration's views when it comes to immigration laws
enacted by the States. The Justice Department sued Arizona for
enacting a law that mirrors Federal immigration law. The
Administration justifies its actions by claiming that the
Arizona law wrongly supersedes Federal authority. But what
about a law recently enacted in Utah that creates a guest
worker program for illegal immigrants. This undermines Federal
immigration law and yet the Administration has taken no action.
Similarly, the Justice Department refuses to defend Congress'
constitutional authority to determine national drug policy.
Marijuana distribution is illegal under Federal law regardless
of whether it is used recreationally or medicinally. But rather
than enforce Federal drug laws, the Department directed Federal
prosecutors not to bring charges against marijuana dispensaries
in the States that have taken it upon themselves to legalize
medical marijuana. And just last week, it was reported that the
Department has dropped its criminal probe of a lawyer who
admitted leaking classified information on the terrorist
surveillance program.
This case should have been a slam dunk for the Department
since the attorney admitted to violating the law. But the
President's ideological opposition to the TSP program may have
stopped a legitimate criminal investigation. The Justice
Department has a solemn duty to defend the laws of the land as
enacted by Congress without politics or prejudice. And I am
concerned that there seems to be a pattern of selectively
enforcing the law based on the Administration's political
ideology. I do want to thank the Attorney General for coming
today, and we look forward to hearing from him on these and
many other issues. The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers,
the Ranking Member of the Judiciary Committee, is recognized
for his opening statement.
Mr. Conyers. Thanks, Chairman Smith. Once again, we welcome
the Attorney General, Eric Holder. Most of us have known him
for more than a number of years in his various positions in the
government. And I welcome you here and praise your standing up
for the rule of law, especially in the area of national
security where you were the Attorney General that supported the
end of using torture. And you released legal memos on this
subject that proved that what you were doing was right and some
of those legal memos were incorrect.
Now, for the things that we want you to improve on. I start
off with the fact that the worst economic upheaval since the
Depression, with all the suffering and damage that it has
caused citizens and their family, there is, to my knowledge,
not one single prosecution on any of the Wall Street barons
that have created this economic mess. The systemic abuses not
only have not ended, but are still going on as far as I am
concerned.
In the area, General Holder, of the approach to crack
cocaine cases under the Fair Sentencing Act, that the
Department would continue to seek extreme sentences that have
been rejected as a policy matter by both the executive and the
legislative branch is disappointing. And more needs to be done
to ensure that the so-called pipeline cases are handled in a
just manner.
And the area of antitrust enforcement and merger review, we
are getting more discussion about this, but our economy
continues to become more and more dominated by global
megafirms, and just about every merger that has come through
the Department of Justice's front door has made it out alive.
And I know that you are getting ready to block one large
merger, but antitrust is still underutilized in the Department
of Justice, and I want to help work with you if we can to
increase the use of antitrust enforcement as these global
megafirms get larger.
And then in the national security area, the State secrets
privilege policy is deeply troubling to me. And of course, the
Department has become more transparent of late, and I
appreciate that the State secrets report recently transmitted
to our Committee, there is still a lot of decision-making that
remains flawed. This privilege to me is a threat to the
separation of powers and to the right of every citizen to
lawfully fight back against government abuse and must be
reigned in. Outside of those minor observations, we welcome you
to the Committee, General Holder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. Without objection, other
Members' opening statements will be made a part of the record.
We are pleased to welcome today's witness, United States
Attorney General Eric H. Holder, Jr. On February 3, 2009
Attorney General Holder was sworn in as the 82nd Attorney
General of the United States. Attorney General Holder has
enjoyed a long and distinguished career of public service.
Joining the Department through the Attorney General's Honors
Program in 1976, he became one of the Department's first
attorneys to serve in the newly-formed public integrity
section.
He went on to serve as a judge of the Superior Court in the
District of Columbia and the U.S. Attorney for the District of
Columbia as well. In 1997, Mr. Holder was named by President
Clinton to be the Deputy Attorney General. Prior to becoming
Attorney General, Mr. Holder was a litigation partner at
Covington and Burling, LLP in Washington, D.C.
Mr. Holder, a native of New York City, attended Columbia
University graduating in 1973 and Columbia Law School from
where he graduated in 1976. Mr. Attorney General, we look
forward to hearing your testimony and welcome you again to
today's hearing. And please proceed.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE ERIC H. HOLDER, JR., ATTORNEY
GENERAL, UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Attorney General Holder. Well, thank you, Chairman Smith,
Ranking Member Conyers. Chairman Smith, that was a wonderful
introduction, except for the part where you mentioned the dates
that I graduated from law school and college. People are now
calculating how old I am. And I am of an age where I am
sensitive to that. Other than that, thank you. But also
distinguished Members of the Committee, good morning, and thank
you for this opportunity to discuss the critical work of our
Nation's Department of Justice. Now, as I have stated often, no
aspect of our work is more important or more urgent than
protecting the American people.
Mr. Smith. Mr. Attorney General, would you pull your mic a
little bit closer so that we can hear you better. Thank you.
Attorney General Holder. Protecting the American people is
our most fundamental responsibility. Two days ago with the
death of Osama bin Laden, the leader of al Qaeda and the
world's most wanted terrorist, our Nation made historic
progress in fulfilling this responsibility and in achieving
justice for the nearly 3,000 innocent Americans who were
murdered on September 11, 2001. This achievement was the result
of a steadfast almost decade-long effort, one that spanned two
Administrations and was advanced by many dedicated military and
civilian leaders, intelligence and law enforcement officers,
diplomats and policymakers, investigators, prosecutors and
counterterrorism experts. For the last 2 years, President Obama
has made certain that efforts to kill or to capture Osama bin
Laden remained a central focus in our Nation's fight against
terrorist threats. For the President's national security team,
achieving this goal has been at the forefront of our work, even
as we continued and strengthened broader efforts to dismantle
and defeat terrorist networks and to use every tool available
to combat national security threats both at home and abroad.
Now, the Justice Department has played a vital role in this
ongoing fight against terrorism. During the last 2 years, we
have helped to identify and to disrupt plots to attack New York
City's subway system and plots to deploy weapons of mass
destruction in Texas, Oregon and Washington State. We have
secured guilty pleas, as well as long sentences and actionable
intelligence from terrorists intent on harming our people, our
allies and our interests. And the Department has charged more
defendants in Federal Court with the most serious terror-
related offenses than in an any 2-year period in our Nation's
history. Through the use of robust military, intelligence and
law enforcement operations this Administration has sent a clear
and unequivocal warning to those intent on harming the American
people. You will be pursued and you will be brought to justice.
Although we can all be proud of Sunday's successful operation
and we can all be encouraged by the way that thousands of
Americans have joined together at this defining moment in our
fight against terrorism, we cannot become complacent.
The fight is far from over. Just yesterday, I ordered the
Department's prosecutors and law enforcement agencies to be
mindful that Bin Laden's death could result in retaliatory
attacks in the United States or against our interests overseas.
And I have instructed Department officials, as well as our
State and local partners, to maintain focus on our highly
effective counterterrorism and deradicalization efforts. I have
also reiterated what President Obama said on Sunday evening
that the United States is not, and never will be at war with
Islam. Bin Laden was not a Muslim leader, he was a mass
murderer of Muslims in many countries, including our own. We
cannot, and we will not lose sight of this fact. And I pledge
that at every level of today's Justice Department, we will
remain focused on our paramount obligation to protect the
citizens that we serve. Using every available resource and
appropriate tool, including the Federal Court system, we will
be vigilant against both international and domestic threats,
and we will continue to utilize the critical authorities that
are provided under the provisions of the PATRIOT Act, which I
hope Congress will move promptly to reauthorize for a
substantial period of time.
On this issue, I want to thank Chairman Smith for his
leadership and for his strong support. Beyond our national
security work, the Department will take steps to build on
current efforts to combat violent crime and financial fraud and
to defend the rights of all Americans, especially the most
vulnerable among us.
And let me say, finally, that our country and the world
have really just witnessed an historic moment. What we make of
it now is up to us. Osama bin Laden has been brought to
justice. A brutal terrorist will no longer be free to order the
murder of innocent people across the globe. And just as we came
together nearly a decade ago in the aftermath of the most
devastating attack in America's history, I believe we must come
together again. On 9/11, our Nation was united as never before
by tragedy, by grief and by a shared sense of loss.
Today, we must be united by a collective resolve and a
common purpose to protect our homeland and to protect our
people, to honor the values that have made our Nation great and
to build on the extraordinary progress that has been achieved
in protecting the people we are all privileged to serve. So
thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be more than glad to respond to
any questions that you might have.
[The prepared statement of Attorney General Holder
follows:]

__________

Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
And I will recognize myself for questions. The first is
this: At the end of the month, there are three temporary
provisions of the PATRIOT Act that are set to expire. A lot of
people say that we might exaggerate the significance of the
ability of those provisions to enable us to gather
intelligence. Would you comment on how important those three
provisions are and whether you feel that they should be
extended?
Attorney General Holder. Well, we believe, I believe, it is
absolutely essential that these expiring provisions be
reauthorized. We never want to see these Acts, these
provisions, expire. The fact that they have sunsetted
periodically and have required us to come back periodically to
get them reauthorized is not helpful to us. We need certainty.
Our prosecutors, our investigators, need certainty in that
regard.
So our hope is that these provisions will be reauthorized
for as long as we possibly can. If they were done on a
permanent basis, that is not something that we would object to.
I am trying to confront the political reality in trying to get
to the necessary votes in the House, the necessary votes in the
Senate, and my hope would be that at a minimum, we would
reauthorize these provisions for a substantial period of time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General. My next
question goes to something that I mentioned in my opening
statement, and that is the importance of data retention by ISPs
to allow us to go after the child predators on the Internet.
Has the absence of data retention or significant periods of
time for data retention hampered your ability to go after these
individuals?
Attorney General Holder. I can't point to a specific case,
but I am concerned that the lack of retention periods will
hamper our ability to get at important cases among the ones
that you mentioned, child pornography, but also in the
terrorist field, national security field is something that we
are talking about with our European counterparts where they
want to have data retention periods that are substantially
shorter than what I think is appropriate.
But I think the concern that you have expressed with
regards to the retention of data is something that is worthy of
our attention.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you. Mr. Attorney General, as I
mentioned in my opening statement, it seems to me that we have
had the appearance that the Department of Justice has chosen to
prosecute cases based upon political ideology rather than equal
justice under law. And some of the examples that come to mind
are, for example, the decision of the Department of Justice to
sue Arizona on an immigration bill that that State passed, but
then not to Utah for the immigration laws that that State
passed. And it seems to me that the Department probably should
be consistent in its application of the law.
Also you reopened an investigation into CI interrogations
earlier in your tenure, and yet you ended a criminal probe into
the lawyer who publicly admitted leaking classified information
on the terrorist surveillance program. Again, I mentioned that
in my opening statement. This does give the appearance of a
pattern of selectively enforcing a law, and I wanted to ask you
for your comment as to whether that appearance is accurate or
not.
Attorney General Holder. Well, let me be very clear. With
regard to those matters and in all the other work that this
Department of Justice does, we apply the facts as we find them,
we apply the law as we find it, we do what we do and make
decisions without any regard for political considerations.
Frankly, the work of the Department could be made a lot easier
if we listened to the critics, if we listened to the pundits,
if we looked at the polls. That is not what we do, it is not
what I have asked the men and women of the Department.
Mr. Smith. But you understand that the examples I mentioned
give that appearance whether that is accurate or not? Do you
see the inconsistency that I point out and feel that that is
not accurate or do you think that there is an appearance of
inconsistency there?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I don't see necessarily the
inconsistency or the appearance of political considerations
that you mentioned. For instance, with regard to the Utah law,
that is a law that doesn't go into effect until 2013. It has
always been Department of Justice policy to try to work with
States to see if there is a way in which we can reach an
agreement without us having to actually file suit. So we will
look at the law and if it is not changed to our satisfaction by
2013, we will take all the necessary steps.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General. The
Ranking Member has yielded his initial time to the gentlewoman
from Florida, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, so she will be recognized
for her questions now.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you so much. And I thank the
Ranking Member and the Chairman. General Holder, it is good to
see you again, and I know that you are going to really be
surprised about the subject about which I am going to ask you,
but that would be our focus and your priority, which I am
thrilled continue to be a priority on the exploitation of our
Nation's children. We have worked hard to implement the Protect
Our Children Act. And the National Strategy on Child
Exploitation, Interdiction and Prevention Report that came out
last year details that there are hundreds of thousands of
criminal suspects in the U.S. engaged in child pornography
trafficking.
Just to give everyone an idea, according to the Office of
Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Preemption in 2009, our
Internet Crimes Against Children Task Forces made over 3,000
arrests and identified over 1,000 child victims. Since passage
of the Protect our Children Act of 2008, the funding though has
remained relatively the same, about $30 million. In the 111th
Congress, under the Democratic leadership we passed a budget
that included $60 million for our ICAC task forces, and we know
that with every dollar that we add, we can make it that much
more likely to actually rescuing a child victim.
So wouldn't you agree that by doubling the ICAC task force
budget that we would have an opportunity to rescue that many
more children?
Attorney General Holder. Well, let me say that we have
certainly enjoyed working with you. The focus that you have
placed on this issue I think is totally appropriate. I hope it
will be a legacy item for this Department of Justice that
people will see that we stood up for our Nation's most
vulnerable and most important citizens, our children. And the
work that you have done with us I think has been extremely
effective.
The ICAC task forces, I think, again, have been extremely
effective and we want to support them in every way that we can.
We are unfortunately confronted with budget realities that make
it extremely difficult to do all the work that we want to do.
But with regard to those task forces we want to try to expand
them to the extent that we can, support the ones that do exist
and then try to ring out efficiency, so that we can in some
ways make sure these budgetary problems don't get in the way of
the very important work that we have done together.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Let me just point out, the
Administration has been incredibly supportive and has made it a
priority. My concern is that we made a commitment in the 111th
Congress to continue to increase the funding for the ICAC task
forces, and in this Republican Congress, I am quite concerned
that that same commitment won't be met. Now, the Chairman has
been--Chairman Smith has been incredibly committed to making
sure that we can go after these child predators. I am hopeful
that his influence rises to the top so we can ensure that
continued commitment.
I want to also just touch on a letter that I sent to you
about Sholom Rubashkin which we sent in December. And it is a
case where the judge has been accused accurately of some ex
parte communication and excessive sentencing. And I won't get
into it here, but if we could follow up with you on that and
get a response from the Department, I would appreciate it very
much. Because it appears both the sentence has been--that the
sentence is incredibly excessive and the judge who levied the
sentence engaged in inappropriate ex parte communication.
So if we could follow up with you on that that would be
great. And then lastly, I just want to ask you about the gas
prices task force, because I think that it is fantastic that
the Administration has set up the task force. If we look--I
just want to review the current situation because most people
aren't aware of this. According to the Energy Information
Agency under the U.S. Department of Energy as of a week ago,
this is a week ago, the U.S. crude oil reserves that we had
were at 363,125 barrels, which is higher than at any point
during the 8 years of the Bush administration. Our total
petroleum imports are at their lowest level since 1997.
Domestic oil production for the last 2 years is up. And in
the Gulf of Mexico, we have larger production now than at any
point in the last two decades, at 1.64 million barrels a day,
which is double the production in 1992. Yesterday though the
average price at the pump was $3.96, up over a dollar from a
year ago this week when it was $2.90. So with all the good news
about supply, one would think that there must be a dramatic
increase in the demand for gasoline that drives those
increases, but that is just not the case.
So it seems like there is something that smells in Denmark.
Can you tell us specifically how the fraud working group, which
again, I think, is really a very aggressive way of pursuing
that the facts and separating fact from fiction and helping to
get to the bottom of how we can explore manipulation, explore
collusion and fraud, and tell us how Congress can assist you in
this effort.
Attorney General Holder. Well, there are certainly market
forces that are at work. And I don't want to oversell what it
is that we will be doing, but to the extent that there are
inappropriate attempts to manipulate the market, that there is
price gouging, other things of that nature that have had a
devastating impact on average Americans who are trying to, in
these tough economic times, make do, that will be the focus of
this task force. We have partners from the Federal Government,
as well as our State and local counterparts, State attorneys
general, district attorneys, all of whom will be coming
together to look at this situation to see if there are people
who are doing things that are inappropriate, and to the extent
that they are we will hold them accountable.
This is a serious effort by a dedicated group of people
that, as I said, is pretty wide ranging. It involves
prosecutors, investigators, at a variety of levels. We will
look at this on both the civil and the criminal sides.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. I thank the Ranking Member and the
Chairman for their indulgence, and yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr. Sensenbrenner,
former Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Thank you very much. Thank you for
coming, General Holder. I would like to ask a few questions
relative to the Department's February 23rd decision not to
defend the constitutionality of section 3 of the Defense of
Marriage Act. And as a result, the House of Representatives is
going to have to hire outside counsel at our own expense to be
able to make sure that this issue is properly argued before the
court. Why did you do it?
Attorney General Holder. Well, we had a unique situation in
the Second Circuit where this case--where the decision was
made. We had, in prior instances, been in circuits where the
courts of appeals had a defined standard, a rational basis
standard. In the Second Circuit, we had for the first time a
circuit that had not looked at the issue, had not come up with
an applicable standard. When the Department looked and had to
make the determination as to what the appropriate standard was,
given the nature of the way in which gay people had been
treated in this country, given the nature of the reasons for
the passage of the statute, it was our feeling that a
heightened scrutiny test had to be applied.
Applying the heightened scrutiny test, we did not think
that the statute would pass constitutional muster, and as a
result, thought that we could not make reasonable arguments in
defense of the statute, something that is done extremely rarely
but happens occasionally. And I recommended to the President
that we not defend the statute and he agreed with that
recommendation.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, sexual preference has never been a
protected class in any of our civil rights laws. And my
understanding is that the vast majority of the courts disagree
with the Second Circuit, and believe that the lower standard,
which is rationally related to a legitimate government interest
is the one that applies. Now, evidently, the President has
decided to take the opinion of one court to the exclusion of
other courts to make this decision that he will not execute the
laws that he took an oath to enforce.
Attorney General Holder. No, I mean, these instances happen
occasionally. In fact, there is a Federal statute that
anticipates this. And under that statute, when the Attorney
General decides not to defend the statute a letter is sent to
Congress, as I did in this case, and as I have done in other
instances. The reason for the determination, though, was, as I
said, this different standard. And the fact that much has
changed since the passage of the bill 15 years or so ago, the
Supreme Court has ruled that criminalizing homosexual contact
is unconstitutional. Congress has repealed the Don't Ask, Don't
Tell policy. Since the lower courts have----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. But Congress has never repealed or
modified the Defense of Marriage Act, and this law has been on
the books for over 15 years. And you were the Deputy Attorney
General at the end of the Clinton administration and this
concern was never raised. And now all of a sudden, 2 years into
the Obama administration, the President and you apparently have
decided that section 3 is unconstitutional. You know, I know
you have got to pivot around a little bit in this business but
the Constitution hasn't been pivoting around.
Attorney General Holder. Yeah, but circumstances have
changed, and that is what I have been saying.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Is it political circumstances or legal
circumstances?
Attorney General Holder. No, as I said, if you look at the
history of discrimination coupled with what Congress has done
with regard to don't ask don't tell, what the Supreme Court has
said----
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Well, don't ask don't tell, with all due
respect, sir, was a personnel issue in the Defense Department.
And the decriminalization of homosexuality, that was the
criminal law. DOMA does not deal with either of these two
items. DOMA was an attempt to define for Federal purposes that
marriages between one man and one woman. And 45 States in this
country have also reached that conclusion, either through a
constitutional amendment ratified by the people, as was the
case in Wisconsin, or through statutory enactments by the
legislature.
You know, my concern on this, Mr. Attorney General, and it
is deeply troubling, is that the President has decided to usurp
the function of Congress in making laws which a former
President has signed and also to usurp the function of the
courts by saying that this law is unconstitutional; well, that
is not his job. Now, I guess what I can say is that I certainly
would support an effort to have the cost of Congress' defending
this provision that the President and you have refused to do so
come out of the Justice Department's appropriation so that the
message is sent down the street that an Attorney General or
President can't willy-nilly decide that a law that they may
have voted against if they had been in Congress at the time is
unconstitutional.
Well, my time is up. And, you know, let me say I haven't
said the last about this, but you made the wrong decision. And
I think that there ought to be a little bit of skin off the
Department's back as a result of the wrong decision being made,
and I yield back.
Attorney General Holder. Well, with all due respect, in
addition to the determination that I made and the President
agreed with, which is based strictly on an assessment of the
legal situation in front of us, there are several lower courts
that have ruled that the DOMA itself is unconstitutional. And
the notion that this is somehow something that ought to be, as
you said, taken off the backs of the Department of Justice in a
financial way, I think, is inappropriate. The lawyers in the
Department of Justice who would have worked on that case,
believe me, have more than a full-time job, and they will have
to use the time that might have been used in the DOMA defense,
they will use it in other areas, so I don't think that that is
inappropriate.
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the gentleman from Wisconsin
is recognized for an additional 30 seconds.
Mr. Sensenbrenner. Mr. Attorney General, I guess what I can
say is that we are in a tough budget time, and we all know we
are in a tough budget time. If you take the position that this
should come out of Congress' budget, which we willingly cut on
the second day of the session, essentially what you are saying
is that there shouldn't be money, government money, to pay a
lawyer to argue the constitutionality of this law.
And you know I am one of those that believes that everybody
is entitled to a lawyer no matter how wrong their position may
be. And you know, what you are saying is, well, just because
you and the President have decided not to defend DOMA because
you and the President have decided it is unconstitutional there
should be some kind of financial shifting around so that the
lawyer gets paid for because this is a serious constitutional
question, and the best lawyers in the country ought to argue
both sides of the case, and I yield back.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired. The gentleman
from New York, Mr. Nadler, is recognized.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you. I am very heartened to hear from
the----
Attorney General Holder. Can I just say, I don't disagree
with Mr. Sensenbrenner in the sense that good lawyers ought to
be involved in this matter, and you apparently hired Mr.
Clement, who is a great lawyer. But Congress, it seems to me,
has the ability to pass an appropriation to pay Mr. Clement for
the defense, a great defense that I am sure he will render. To
take it out of the Justice Department, however, I think is
inappropriate.
Mr. Nadler. I am delighted to hear the observation of the
gentleman from Wisconsin, and I look forward to his--that
everyone is entitled to a lawyer, and I look forward to his
support to greatly increase appropriations for legal services
and legal aid so that people who need lawyers in this country
can get it, and we will be working together on that, I am sure.
Mr. Attorney General, I want to offer my sincere appreciation
to the Administration for its daring and successful mission to
eliminate Osama bin Laden. I want to commend our military, our
intelligence personnel and the Administration for never
forgetting 9/11, and for continuing to pursue terrorists and
bringing them to justice. And please bring that message back to
the President.
As you well know, during the last Congress a number of us
worked tirelessly to pass the 9/11 Health and Compensation Act
so that we can properly honor, remember and care for the
victims of 9/11. This new law reopens the Victims' Compensation
Fund which will allow those still suffering and dying from
their work at Ground Zero to finally apply for financial
compensation for their losses. You and I have met about setting
up the fund, and again, I want to encourage you to make rapid
progress on appointing a special master, setting up the
mechanisms necessary to process claims and doing everything you
can to ensure that those still suffering from the attacks will
get the compensation they deserve. And I hope you will let us
know if there is anything we can do to help ensure that
implementation of the Act goes as smoothly as possible.
Now, getting back to the little discussion of DOMA, I don't
believe that the Administration had any choice in the matter at
all by looking at the legal precedence. And tell me if it isn't
true that Mr. Sensenbrenner was a little mistaken because he
said you chose one circuit over the others.
In fact, a number of circuits had established the rational
relationship test, the Second Circuit hadn't established any
test, which is why you had to look into the position of the
Department in the Second Circuit case what should you do. Not
whether you agreed to the Second Circuit or not is a new
question which you had to consider for the first time in a new
circuit. But isn't it true that the cases in the other circuits
that determine that the rational relationship test was the
right test all were done pre-Lawrence and post-Bowers. In other
words, they were all done in a legal context in which the
Supreme Court had said that the act of consensual sodomy, the
homosexual act itself, could be properly made a crime. This was
specifically--that was a 1986 case--was specifically overturned
by the 2003 case of Lawrence which said you couldn't do that.
And this had to give an entirely new context and there had been
no determination by any court as far as I know, but certainly
by any circuit, of the proper scope of review, or standard of
review after the Lawrence case.
And if you look at the normal criteria for determining the
standard of review that the Supreme Court has enjoined upon us
as to what a suspect classification is, et cetera, does this
class have a history of discrimination, does it have the
political power to stop the discrimination, et cetera, et
cetera, it meets all the tests and you really had no choice but
to go that route.
Attorney General Holder. Well, I would agree with you. I
mean, the legal environment, the legal landscape, has
fundamentally changed since some of those earlier decisions
were made by those other circuits. And we confronted in the
Second Circuit, a jurisdiction or a circuit that had not ruled
and so therefore we had to examine the legal environment as it
exists today.
And on that basis, not on any political basis, but on a
legal basis, a constitutional basis, the recommendation that I
made to the President was that there was not a reasonable
argument that could be made in favor of the constitutionality
of DOMA, and the President agreed.
Mr. Nadler. In a context after Lawrence, not just in the
context of social change?
Attorney General Holder. Exactly. In terms of what the
courts have said, understanding what the court said and when
they said it, what the Supreme Court said, what many lower
courts have said, and in looking at the right to decide what
the appropriate standard was.
Mr. Nadler. Well, I commend you for that determination. I
think it was compelled by the courts. And I certainly hope that
we will not start trying to intimidate the Department in terms
of its legal decisions through the use of the appropriations
process. That would be wholly inappropriate.
Let me switch topics if I may. We have here your letter
from Ron Weich, actually, on the State Secrets Doctrine. And
you make some very interesting points. But the key point is the
courts should have the information, you are going to exercise
this power very sparingly, et cetera, et cetera, but it is
still a power the executive is going to use.
In the Ninth Circuit, in the initial decision of the Ninth
Circuit, I thought, the most important sentence was a sentence
where the three-judge panel said the executive cannot be its
own judge. And all the criteria which you set forward in this
letter are fine criteria, but they all say, in effect, trust
the Department, trust the executive branch, no recognition of
separation of powers.
And my contention is that you say in here that the courts--
the Department recognizes that courts have an essential and
independent role to play in reviewing the executive's
assertion. It should be in approving the executive's assertion.
There should be secret proceedings and so forth if necessary,
but the key is that the courts should have to okay or not an
assertion of the fact that--a motion to dismiss on the grounds
of executive privilege should have to be okayed by the court,
not simply noted by the court regardless of how restrained and
proper the executive is. That seems to be fundamental to our
system of checks and balances and completely missing from the
Department's position.
Attorney General Holder. What we have tried to do, what I
have tried to do is really reform the process by which the
invocation of that privilege is made. There are a whole series
of levels of review that have to be agreed to, including by the
highest levels in the Department of Justice, and I ultimately
must agree that the invocation of the privilege is appropriate.
Since this new process was put in place, we have only invoked a
privilege on two occasions, and we only will do it in those
instances where it is necessary to protect national security
and not to hide anything that might have been inappropriately
done by the executive branch.
Mr. Nadler. All of which----
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Nadler. May I have one additional minute?
Mr. Smith. The gentleman is recognized without objection
for an additional 30 seconds.
Mr. Nadler. All of which may be true, and all of which may
be exercised properly by you and maybe by your successor or
not, but the decision is still reserved for the Department, not
the court, and that is the fundamental problem which I think is
inconsistent with our general system of government.
Attorney General Holder. Well, as I said, I think we have
in place a new process that handles the concerns that you have,
and we make sure that these invocations of the privilege are
rare and are appropriate.
Mr. Nadler. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired. If you can
double-check this mic for me please. The gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Coble, is recognized for his questions.
Mr. Coble. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General Holder, good to
have you on the Hill. Mr. Attorney General, last June, the
Justice Department contacted Alamance County in my district to
inform the County Board of Commissioners that it was commencing
an investigation concerning allegations of discriminatory
policing and unlawful searches and seizures. The county assures
me that there is no factual basis for these allegations. At a
mutually convenient time, Mr. Attorney General, I would like to
meet with you and/or the appropriate staffer of Justice
regarding this matter.
Attorney General Holder. We are, I guess, in the process of
trying to negotiate with the sheriff's office to get some
relevant documents, and apparently there has been partial
compliance with our document request. But to the extent that
you have concerns, I am sure that we can work out some
interaction between our staffs.
Mr. Coble. I thank you for that. An important element, Mr.
Attorney General, of our Federal bankruptcy laws is a
requirement that debtors consult with an approved agency to
receive a briefing and budget analysis for the credit
counseling agency prior to filing for bankruptcy relief. To
ensure high quality standards for pre-filing counseling, the
executive office of the United States trustee is charged with
approving nonprofit budget and credit counseling agencies that
may provide this service. There are allegations that the
trustee office has approved a number of credit counseling
agencies that are not meaningfully interacting with debtors
prior to certifying that they have completed the prerequisite
pre-filing counseling.
There are also allegations that many of these nonprofit
agencies are related or linked to for-profit entities. Are you
familiar with these allegations?
Attorney General Holder. I have heard--I am not intimately
familiar with them, but I have heard conversations in the
Department about the subject that you are talking. I know that
we are looking at these matters. To the extent that you have
information though that you think we have not adequately
addressed, again, that would be information you can share with
us I will make sure that the appropriate people in the
Department examine it.
Mr. Coble. And I thank you for that. If you would get back
to us on what you find out as well. Finally, Mr. Attorney
General, as has been mentioned, we are in a cutting mode on the
Hill, as you know. What are your priority areas for cuts?
Attorney General Holder. I always like to have the question
asked the other way.
Mr. Coble. Well, I didn't mean to induce laughter when I
asked that question, Mr. Attorney General.
Attorney General Holder. You know, we are mindful of the
fact that we have tough budgetary times, and the Department has
to step up as other executive branch agencies have. We have our
priority areas which all revolve around the protection of the
American people; national security, financial fraud, prevention
of violent crime, the protection of the most vulnerable among
us. We want to have an adequate budget that will allow us to do
those kinds of things. There are budget proposals that are
floating around. We have talked to our counterparts at OMB and
have made known to them what our priorities are. And my hope is
that recognition will be made of the unique responsibilities
that the Justice Department has and that a budget that will
allow us to serve the American people in a way that I describe
will be actually enacted.
Mr. Coble. I thank you for that. Mr. Chairman, I yield back
prior to the illumination of the red light.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Coble. The gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Conyers, is recognized for his questions.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman. One of the things that I
hope we can take a new look at is the State secrets privilege
in which the exclusion of evidence from a legal case based
solely on affidavits submitted by the government stating that
the court proceedings might disclose sensitive information
which could endanger national security causes the information
to go and the case collapses.
And I think that is a serious problem in the way the
previous Administration and this one is proceeding. What
bothers me, General Holder, is that there have been cases
challenging the use of rendition, of wiretapping, of torture,
and the Administration has used the secret privilege, State
secret privilege, to have these lawsuits dismissed. I think it
is very troublesome and problematic, and I am wondering if a
number of us here can begin to persuade you to reexamine the
use of this technique, because it makes it very hard to
challenge those in those cases to bring a case against the
government.
Attorney General Holder. Well, I certainly heard the
concerns that were expressed by Members of this Committee, and
frankly other Members of Congress and people outside of
Congress. And I was concerned myself about the invocation of
the privilege, and I think that I have put in place a regiment
that, as I indicated to Mr. Nadler, would make the use of the
privilege rare and appropriate and transparent to the extent
that we can. We have sent a report to Congress about the
invocation of the privilege which has not been done before. I
put in place a series of review steps that did not exist
before, and required that the Attorney General himself or
herself actually sign off on any invocation of the privilege,
all of which is new. And it would seem to me that that, I
think, would deal with many of the concerns, if not all of the
concerns, that have been raised. But, I mean, this is a fluid
process. And to the extent that there are other ideas that you
or other Members of the Committee have, I would be more than
glad to listen to them, work with you and see if there are
further changes that we need to make.
Mr. Conyers. Well, thank you. And I am familiar with that
new report. But look, many in the legal community don't think
that it changes really very much, and we have got a lot more
meeting to do and discussion, and I am glad you are open to it.
Let me turn now to antitrust. Now, the antitrust division has
been dormant for many years in my view. And the global
corporations get larger and larger and larger. It works against
our economy, it certainly takes jobs away from this country as
badly as we need them. And I haven't seen one major case in
which your Department has refused to approve a significant
merger.
Now, isn't there some way we can begin to review that? And
I would like to be able to meet with you and others on this
Committee that think we can make a good case that it is not
good law, it is terrible for the economy, and that it would be
the right thing to do to start refusing it. DOJ hasn't refused
one merger.
Attorney General Holder. Well, we have, I think, a very
vigorous antitrust policy, we have got a great Assistant
Attorney General, Christine Varney, who is the head of the
antitrust division, and I think that she has, in fact,
revitalized the work of the antitrust division. To the extent
that proposed mergers have come before the antitrust division,
they have oftentimes been approved, but approved with
conditions that were required by the Department; changes in
business practices, divestment of certain components in the
business that it sought to merge. And I think that the way in
which Christine is going about it, the men and women of the
antitrust division are going about their enforcement activities
is appropriate. Again, based only on the facts and law there
are mergers that we presently have that we are in the process
of considering. I can't talk about those. But in the
examination of those proposed mergers, we will be vigorously
enforcing the antitrust laws.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Conyers. The gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte, is recognized for his questions.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And General Holder,
thank you very much for coming to be with us today. A few weeks
ago, Director Mueller testified before this Committee and
highlighted the threat of cyber crime. Please let us know what
measures the Department is currently taking to strengthen our
Nation's cyber security.
Attorney General Holder. Well, it is an issue that is a
great concern to us in the Department. We have within our
criminal division a computer crimes section that does a great
deal of work dealing with issues that come before it. It has
been publicly revealed about steps, enforcement steps, that we
have taken with regard to a matter that was centered I guess in
Connecticut with regard to I guess what we call botnets. The
national security is potentially threatened by cyber issues.
There is economic fraud that can be perpetrated through the use
of cyber components. We work with the FBI and other agencies
within the executive branch to try to deal with these cyber
issues; child pornography, as was indicated before. A whole
variety of things can happen.
I mean, the cyber world can be such a positive force, but
also the potential for great negative activity is there, and so
we are very active in a variety of ways in dealing with these
cyber issues.
Mr. Goodlatte. Are there additional tools that the Congress
can provide to the Department that would help you in this
critical mission?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I think that is actually a
very good question, because the reality is that the cyber
issues evolve. And what was state-of-the-art 6 months ago isn't
state-of-the-art necessarily today. And to the extent that we
can come before this Committee, work with Members of this
Committee, in looking at the issues that we are confronting
now, or that we expect that we will have to confront in 6
months, a year from now, and make legislative requests, that
would be certainly something that we would appreciate, and I
would take advantage of that offer.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, thank you. And so I take it you would
be willing to work with us to identify these additional tools
and try to enhance our Nation's cyber security, as well as your
ability to combat cyber crime?
Attorney General Holder. Oh, absolutely, absolutely.
Mr. Goodlatte. Another subject area I wanted to get into
relates to intellectual property, which is a subset of cyber
crime, if you will. There is a great interest on both sides of
the Capitol in legislation to better protect the public by
enhancing respect for intellectual property online.
One of the proposals being considered has been to give the
Department enhanced authority to petition Federal courts to
block access to Web sites, many of which may be based outside
the United States, which are dedicated to offering
illegitimate, physical and digital goods to American consumers.
In this regard, I wonder if you can address some key
concerns. First, do you have suggestions for how this Committee
can ensure that such new authorities are used often enough to
serve as a meaningful deterrent to the scope of illicit online
activity?
Attorney General Holder. Well I think you are again right
to identify that as an issue that is of legitimate concern. I
went to Hong Kong and to China a few months ago and gave a
speech in Hong Kong about this very issue. I raised with
Chinese officials who I met with about the concerns that our
government has with regard to these matters. To the extent that
we can identify the need for new tools or to the extent that
there is proposed legislation, we would want to work with you,
look at that legislation, and see if, in fact, there are ways
in which we can either pass it, modify it, but there are huge
economic concerns, huge economic concerns around the issue that
you have raised.
Mr. Goodlatte. What protections does the law currently
provide before the government can seize or seek forfeiture of a
domain name? And are there any additional steps you believe are
necessary to ensure that the constitutional requirements are
met, that legitimate users of these domains are protected?
Attorney General Holder. The difficulties there really are
constitutional in nature. And to the extent that we can craft
bills that allow the Department to seize domain names, to take
other actions and do so in a constitutional way, that is
something that I think we should explore. And we don't have all
the answers in the Department with regard to how that
legislation might be crafted.
And so I think working with this Committee and, frankly,
other Senators who have raised this issue as well, I think
would be a wise use of our time.
Mr. Goodlatte. And given that around 100 Web sites have
been ordered seized by Federal courts under existing
authorities, what's your best estimate of a number of Web sites
you might expect the Department would be able to target on an
annual basis if something along the lines of the existing law
was enacted to reach sites that are wholly based outside our
borders?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know if I could give you a
real good specific numerical estimate. But I can say that with
different tools, given the nature of the threat that we face,
that we would have substantially greater than the hundred or so
that you have mentioned. If we had those additional tools, as I
said, working with you to identify the tools that we need, and
making sure that those tools are constitutional in nature would
be of great use to the Department.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Goodlatte.
The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Scott, is recognized for
his question.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And welcome, Mr.
Attorney General.
In your prepared remarks you talked about the importance of
all religions getting along. You are aware that then-Senator
Obama, in Zanesville, Ohio, said that if you get a Federal
grant, you can't use that grant money to proselytize to the
people you help, and you can't discriminate against them or the
people you hire on the basis of religion.
Is it possible in this Administration today for someone to
apply for a Federal grant and articulate an intention to
discriminate against people of particular religions? For
example, they don't want to hire Catholics, Jews, and Muslims;
would they be entitled to run a Federal program?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I want to say that we want
to make sure that we partner with faith-based organizations in
a way that is consistent with our values, in a way that's
constitutional, and we will continue to evaluate any legal
questions or concerns that are raised with regard to----
Mr. Scott. Does that mean, yes, they can get a Federal
grant and discriminate?
Attorney General Holder. We don't want to be in a position
where people are, in fact, getting Federal grants and
discriminating.
Mr. Scott. But you have at least one Administration
official who has suggested that they are going to deal with
discrimination on a, quote, case-by-case basis. What kind of
cases would ``We don't hire Catholics, Jews, and Muslims'' be
okay?
Attorney General Holder. Obviously, that kind of situation
would not be okay, would not be legally appropriate. It would
be inconsistent with our values.
Mr. Scott. Is it legal under this Administration?
Attorney General Holder. It's not a question of it being
legal under this Administration. It is a question of what the
law says.
Mr. Scott. Does this Administration provide grants to
organizations that actively discriminate based on religion or
not?
Attorney General Holder. We don't want to do that. We try
not to do that, but the question is, what----
Mr. Scott. Wait a minute. Either you do or you don't. Do
you not give grants to organizations that actively discriminate
based on religion or not?
Attorney General Holder. The attempt we make is not to do
that. As I have indicated, our hope is that we do something--
the grants that we give are consistent with the law, but beyond
that are consistent with our values.
Mr. Scott. We don't have time to go into the legal memo of
June 29, 2007. Could we give, could you for the record provide
the Administration analysis of that legal counsel memo which
essentially suggested that the Religious Freedom Restoration
Act of 1993 provides a virtual exemption to statutory
nondiscrimination provisions? Could you provide that to us for
the record?
Attorney General Holder. I'm sorry. Provide you----
Mr. Scott. With whether or not the status of that policy
and whether or not that legal counsel memo is still in effect.
Could you provide that for the record?
Attorney General Holder. As I understand it the memo is
still in effect, as I understand it.
Mr. Scott. That the Religious Freedom Restoration Act gives
organizations a virtual exemption to statutory
nondiscrimination provisions?
Attorney General Holder. If you are talking about the 2007
OLC world vision opinion?
Mr. Scott. So if you are running a Head Start program, if
they are running a Head Start program, they can discriminate.
Even though there is a statutory provision prohibiting
discrimination, they can discriminate anyway?
Attorney General Holder. What I was saying was with regard
to that specific OLC opinion, we are not in the process of
reconsidering it. That is not something, as I understand it----
Mr. Scott. I'm not talking about the memo, I'm talking
about the policy. Can they discriminate, notwithstanding a
specific statutory prohibition against discrimination, they can
discriminate anyway based on that interpretation?
Attorney General Holder. Obviously, discrimination cannot
occur; that is, that contravenes Federal law.
Mr. Scott. Well, let me ask a number of questions. My time
is running out. Let me ask a number of questions just for the
record since we don't have time for the answers.
The Prison Rape Elimination Act regulations apparently
overlooked juveniles prosecuted and jailed as adults. We want
to work with you on making sure that they are covered.
We also understand that the changes we made in the crack
cocaine law are still not being applied for those who committed
their crimes before the law went into effect. We need to know
what changes need to be made since we have ascertained that
those are unjust laws.
We also want to ask you whether or not you believe poker is
a game of chance or a game of skill, and whether or not the
anti-gambling laws apply to poker as they would for roulette
and other games like that.
If I could get another 30 seconds, Mr. Chairman, just to
ask the questions for the record, the news reports have talked
about the compromise of a lot of identity information.
Prosecution of identity theft and organized retail theft--not
shoplifting--but organized, including E-fencing and everything
else, are resource-intense activities. If you could give us an
idea of what kinds of resources are needed to effectively
combat identity theft, consumer identity theft and organized
retail theft.
Also, on reentry, your prepared remarks talked about the
importance of reentry and that you are studying what works and
what doesn't work. We know that a lot more applications are in
than we have money to fund. And so we would like to know how
that study is going, and also hope that you are going to
continue to support the Federal Prison Industries, if you can
give us a comment on that, that has shown to have a significant
reduction on recidivism.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time is expiring.
Mr. Scott. And I appreciate the Chairman's indulgence.
Attorney General Holder. I would be more than happy to
answer all those questions except the one about whether poker
is a game of chance or skill. That is beyond my capabilities.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Lungren, is recognized.
Mr. Lungren. According to ESPN, it's a sport.
Mr. Attorney General, in 1996 while I was Attorney General
of California, we helped work with the Congress to pass the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act. One of the
things was to try and create incentives for States to improve
their habeas corpus procedures and to allow an expedition of
their consideration by Federal courts. Unfortunately, no court
ever found any State to do that.
So in 2005, we passed legislation which changed that
responsibility for certifying a State from the courts to the
Attorney General. You published draft regulations in March
2011. The comments on the draft are due June 2011. I would hope
that I could have your commitment that we will move on this,
since this goes all the way back to 1996.
Attorney General Holder. Yeah. I mean, we have tried to
move this as quickly as we can.
Mr. Lungren. As long as I have your commitment, that's all
I need. I would just say that with respect to DOMA, it would
have been helpful if the President of the United States, as a
former constitutional law professor during the time he was
running for President, would have indicated that he had some
constitutional questions about the DOMA when he was going
around the country saying that he believes that marriage is
between one man and one woman. These newfound understandings of
the Constitution after one is elected are somewhat troubling,
and particularly when it goes to the question of defending a
law that was duly passed by the Congress and signed by a
President.
Mr. Attorney General, do you support and approve the action
the President and the U.S. military took in going to Pakistan,
killing Osama bin Laden and taking his body?
Attorney General Holder. I think that the acts that we took
were both lawful, legitimate, and appropriate in every way. The
people who were responsible for that action, both in the
decision making and the effecting of that decision, handled
themselves I think quite well.
Mr. Lungren. Can you tell us for the public record whether
we can therefore be assured that any intelligence which led to
this capture and killing of Osama bin Laden was not the result
of enhanced interrogation techniques?
Attorney General Holder. Well I think, as has been
indicated by other Administration spokesmen, there was a mosaic
of sources that led to the identification of the people who led
to bin Laden.
Mr. Lungren. I understand that. But were any pieces of that
mosaic a result of enhanced interrogation techniques?
Attorney General Holder. I do not know.
Mr. Lungren. If that were the case, would that have made
the action we took against Osama bin Laden illegal?
Attorney General Holder. No. I think that in terms of the
attenuation to the extent that--let's assume that that were
true--those acts might have been problematic and the action
that was taken just 2 days ago I think was sufficiently long,
so that the action would still be considered legal.
Mr. Lungren. Could we have used the same tactics against
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed when we captured him in Pakistan as we
did against Osama bin Laden? Would that have been lawful?
Attorney General Holder. Could we have----
Mr. Lungren. Used the same tactics against Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed when we captured him in Pakistan as we did against
Osama bin Laden? That is, killed him rather than capture.
Attorney General Holder. The aim with regard to bin Laden
was to kill or capture him. I would think that with regard to
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, we could probably apply those same
standards of kill or capture. We had the ability to capture him
as opposed to kill him.
Mr. Lungren. Does it seem in some ways inconsistent or a
difficulty for moral relevance to say that it is per se so
shocks the conscience that one would subject Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed to waterboarding, but it would not shock the
conscience to put a bullet in his brain?
Attorney General Holder. One has to take into account a
whole variety of things and when you are on the scene, you want
to get the person who you are trying to capture, but you also
have to make sure that you are protecting the lives of the
people who are on our side and who put themselves at risk. And
it is for that reason that there is a safety component there
and the kill-or-capture component raises itself in a way that
it would not when it comes to the interrogation of Khalid
Sheikh Mohammed or somebody else.
Mr. Lungren. Since you opposed a military commission trial
for Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, would you have opposed a commission
trial for Osama bin Laden had he been captured and not killed?
Attorney General Holder. Well, that is a hypothetical. I'm
not sure that it is particularly relevant.
Mr. Lungren. Well, you have taken a strong position against
military commissions. And the reluctance that you showed toward
closing Guantanamo, you issued a rather strong statement about
your disappointment with the Congress with respect to both our
efforts to keep Guantanamo open and our efforts to have
military tribunals. So I think it is an appropriate question to
ask you whether or not, since you opposed a military trial for
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, whether you would have opposed a
military trial for Osama bin Laden and rather given him the
protections of a civilian trial?
Attorney General Holder. Well, my position is oftentimes
mischaracterized. And on the same day that I indicated that it
made sense--tactical sense to put Khalid Sheikh Mohammed in a
civilian court, I sent five or six other cases to military
tribunals, military commissions. I don't have a problem with
the military commissions. But the decision that I made in the
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed case was based on my review of the
facts, the evidence, and tactical decisions, tactical decisions
that no Member of Congress had the ability to see, that I did.
Mr. Lungren. So it is tactical rather than civilian courts
being the one that can uphold the constitutional notions of
fair play as opposed to a military tribunal?
Attorney General Holder. I think our military commissions,
in fact, especially since they have been modified, are
constitutional and can give fair trials. But the decision with
regard to Khalid Sheikh Mohammed dealt with a whole variety of
things that I uniquely had access to, and that's why I made
that decision and why I have been so vehement in my comments
about what I think is an inappropriate and wrong decision by
Congress to block our ability to try the case in that form.
Mr. Lungren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Lungren.
The gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt, is recognized
for his questions.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome, Attorney
General Holder.
I'm going to submit with--if I can get unanimous consent, a
copy of a letter I received from the Attorney General for North
Carolina, asking me about funding for the elimination of meth
lab cleanup. You may not have the information at your hand; but
if you could, just let me know what the basis was for the U.S.
DEA halting all funding across the country for meth lab
hazardous waste cleanup. Apparently it's having substantial
adverse impact not only in North Carolina but throughout the
country, and it would be helpful to know why they stopped that
funding.
I ask unanimous consent to submit a copy of a letter and I
will give----
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the letter will be made a
part of the record.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Watt. In August of 2010, after a joint working group of
antitrust and FTC economists and senior attorneys and public
workshops and comment opportunities, the Department of Justice
made a substantial revision to its horizontal merger
guidelines.
Let me ask you three questions and then I'll just give you
the rest of the time to respond, to the extent you can, and if
you don't have time maybe you could provide written responses.
First of all, could you briefly explain the impetus for the
revisions and describe generally what the Department hoped to
achieve in making the changes?
Second, could you highlight some of the most significant
changes made to the guidelines, and briefly assess the impact
these changes have had on recent merger reviews?
And third, what role, if any, did the new guidelines have
in the Department's analysis of the merger between Google and
ITA in particular; and if there are other mergers that these
guidelines were significant in, I would like to have your
response, probably in writing, to the last question.
But if you could respond briefly to the first two questions
that would be helpful.
Attorney General Holder. I think what I would like to do is
be able to give you a more detailed response in writing, but to
say that the changes that we made that were done under the
leadership of our Assistant Attorney General Christine Varney
were all designed to make the Department's enforcement efforts
more effective, to revivify the antitrust division, and to
ensure that as we look at matters we have the tools that we
need and that those tools are transparent, so that people
understand where the Department is coming from, that people
have some degree of certainty they can understand how things
have to be structured. All, as I said, with the aim toward
making the enforcement of our antitrust laws as effective as we
can and we are as aggressive as we can.
With regard to the specific questions that you have asked,
we will get you something in writing.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*As of September 10, 2012, Mr. Watt nor the Committee had received
a response from the Dept. of Justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Watt. Is it likely that this new approach is going to
make it less likely--it seems to me that you are moving toward
a more compromised approach, as opposed to an enforcement
approach, of saying this violates the antitrust laws;
therefore, we will not approve it.
And am I misreading that or--and I think that may be the
discomfort that Mr. Conyers was raising earlier, that there
have been no disapprovals, not that we are looking for
disapprovals--is this a shift in poll policy in the Department,
I guess, is a better question.
Attorney General Holder. To the extent that you are
concerned or others are concerned that we are somehow stepping
back from being aggressive in the enforcement of the antitrust
laws, I want to put your minds at ease. That is not what we are
attempting to do. In fact, we take these cases and examine them
one by one, as we have to. And as I think I indicated to Mr.
Conyers with regard to the decisions that have been made, we
have oftentimes required things of the parties before the
mergers were approved. The fact that there has not been one
that has been rejected, I would have to look to make sure that
is accurate. Let's assume that that is true; that is not an
indication that there is any timidity on the part of the
antitrust division, the Justice Department, to enforce the
antitrust laws, or any indication going forward, some of the
more high-profile ones that we are now in the process of
considering, might not pass muster.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Watt.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Chabot, is recognized.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I would like to comment on the
gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Scott, whom I agree with on one of
the few issues I think we agree on: the importance of the
Federal Prison Industries. And I would encourage you to look
into that matter.
I think it's an important program. I think once we have
people locked up--at this level, it is Federal prisons, I have
dealt with them at the local level as well--I think we ought to
make sure we are utilizing those resources, and most of them
are going to be out in the street someday, and to the extent
that they can get job skills and improve themselves so that
when they are back out, some at least can become productive
citizens. I think that is very important.
Let me move to an entirely different topic, then, and that
is Guantanamo Bay, or Gitmo. I have been there three times. The
first time I was there was shortly after it opened. It was
about 9 years ago, not much to it at the time; that's where we,
of course, held the detainees or terrorists or enemy
combatants, whatever terminology one prefers to use now, or
even back then, most of them captured in Afghanistan. And the
reason, of course, we set up Gitmo is we needed a safe and
secure place to keep the most dangerous people, essentially the
worst of the worst, the terrorists, most of them, and the goal
was not to do it on U.S. soil. And at that time they were at
Camp X-ray within Guantanamo Bay. It really wasn't much more
than a bunch of cages out there and I think a great disservice
was done when we had initial photographs and they had bags over
their heads and they were kneeling and the impression, the
wrong impression, was given that that's the way we kept them
all the time. And the world press pretty much went wild and it
was, I think, a blow to the stature of the United States around
the world because that's not how these prisoners are treated
for the most part. At its zenith--and I was there the second
time about 5 years ago, and then most recently about 1 month
ago, and so I have seen it pretty recently and through the
whole process.
At its height we had somewhere around 800 detainees is what
my information is there. We are now down to about 172. A number
of them have been transferred back to the countries of their
origin. In some cases, the countries didn't want them back, and
we tended to try to give back the folks that we thought were
least dangerous to the country. But even at that, the record
shows that about 25 percent have taken up arms again against
the United States or some other country, essentially, so one
out of four have become terrorists again. And that to me is
very disturbing.
And they are treated--there is a lot of allegations out
there about how terribly they are treated; for example, the
waterboarding. First of all, the waterboarding that's out
there, this did not occur at Guantanamo Bay; is that a fact,
Mr. Attorney General?
Attorney General Holder. I think that is correct.
Mr. Chabot. So no waterboarding there. So first of all,
when we hear that term and we have an equivalent that it's
torture, people can think what they think, but the definition
is it is not torture, but it didn't happen at Guantanamo Bay,
and I think that is an important point to make. When prisoners
are there, they probably eat better than they have in their
lives, get the same medical treatment that our own soldiers
get, they have cable TV, 22 channels, exercise equipment, a
Koran, a prayer rug, clothing, access to legal care, among
other things. Would that be accurate, sir?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know about all the
specifics. I was in Guantanamo shortly after I became Attorney
General. And it is a place that I think treats people as they
should be treated. I don't know about all the details that you
have just gone through.
Mr. Chabot. And there is a separate section and it's
classified, so I can't go into a lot of this. But there's about
20 people there. The worst of the worst is Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed. But I think our men and women in uniform have been
really disparaged unfairly, and these are quality people who
have handled a tough job with great professionalism and
restraint. Are you familiar with the term a Gitmo cocktail?
Attorney General Holder. A Gitmo cocktail? I think I know
what that is.
Mr. Chabot. Yes. And it is what you think it is. It's fecal
matter and other pretty horrific things that get thrown by
prisoners at our guards, and even under those circumstances
there's an awful lot of restraint that is handled there. But I
know this is one thing where I agree with the Administration
now, where they have changed their opinion about closing down
Gitmo and also bring those people back here to the United
States. There's absolutely--that was a terrible idea, sir, to
bring them to the United States and try them here; to have the
anti-American vile mindset of some of these radical jihadists
spread among the prisoners in our Federal prisons, and that's
where they ought to be tried. We shouldn't give people an
opportunity--can I have 30 seconds Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Smith. The gentleman is recognized for an additional 30
seconds, without objection.
Mr. Chabot. Thank you. To give a master propagandist like
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed a soapbox to spew that anti-American
venom around the world is just not the way to go. So I commend
you for bringing them back here now--excuse me--for keeping
them at Gitmo. We also built a $16 million court facility there
that was virtually unused. And so now it is going to be used,
and should be, and full speed ahead with that. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chabot.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Lofgren, is recognized
for her questions.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Mr. Attorney General, for being here today.
A couple of years ago the Immigration Subcommittee held a
hearing on ICE's raid of a meatpacking plant in Postville,
Iowa. And the factory workers there were literally rounded up
and herded into a cattle area and then figuratively treated
like cattle. They had group hearings with shared counsel, no
translation services, and very questionable guilty pleas and
prison time.
Judge Mark Bennett who sentenced a number of the immigrants
said this about that proceeding: ``I found the plea agreement
[that the immigrants were asked to sign] personally and
professionally to be offensive, and I thought it was a
travesty, and I was embarrassed to be a United States District
judge that day.''
Now that was then, this is now. One way to look at these
prosecutions is the impact in terms of due process rights and
our adherence to law as to the defendants. Another way to look
at it is how are we using our resources. I've had my--the
attorneys on the Subcommittee--take a look at the data, and I
understand that illegal reentry after deportation is now the
most prosecuted Federal felony in the United States, and that
misdemeanor prosecutions of immigration offenses in border
districts has tripled from 2007 to 2010, and that these
prosecution decisions--making reentry felony prosecutions the
most commonly prosecuted felony, Federal felony--has come at
the expense of prosecuting other crimes, and nonimmigration
felony prosecutions in nonborder districts have declined 6 to 8
percent in the same time frame.
Now I raise this because many of us when we go home every
week, get this question from our constituents: As far as we can
tell, the Department has not brought a single prosecution of a
high-ranking Wall Street executive or major financial firm in
the wake of the Wall Street scandals that contributed to the
global economic crisis. So it looks to me that the Department
is spending its resources prosecuting nannies and busboys who
are trying to get back to their families, illegally reentering,
and yet we have not brought any prosecutions on the bandits on
Wall Street who brought the Nation and the world to the brink
of financial disaster.
Could you explain these priorities, Mr. Attorney General?
Attorney General Holder. Well, there's a lot packed into
that question. The fact that there are so many prosecutions
along the border is an indication of the nature of the problem
that we confront. This Administration has always stood for a
comprehensive approach to----
Ms. Lofgren. No. No. No. I would like to know about the
lack of Wall Street prosecutions.
Attorney General Holder. All right. I was just dealing with
some things that you said. The fact that we have these
prosecutions on the border is not any indication that we are
not taking the Wall Street potential offenses seriously. We
have prosecuted a great many cases that deal with fraud with
regard to the mortgage area, with regard to financial schemes.
A case was brought, just decided in the last couple of
weeks, a $3 billion fraud scheme that involved Colonial Bank,
Mr. Lee Farkus. The Department is looking right now at the
report prepared by Senator Levin's Subcommittee that deals with
Goldman Sachs. People have to disabuse themselves of the notion
that somehow or other this Department of Justice, the
prosecutors who look at these cases, don't want to bring these
cases. They come to the Department of Justice to look at
matters like this to apply the law, look at the facts, and to
bring these cases. We are extremely aggressive in that way.
Ms. Lofgren. May I ask how many investigators and U.S.
Attorneys are assigned to the prosecution of executives on Wall
Street who may have committed misconduct?
Attorney General Holder. I can't give you an exact number.
But I can tell you that a substantial number of people in the
Southern District of New York, as well as the criminal division
here in Washington, numerous FBI agents----
Ms. Lofgren. Maybe we can get that number after this
hearing.
I would like to turn to the whole mortgage industry. There
was tremendous misconduct undertaken relative to the mortgage
industries, including fraud. And as you are aware, I am sure,
all 50 attorneys general have engaged in settlement discussions
with banks about their misconduct. Recently the Comptroller of
the Currency released a draft cease-and-desist order which one
expert described as the regulatory equivalent of a Potemkin
Village.
I'm wondering if you could tell us--I understand the
Department is also engaged in the negotiations--what should the
top priorities for a global settlement of legal claims against
the servicing industry include? Do you concur with the
attorneys general's outlined settlement, or do you have a
different approach?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I'm not sure you can say
that the attorneys general are a model. They have a variety of
approaches. Tom Perrelli, who is the Associate Attorney
General, is intimately involved in that process, and we are
trying to work with the financial institutions as well as the
State attorneys general to try to work our way through an
appropriate settlement.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, they have a framework and I'm just
wondering if you agree with that framework or not.
Attorney General Holder. Well, there is a framework. But
there are still a whole bunch of different views, believe me.
There's a stated framework. But in terms of the interaction
that goes on in these negotiations, there are a variety of
positions that we are trying to harmonize and trying to work
with the financial institutions to reach a conclusion.
Ms. Lofgren. If I could ask for unanimous consent for 30
seconds, Mr. Chairman. Could you tell us if the----
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman is recognized for an additional
30 seconds.
Ms. Lofgren [continuing]. If the settlement discussions
fail, are you prepared to prosecute these institutions, since
that is the basis for the settlement discussions?
Attorney General Holder. If the negotiations fail, if there
is a basis for prosecutions, we will bring them.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you Ms. Lofgren.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Issa, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I would like to thank you for the
work that the U.S. attorney Laura Duffy is doing in San Diego
going after coyotes, going after gun traffickers at the border.
The work in my border district area of making our city safer,
because the crime in Mexico often stops at the border, because
her work and willingness to prosecute human traffickers and gun
traffickers is very much appreciated. So just so you hear two
sides of the California story for a moment.
Mr. Attorney General, we have two Border Patrol agents who
are dead, who were killed by guns that were allowed, as far as
we can tell, to deliberately walk out of gun shops under the
program often called ``Fast and Furious.'' This program, as you
know--and the President has been asked about it, and you have
been asked about it--allowed for weapons to be sold to straw
purchasers, and ultimately many of those weapons are today in
the hands of drug cartels and other criminals.
When did you first know about the program officially, I
believe, called ``Fast and Furious''? To the best of your
knowledge, what date?
Attorney General Holder. I'm not sure of the exact date but
I probably heard about Fast and Furious for the first time over
the last few weeks.
Mr. Issa. Now that you have been briefed on it, the
President has said on March 22 that you didn't authorize it.
Did your Deputy Attorney General James Cole authorize it?
Attorney General Holder. I'm sorry, did the----
Mr. Issa. The Deputy Attorney General, James Cole----
Attorney General Holder. Did he--I didn't hear. Did he----
Mr. Issa. Did the Deputy Attorney General authorize it?
Attorney General Holder. My guess would be no. Mr. Cole, I
don't think was in the Department at the time that operation
started.
Mr. Issa. But he has been aware of it much longer.
Attorney General Holder. Been aware of it much longer?
Mr. Issa. Than you have, since you have only been aware of
it a few weeks. How about the head of the criminal division,
Lanny Breuer, did he authorize it?
Attorney General Holder. I'm not sure whether Mr. Breuer
authorized it. You have to understand the way in which the
Department operates although their operations--this one has
gotten a great deal of publicity.
Mr. Issa. Yeah, there are dead Americans as a result of
this failed and reckless program. So I would say that it hasn't
gotten enough attention, has it, Mr. Attorney General?
Attorney General Holder. Not necessarily. There's an
investigation that is underway----
Mr. Issa. I'm aware of that investigation. Let me follow up
with a couple of questions.
Attorney General Holder. We will have to look at that to
see exactly what happened with regard to that----
Mr. Issa. Mr. Attorney General----
Attorney General Holder. I take very seriously the
allegations----
Mr. Issa. Mr. Attorney General, do you take seriously a
subpoena signed by the Clerk of the House?
Attorney General Holder. Of course.
Mr. Issa. After 14 days waiting for a letter to be signed
or acknowledged or responded to, we sent a subpoena signed by
the Clerk of the House. Thirty-two days later, last night, your
people responded by giving us 92 pages, representing three
documents that were public records already, all are available,
and saying that the other 400 or so responsive pages were not
going to be produced. Do you stand by that? And were you aware
of that?
Attorney General Holder. I think we indicated that the
other 400 pages would be made available for review, to be
accurate, I think. So those in essence were being made
available as well.
Mr. Issa. And that took 32 days to get that answer.
Attorney General Holder. The information was gathered as
quickly as it could. I have taken steps to enhance our ability
to to respond to subpoenas and document requests in that
regard. I was not satisfied with the pace at which these things
were happening. And as I said, I have taken some steps to make
sure that we are more responsive.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Attorney General, do you agree that Congress
has an independent responsibility, particularly when U.S.
persons have been killed because of a failed and reckless
program, to investigate those who authorized, approved, knew
about it, and in some other way were responsible for it?
Attorney General Holder. As I indicated to you last night
when we spoke about this at the White House, I think there is a
legitimate oversight responsibility that Congress has. But I
think also Congress has to use that oversight responsibility in
a responsible way. We have cases, 20 matters, that will go to
trial in June of this year----
Mr. Issa. Mr. Attorney General, isn't it true that those
cases that will go to trial in June--I have very limited time,
I'm sorry--those cases are basically a bunch of meth addicts
who did the buying, that you do not have what this program was
supposed to produce, you don't have the kingpins, you don't
have the places it went. What you have are the people that you
already had on videotape, many many months before indictments
were brought. Isn't this true?
Attorney General Holder. There are cases that are important
that we are trying to bring, that we want to try successfully,
and they are part of a scheme. You can't look at a case as an
individual matter and think it is unimportant, because small
cases lead to larger ones. And that's why it's important----
Mr. Issa. I would ask unanimous consent for an additional
30 seconds.
Attorney General Holder. That's why these cases are
important, and that is why----
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the gentleman is recognized
for an additional 30 seconds.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Attorney General, my final question, though,
is from what you are saying about a scheme and so on, do you
stand by this program; in other words--and it's not a
hypothetical, really--if you knew this program, knew about this
program 90 days ago, 180 days ago, would you have allowed it to
continue? And if not, then what are you going to do about the
people who did know and allowed it to continue?
Attorney General Holder. Well, what I have told people in
the Department of Justice is that under no circumstances in any
case, that any investigation that we bring, should guns be
allowed to be distributed in an uncontrolled manner.
Mr. Issa. So that would be consistent with the March 9
letter from Deputy Attorney General James Cole in which he said
that we should not design or conduct undercover operations
which include guns crossing the border; if we have knowledge
that guns are about to cross the border, we must take immediate
action to stop the firearms from crossing the border and so on.
That's your policy today.
Attorney General Holder. That is our policy. That has
certainly been the policy that I have tried to impose since I
was Attorney General.
Mr. Issa. And isn't Fast and Furious inconsistent with that
policy?
Attorney General Holder. Well that's one of the questions
that we'll have to see, whether or not Fast and Furious was
conducted in a way that's consistent with what Jim wrote there,
what I have said today, and that's what the Inspector General
is, in fact, looking at.
Mr. Issa. And will you agree to work with both this
Committee, of course, and the other Committee investigating
this as to--we're not looking at the straw buyers, Mr. Attorney
General, we're looking at you, straw purchasers; we're looking
at you, we're looking at your key people who knew or should
have known about this, and whether or not your judgment was
consistent with good practices and whether or not, instead, the
Justice Department is basically guilty of allowing weapons to
kill Americans and Mexicans.
So will you agree to cooperate with that investigation both
on the House and Senate side?
Attorney General Holder. We'll certainly cooperate with all
the investigations, but I'm going to take great exception to
what you just said. The notion that somehow or other this
Justice Department is responsible for those deaths that you
mentioned, that assertion is offensive. And I want to tell
you----
Mr. Issa. But what if it's accurate, Mr. Attorney General?
Attorney General Holder [continuing]. That it is the policy
of the Justice Department to make sure that we do all that we
can to protect law enforcement agents. It is one of the reasons
why I have tried to look at a whole variety of methods,
techniques that we can use to protect the lives of law
enforcement agents. It is something that this country is not
focused enough on.
Over the last 2 years, the rate at which our people in law
enforcement have been killed has risen about----
Mr. Issa. What am I going to tell Agent Terry's mother
about how he died at the hand of a gun that was videotaped as
it was sold to a straw purchaser fully expecting it to end up
in the hands of drug cartels?
Attorney General Holder. We'll have to see exactly what
happened with regard to the guns that are at issue there. And I
have attended funerals. This is something that isn't
theoretical, this is not political, this is extremely real for
me as Attorney General.
Mr. Issa. It is for us, too. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
Attorney General Holder. I have had to look into the eyes
of widows, of mothers who have have lost sons. I have felt
their pain. And the notion that somehow, some way, we are less
than vigilant, less than strong in our determination to keep
the people who put their lives on the line every day to protect
the American people, that we're not doing all that we can to
protect them is inconsistent with the facts, inconsistent with
the people who serve in the Department of Justice.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
The gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized
for her questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I consider these opportunities a
chance for us to work as a team. We are, in fact, a team. I
have been privileged to serve on this Committee since being
elected to the United States Congress. And it is an honor
because we hold in our hands, as you do, the lives of Americans
as it relates to the laws of this land.
First of all, I too want to add my appreciation for what I
know was a combined effort on the capturing and, of course, the
ending of the evil actions of Osama bin Laden. Obviously the
intelligence and various law enforcement officers, certainly
the CIA at the lead, certainly had over the years a
longstanding effort. And I thank you, the expanded team and
President Barack Obama, and it should be said over and over
again. I thank you also for the very astute team, legal talent,
that you have combined under your leadership at the DOJ. And
what I would like to see most of all is our enhanced
cooperation. We have worked together in the past.
And I have a series of questions, some of which I want to
have answers. But I would really like you to, say, be in touch
with--and that person, please have them be in touch with me in
my office. Some of these require a detailed answer.
You may not have had the details. I associate myself with
Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz on the Rubashkin case, Rabbi
Solomon Sholom Rubashkin, excuse me. And I think we can talk
about this very briefly only because this person has been
convicted and has been sentenced for 27 years. It is a
nonviolent crime, first offender, they have eight or seven or
nine children, maybe ten children, and they have been
disallowed bail while they're on appeal, I think on the basis
of an issue of a flight risk.
I would ask for a review of this case on the basis of the
potential of bail. And I need to work with someone on that.
I've given you the parameters and I don't want to engage, and I
want to do it not as interfering in a prosecution which is
already done, it's the question of a bail.
The second question very quickly is regarding the
communication management units, 60 to 70 individuals are in it,
two-thirds are Muslims, it is a very harsh unit. A story was
told us by Sara Joyyousi, that was her dad, no communication
with his children. I'd like to know what your thoughts are
about the practices surrounding CMUs and whether or not they
are extremely harsh in light of the population. It seems to me
that that needs to be someone getting back to me, if you would,
and that is on the CMUs.
The IRS criminal division, we have had a lot of colorful
stores about actors and others, but it's serious when it comes
to our neighbors and friends. I would like to meet with the
IRS, DOJ, IRS or individual dealing with the ability to resolve
what seems to be innocent cases, meaning bad facts, payroll
taxes--I know sends horns out of our head--but individuals who
have been in small business, who have had some mishaps in their
health and they are now caught up in this system. I really
think we're better than this. And I really think the Justice
Department is better than this. And I think we have the
latitude, as a barred lawyer, as someone who has a license, I'm
certainly aware of ex parte contacts, but I would be very
interested in having that opportunity. On those three, would
you be able to let me work with individuals under your staff?
Attorney General Holder. We will try to certainly look at
the requests that you have made and get information back to
you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I would greatly appreciate that,
particularly on Rabbi Rubashkin and why he cannot have a bail.
Let me go now to the ATF situation. We had a report by the
OIG that indicated that the greater guns, that long guns have a
shorter time to crime than handguns in Mexico. We know that the
ATF has no permanent director. But I believe that, as the OIG
has said, that ATF needs to have reporting responsibility and
be able to get data and be able to have more enforcement
opportunities of these AK-47s that are killing people on both
sides of the border with these horrible drug cartels. What is
your answer to that?
Attorney General Holder. Well, we have certainly proposed
that with regard to long guns along the border with one to four
States, that there be a reporting requirement if somebody buys
two long guns over the space of 5 days that are larger than 22-
caliber, if they are semi-automatic, and if they have
detachable magazines. It's a proposal that OMB is in the
process----
Ms. Jackson Lee. So we are working on that. I have a short
period of time, and I will pursue it further with you. I would
like to see that happen.
Specifically with respect to Harris County, I have a whole
series of questions, but I will get on and ask them in writing.
We submitted to the Justice Department a police brutality tape
regarding Chad Holy and have asked for the Justice Department
to investigate. We have heard nothing from that. We have heard
announcements from Seattle and Miami, Florida, and nothing from
Houston, Texas. I also need to have a status report, I would
like your answer on this, status reports on the question of the
Harris County jail. You issued a report that there were
constitutional violations. The question is: What has been the
oversight of the Department of Justice and have they completed?
I also want to ask the question--I would ask for an
additional 30 seconds so you can answer this--the issue of the
ContinentalUnited merger that is finished. I want to thank your
assistant attorney general for antitrust for a very open
discussion. But I would like to know whether there is a follow-
up and whether or not we need to strengthen the Clayton Act's
section 7A for the Justice Department, because we frankly feel
there is no oversight.
Could you answer the question about the brutality case,
excessive force and why there has not been a response, and
including that in a police brutality situation? And then what
is the status of the Harris County jail?
Attorney General Holder. We will try to get you answers to
all of those questions and I might ask for a budgetary
increase, given the nature of all of the things you have now
put on our plate. But we will get you answers to all----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well I can say, Mr. Attorney General, I am
one of your strongest advocates and supporters, and so I expect
no less from you. And as relates to budgets, you can be sure
that Sheila Jackson Lee will not be asking to cut the COPS
budget of 600 million. You might want to answer whether that
will hurt you. Or the FBI at 83 million. Anything that I will
be doing will be increasing the funding for the Department of
Justice, because I believe in what you do both in terms of your
juvenile division and your civil rights division.
And if I could add one more thing, I need to understand
what you're doing with respect to redistricting and the
oversight over the numbers of cases that will be coming forward
and the involvement of the Department of Justice.
Attorney General Holder. We will certainly answer all those
questions. I was kidding you, but you have been a big supporter
of the Department, and for that we are very thankful
institutionally, and I thank you very personally for all the
support you've given me over the years.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will add amendments so that you can get
more money on this appropriation. I'm sure Chairman Smith will
support me on those amendments and greater funding for the
Department of Justice.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Forbes, is
recognized.
Mr. Forbes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And Mr. Attorney
General, thank you for being here.
Forgive me for talking quickly but I only have 5 minutes. I
want to begin, I was interested that the Ranking Member
deferred his questions at the beginning today to the head of
the Democratic National Committee who asked two questions, one
relating to gas prices and the other child pornography. So I
would like to pick up on these two questions.
The first one on gas prices was this: The indication was
that somehow this spike-up is a result of illegal activity by
major oil companies in terms of either price gouging or illegal
influence in the market. Six months before the Administration
came into office in July of 2008, it was the highest spike we
had, $4.11. The President talked about it in the campaign; the
Administration came in concerned about energy and the price of
gas at the pump.
In the last 2\1/2\ years since you've been in office, can
you tell us what evidence you have uncovered that you can
present to the Committee today that the prices at the pump have
been affected by illegal activities of major oil companies in
terms of price gouging or illegal influences on the market?
Attorney General Holder. Well, the purpose of the task
force will be to examine----
Mr. Forbes. I'm sorry to interrupt you. I'm talking about
evidence that you currently have, not task forces or studies.
But in 2\1/2\ years, have you uncovered any evidence that you
can present to this Committee today of such activities?
Attorney General Holder. I'm not prepared to present them
at this point. But what we tried to with the task force----
Mr. Forbes. So you don't have any to present to us today.
Have you made any prosecutions?
Attorney General Holder. But the task force would look at
all this stuff and see what has happened over the course of
time----
Mr. Forbes. When did you set up the task force, Mr.
Attorney General?
Attorney General Holder. The task force was constituted
over the last couple weeks.
Mr. Forbes. Last couple of weeks. So we have had 2\1/2\
years, knew these concerns were there, and except for the last
2\1/2\ weeks you've done nothing to ascertain if we have any
such evidence, and you have none to present to the Committee
today?
Attorney General Holder. Well, given the situation that we
are now confronting that is relatively recent in terms of the
recent price hikes that we have seen----
Mr. Forbes. But we knew, Mr. Attorney General, in July it
was higher. Today it's 3.9 per gallon, it was $4.11 then. No
prosecutions, no recommendations of any changes to the law from
anything you have found out in the last 2\1/2\ years.
Let me skip that and go to the pornography issue.
Do you believe that there's any connection, we've talked
about child pornography, do you believe there's any connection
between hard-core adult pornography and child pornography,
human trafficking, violence to women and sexually violent
behavior?
Attorney General Holder. There are a number of things that
you have put together there, and there are relationships
between certainly some of them. And we have certainly tried to
look at those violence against women issues.
Mr. Forbes. Which ones do you feel there is no connection
to, so I can take that one off the table? Let me repeat them.
Human trafficking. Any connection?
Attorney General Holder. With?
Mr. Forbes. Between hard-core pornography and human
trafficking.
Attorney General Holder. Probably, yes, there is probably
some connection.
Mr. Forbes. Violence to women, yes or no?
Attorney General Holder. Probably.
Mr. Forbes. Sexually violent behavior?
Attorney General Holder. That, I don't know.
Mr. Forbes. So you don't know if there's any connection
between hard-core pornography and sexually violent behavior?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know.
Mr. Forbes. How about child pornography?
Attorney General Holder. Probably, yes.
Mr. Forbes. Okay. Of those, then, can you tell me how many
agents that you have had assigned to investigate hard-core
pornography in the United States right now?
Attorney General Holder. We have a child enforcement and
obscenity section that looks at these patterns----
Mr. Forbes. No, no. Hard-core pornography, not on child
pornography, hard-core adult pornography.
Attorney General Holder. Congressman, if you let me answer
the question, I have an answer for you.
Mr. Forbes. Sure. Go ahead.
Attorney General Holder. But I have to speak.
Mr. Forbes. Go ahead.
Attorney General Holder. We have to work this out. You ask
a question and give me a chance to answer.
Mr. Forbes. And if I can get time, I would love to take as
much time----
Attorney General Holder. I would be more than glad to give
you more than 5 minutes if the Chairman is willing to do that.
We have a child enforcement and obscenity section that handles
as part of its responsibilities examination of obscenity
matters. It is not only a child exploitation section, it looks
at obscenity matters more generally, and has recently been
reformed to include a task force that looked at strictly
obscenity matters, that has now been moved into CEOS.
Mr. Forbes. We had a task force that was set up under the
previous Administration that got 52 convictions for hard-core
pornography cases. Have you disbanded that task force?
Attorney General Holder. It has not been disbanded. It has
been incorporated into CEOS.
Mr. Forbes. Can you tell me how many prosecutions in the
last 2\1/2\ years of hard-core pornography cases this
Administration has undertaken and how many convictions you have
obtained?
Attorney General Holder. We have a number, and I can get
that number to you. I don't have it at my finger tips.
Mr. Forbes. Will you get that number for us?
Attorney General Holder. Yes.
[The information referred to follows:]

__________

Mr. Forbes. Can you also let us know, if you would, how
many attorneys that you have assigned to adult hard-core
pornography and how many agents that you have assigned to adult
or hard-core pornography.
And if you would, when you give that to us, would you let
us know the evidence that you've received of any major oil
companies' illegal activities that have resulted in gas prices,
evidence you have today; secondly, any prosecutions you have
had to date; and third, any recommendations you've made to
change the laws.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, my time is up.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Forbes.
Attorney General Holder. With regard to the oil question,
the task force that we're putting together would look at not
only what is going on now, but what has happened over the past,
and make determinations about whether or not there are
inappropriate market manipulations or price gouging. Which is
not to say that we are not dealing with something that might be
market-driven. We don't go into this with any preconceived
notions. And what the task force will look at is the situation
and then make appropriate determinations and then we'll take
action that is appropriate. We don't go into this with any
preconceived notions, though.
Mr. Forbes. Mr. Attorney General, my point was that we knew
this was a big problem in July 08, we've gone 2\1/2\ years, and
we've just set up a task force 2 weeks ago.
Attorney General Holder. In July 2008, I was not the
Attorney General of the United States, just for the record.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Cohen, is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, you were asked a question earlier
which reminded me--you smiled when the question was asked, kind
of a smile--and it reminded me of a nice article I read on the
web this morning that said that President Obama, when he
engaged in activities over the weekend, going to Alabama, going
to Florida, dealing with Mr. Trump at the dinner, and all those
things, that he had a poker face. Now, it's been said, I
believe, that you and the President have played poker together.
Is that correct?
Attorney General Holder. No. I've never played poker with
the President. I don't know if the President plays poker.
Mr. Cohen. You don't know that.
Attorney General Holder. I don't know.
Mr. Cohen. Let me ask you this. You seem to think that
maybe you didn't know whether it was skill or luck in poker. Do
you think Phil Ivy is just lucky? He's the world's greatest
poker player. Do you think he is lucky, and Annie Duke, or do
you think they have some skill involved?
Attorney General Holder. I'm not sure I know who Mr. Phil
Ivy is, but I'm sure there is some degree of skill that is
involved in this. I'm not a poker player myself.
Mr. Cohen. You're not. I didn't realize that. You might
become one, because it's one of the rapidly increasing popular
activities in America, and it has been going on for years. And
people used to play at tables, like in the kitchen they play
poker. Now they do it on the Internet because there are things
that--it's amazing the things you do on the Internet. I even
got one of these. I'm moving into the age.
Attorney General Holder. I've got one, too.
Mr. Cohen. You pay bills and you do things you used to not
do there, but you do them. Do you think we really ought to be
spending a lot of time in trying to deal with Internet poker
and/or do you think we should find a way to make it legal, to
tax it, and to bring revenue in to help pay for the folks that
Mr. Sensenbrenner wants to take out of your budget?
Attorney General Holder. Well, we have to enforce the law
as it exists. And there are laws on the books with regard to
Internet gambling that we have to enforce. We recently
announced an action in the Southern District of New York. It is
for, I guess, Congress to decide what the law is going to be,
and then we will enforce those laws.
Mr. Cohen. I agree with you generally. I understand there
were civil rights laws in the forties and fifties that the
government had to defend. And then maybe 10, 12, 15 years
later, after Thurgood Marshall's arguments and the Court's
agreement, that they realized those weren't valid laws, and the
law changed because society changed, people's thinking changed?
Same thing with DOMA. There are certain laws and things
change, and you change. Even though it's the law Congress
passed, there's a change in the cultural lag and it kind of
catches up and the people's perception of it changes. Some of
the same people that gave us DOMA, most of them gave us the
laws against Internet poker. It was that family's value crowd
that, yeah, and--quotes--and they gave us those laws, but
sometimes they might not have been the right laws. And some of
Mr. Forbes' folks, so you could be prosecuting some of those
obscenity cases with some of the people you've otherwise got
concerned with some of these laws concerning Internet poker.
And there are priorities. We can't do everything.
Don't you think that maybe in the priority range, that
Internet poker would be down at the bottom of the level and
beneath obscenity and hard-core pornography and child rape and
things like that?
Attorney General Holder. Well, there are a whole variety of
things that we have responsibility for. The cases that we
brought, for instance, in the Southern District of New York
involve pretty substantial amounts of money in big financial
institutions. And I think those cases are appropriate.
There are going to be some other cases in this area that
aren't really Federal cases because they're not really large
enough--the degree of harm is not serious enough. Even within a
certain class of cases, certain ones are going to be worthy of
our attention and then some will not be.
Mr. Cohen. Did the Southern District coordinate with the
Criminal Division or you particularly about the policies of
your office which has been kind of in flux underlying the
decision to effectively criminalize poker, going after these
folks?
Attorney General Holder. Yeah, the Southern District worked
with the Criminal Division, worked with main Justice in the
formulation of that case, though the primary responsibility was
in New York.
Mr. Cohen. We are coming down on time, which is my fault,
but freedom is a big issue with me and the opportunity to do
things. And a lot of people, the cocaine and crack sentencing,
we made progress. But is the Department seeing that we are
asking for sentences that are maybe on the lower range for
those people that were indicted before the law changed?
Attorney General Holder. I have told our prosecutors, I
have given them discretion, so that they ask for sentences that
are appropriate looking at the facts of each individual case.
The Department is going to take a position with regard to
whether or not the loss should be made retroactive before the
sentencing commission. But while we are still in that process,
I have asked my prosecutors to make sure that we only ask for
sentences that are appropriate and consistent with the facts.
Mr. Cohen. Expungement is an issue I am interested in, too.
Do you believe we should have for like low-level crimes,
whether misdemeanors, an expungement law on the Federal level,
whereby after say 7 years a first offender for a nonviolent
offense could get the record expunged to maybe get a job?
Attorney General Holder. I think that is certainly
something that I would want to work with the Committee on and
consider. It is certainly something we had here in Washington,
D.C., when I was a judge for a relatively small number of
offenses, obviously nonviolent, so that the stigma that goes
with a conviction, especially for younger people, might not
harm their ability to get meaningful employment to otherwise
make themselves productive members of society, and so the
ability to have that as a tool in the Federal system is
certainly something I am willing to consider.
Mr. Cohen. The red light has come on, and I am going to do
the hypothetical yield back the remainder of my time that
doesn't exist. But I am going to bring up if I can in the extra
30 seconds I know the Chairman is going to give me----
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the gentleman is recognized
for an additional 30 seconds.
Mr. Cohen. Thank you. I am going to bring up an issue that
the Chairman wouldn't want me to bring up, which is the fact
that----
Mr. Smith. In that case, he is not recognized for an
additional 30 seconds.
Mr. Cohen. The Memphis Grizzlies beat the San Antonio Spurs
4-2. I know you play basketball with the President. Has he
caught on to Zack Randolph in the Grizzlies of being a dynasty
in the making----
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has definitely expired.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Franks, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Franks. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, General Holder, for being here.
Sir, money is indeed the lifeblood of terrorism. Without
funding terrorism, it would be nearly impossible. The 2008 Holy
Land Foundation case was the largest terrorism finance case in
U.S. history, as you well know. And according to the volumes of
case history and evidence available on the Web site of the
Federal Court of the Northern District of Texas, hundreds of
U.S.-based persons or entities are listed as unindicted co-
conspirators who allegedly funneled millions of dollars to the
designated terrorist organization Hamas under the guise of
funding a Muslim charity.
Now, the sources have told us that the case was the product
of 19 years of investigations, consuming thousands of hours,
thousands of man-hours of manpower and millions of dollars. But
over the past year, the Department of Justice has signaled that
it will not further prosecute this case, despite the voluminous
evidence that the unindicted co-conspirators are financing
terror from within the United States.
Chairman Smith of this Committee and Chairman King of the
Homeland Security Committee are interested, obviously, in
learning why this case was dropped, as you well know. You have
received correspondence recently from both of them. Now, you
have claimed that the career attorneys made the decision to
drop the case, but the press reports are saying that
prosecutors, FBI agents and even your own spokesperson at DOJ
are telling a different story. They claim that the decision to
scuttle the largest terrorism finance case in U.S. history now
spanning three Administrations was made not by career attornies
but instead by senior Obama administration political
appointees.
Now, the scuttling of this case obviously has outraged the
career lawyers. And according to Congressman King, we just
learned from his office that his letter today was responded to
in a completely unresponsive way. It never did speak to the
questions that he asked. So I guess I ask you here then today,
which individuals, and I hope you will say the names, which
individuals are responsible for scuttling the Holy Land
Foundation prosecutions of the unindicted co-conspirators?
Attorney General Holder. Well, the premise of your question
is inaccurate. There was no scuttling of the case.
Mr. Franks. Do you intend to--I am sorry, I don't know what
happened here. I didn't mean to do that. I wasn't yelling at
you; the microphone kind of went off on me.
Do you intend to prosecute these cases?
Attorney General Holder. The decisions that were made not
to prosecute those cases were made initially in the Bush
administration and continue in this Administration. And I have
to take exception----
Mr. Franks. Let me just, I have to stop you on that. You
claim that the decision to drop the case was a continuation of
the approach taken by the Bush administration, but that really
isn't true.
The Bush administration successfully prosecuted the first
round of defendants. They aggressively secured convictions on
all 108 counts. And the first--you know, the first round didn't
conclude until after, until 3 weeks after the election of
Barack Obama, and essentially the Bush administration just ran
out of time. They were pursuing this.
And Peter King has said that, you know, it is hard to hide
behind the deliberations of the Bush administration that pre-
date the successful prosecution of the Holy Land case. So you
are obviously not following the Bush administration's path,
because they did prosecute, and they got 108 convictions.
Attorney General Holder. But a decision was clearly made in
not indicting certain organizations and people in that initial
case. That is why they were, as you said, unindicted co-
conspirators.
But the other thing is that what you say about the concerns
about the career prosecutors seems very inconsistent with press
reports that I have read from the guy who handled that matter,
a career prosecutor, who said that there was no political
pressure brought to bear on anybody in connection with the
decision not to proceed. That was in the Dallas Morning News, I
believe that is the newspaper, and I would be more than glad to
get a copy of that article.
Mr. Franks. I am sorry the microphone is giving me so much
trouble here, but let me just ask you, did you or the case
abandon or not, did you do that?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mr. Franks. Did anyone in your Department do that?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mr. Franks. Okay. Were you personally involved in any
decision to delay any prosecution of the case?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mr. Franks. Have you communicated with the White House
about the Holy Land Foundation case? Was the White House
involved in any sort of issue to try to delay or not to
persecute the case--prosecute the case?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mr. Franks. Were any of the unindicted co-conspirators
communicating outside the legal process now with the White
House or the Department of Justice about the Holy Land
Foundation case?
Attorney General Holder. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Franks. All right. Well, I think my time is up here.
And thank you, General, for coming.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Franks.
The gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Quigley, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome.
You know, coming from Chicago, I can't help reflect on the
fact that there is a trial taking place there, and while I
don't ask you to comment on that, I note that there always
seems to be a trial taking place there or other places in the
country that deal with public integrity.
As you know, the court has struck down the honest services
section of the statute, a very valuable tool that prosecutors
had to go after public officials using their office for
personal gain. We could really use your office's help preparing
a replacement.
I think it was probably appropriate the statute was struck
down because it was probably, as they said, too vague. But I
appreciate your comments on what we need to do to fill that
void.
Attorney General Holder. Well, that obviously is a very
valuable tool. It has been used over the years in any number of
instances. It is a statute that has had a somewhat troubled
history. It has been declared unconstitutional. I guess that
has been applied on at least a couple of occasions. So I think
what we need to do is come up with a statute that will survive
constitutional scrutiny once and forever. And obviously, we
would be willing to work with this Committee and others so that
we could have that tool back in place.
Mr. Quigley. Thank you.
And I would like to afford you the opportunity here to talk
about another issue that is important to everyone here, and
that is the recent extraordinary increase in police officer
shootings across the country. I think since January, 29 police
officers have been shot in this country. This is an increase in
fatal police shootings of more than 50 percent over last year.
I believe you convened a conference on this last month. I would
again appreciate your office's help on what else we can do to
help you in this vein.
Attorney General Holder. That is something that is of great
concern to me and is the reason why I convened that summit a
few weeks ago. It is one of the reasons why we have tried to
increase our funding of bullet-proof vests that are made
available to State and local police agencies and why we have
tried to now require that there be a mandatory wear policy, as
well. We have something also called the VALOR program so that
officers can be trained as to handle themselves in these
situations when their lives are most likely to be put at risk.
That is something I think that is really worthy of this
Committee's time, certainly my time, and I would be glad to
work with you in that regard to try to keep our law enforcement
officers safe.
Mr. Quigley. I can't help but inject another statistic that
is bothering to me. The 29 officers fatally shot this year, 20
were killed by individuals who would have been barred by
Federal law from possessing guns. In my vein, this gets to the
greatest loophole of all, and that is the gun show loophole.
The fact that you could be barred from getting on an airplane,
you can have multiple felonies, you could have been adjudicated
as being dangerously mentally ill, but you can go to 33 States
and go to a gun show and buy just about anything you want
without a background check whatsoever. Your thoughts on this?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I think we have to look at
the laws that we have on the books. We need to certainly
enforce them. We need to be asking questions about whether they
are adequate, whether they are keeping our people safe, whether
they are keeping law enforcement officers safe. And we also
have to focus on, and I think the point you made is a very,
very good one, who has these guns.
It is not only a question of what guns we are dealing with,
but also who has them. Obviously, everybody has Second
Amendment rights. The Supreme Court has ruled that in the
Heller case. This Department of Justice respects that decision.
But I think questions can be asked about are there felons, too
many felons who for whatever reason are in possession of guns;
people who have mental issues, whether they should have guns;
people who have domestic violence issues, whether they should
have guns. There are a whole variety of questions as to the who
that I think we should focus on as well.
Mr. Quigley. And I agree. And to close, I would suggest to
those who are very supportive of the Second Amendment that
while that case did grant Second Amendment rights, that
majority opinion did talk about limitations. One was who and
one of the others was what. And I think it is fair to ask if
you are out to protect your home or you are hunting deer,
whether you need a 30 round clip. But that is my own editorial
comment for the day.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Quigley.
The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gohmert, is recognized.
Mr. Gohmert. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And thank you, Attorney General, for being here. I want to
follow up on what Mr. Franks was talking about, the case
involving the Holy Land Foundation. You have mentioned the
Dallas Morning News article. I have a copy of it here. I have
also got a copy of the political article. And the person you
are talking about is Jim Jacks, who is the interim U.S.
attorney for the Northern District of Texas, because the
President has not made a nomination for U.S. attorney for the
Northern District of Texas. So as long as Mr. Jacks stays in
the good graces of the President, he serves at the will of the
President or of the judges in that area; he might even get the
nomination if he does a good enough job from the President. He
serves at his will.
So let's go to this. Are you aware that this same career
prosecutor that you have mentioned filed pleadings in the case
before Judge Solis and before the Fifth Circuit where he
supported the decision of Judge Solis that there was evidence
to keep the unindicted co-conspirators listed? Because some of
them were wanting to be eliminated as co-conspirators, he filed
documents with the court. And I am rather sensitive, as a
former judge and chief justice, to lawyers filing things and
saying things they don't believe. Because it seems that the
position Mr. Jacks is taking now, which could be viewed as
supportive of the President's position on some of the people
and some of the organizations that are unindicted co-
conspirators, are inconsistent with his position in his
pleadings. And I have copies of those as well.
But the judge found after reviewing Mr. Jacks' pleading
that there was plenty of evidence to keep them in as unindicted
co-conspirators. Now, if a lawyer files something that he
doesn't believe and he knows he doesn't believe it, some judges
think it is a fraud upon the court that requires punitive
actions to be taken. So I am also aware that when someone makes
a statement to the Dallas Morning News, even if he believes it
is not true, though it may help him in the political
appointment, there is no actionable punitive measures that may
be taken.
So I wonder which Mr. Jacks' opinion we are relying on; the
one that is the interim, that possibly hopes to be nominated or
stay in that position, or the one that filed pleadings before
the court.
Now, are you aware that one of the unindicted co-
conspirators is the Islamic Society of North America, ISNA?
Were you aware of that?
Attorney General Holder. I don't have at the tip of my
fingers all the unindicted co-conspirators. But there is not an
inconsistency in----
Mr. Gohmert. Wait a minute. My time is limited. I have to
ask questions and get short answers. The FBI has recruited
through the ISNA magazine. ISNA has advertised in FBI
publication--in their publications. And even in the White
House's own Deputy Assistant National Security Advisor went out
and spoke and met with and spoke out at the--let's see, the All
Dulles Area Muslim Society, or short for that is ADAMS, ironic.
But Deputy National Security Advisor Denis McDonough even in
his opening remarks thanked the president of ISNA and that
thank you is on the White House Web site.
So I am wondering, when you say that you nor anyone else,
as I understood, in your Department assisted at all in the
decision not to pursue prosecution of the most important
funding case for terrorism in American history, do you need
time to reflect on that, or can you absolutely be certain that
no one in your Department had any consultation with Mr. Jacks
or anyone making the decision in this case before the decision
was made not to pursue it?
Attorney General Holder. I am not sure that is the question
I was asked. But beyond that, the notion----
Mr. Gohmert. Well, that is the question I am asking. That
went beyond Mr. Franks'.  That is the question I am asking.
Attorney General Holder. Now, you asked me one question and
you are saying--your question is what now?
Mr. Gohmert. My question is very specific. Is there anyone
in your Department who consulted with Mr. Jacks or whoever made
the decision before the decision was made not to pursue any of
the unindicted co-conspirators in the Holy Land Foundation
trial?
Attorney General Holder. It is my understanding that in
fact there was contact between Washington national security
professionals and the U.S. Attorney's Office in Texas in that
regard. But one thing----
Mr. Gohmert. Are those Washington national security
professionals part of your Department, because that was the
question?
Attorney General Holder. Part of the National Security
Division.
Mr. Gohmert. But are they under you?
Attorney General Holder. Yeah. The National Security
Division is part of the United States Department of Justice.
Mr. Gohmert. Did they consult with you in any way?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mr. Gohmert. All right. Thank you. I see my time is up.
Attorney General Holder. But one thing I want to say that I
think is grossly unfair. You have cast aspersions on a person
who I don't know, who has served, I understand, the United
States Department of Justice and the people of this country
quite well for a good number of years and you have implied that
he would take a position in order to maintain a position as an
acting U.S. attorney or to become the U.S. attorney.
These are the kinds of things that you know will get
reported in the newspapers. People don't know this gentleman.
They will wonder about him. And I think that is a very unfair
thing to do, given the fact that I don't think there is any
basis for the assertions that you have made.
Mr. Gohmert. Now, wait a minute. You are saying there are
no basis for the assertions----
Mr. Smith. The gentleman is recognized for an additional 30
seconds.
Mr. Gohmert. No basis for the assertions that he said one
thing in the pleadings before the trial court and the same
things before the pleadings in the Fifth Circuit and yet he
comes out and says something entirely different later, that
there is no evidence to support that, and basically what he is
telling the Dallas News there was no basis for a case there.
And you are saying I have no basis for saying that? I have got
the Dallas News article. I have got the pleadings he filed.
That is what I am basing that on.
Attorney General Holder. No, it is not inconsistent, his
saying that there is a basis to keep these people, these
organizations as unindicted co-conspirators.
Mr. Gohmert. Have you looked at the documents that were
made available in this case before you say that I am being
unfair by making allegations? Have you looked at the evidence
in the case? Here is ISNA, here is documentation of the money
they provided which ended up supporting terrorism as found by
the court, and you are saying I have no basis for saying what I
did. There is a basis for what he said before the Fifth Circuit
and before the trial court. And so I don't appreciate the
allegation that I am making unfounded allegations.
Attorney General Holder. I am just responding to what you
said. You essentially said that he would take a position in
order to maintain a position. That is certainly what you
implied.
Mr. Gohmert. I raised the issue. And sir, I don't know how
many cases you have ever tried in court or prosecuted, but I
can assure you if you tried a case and you had someone with the
impeachment material that was available for Mr. Jacks on his
inconsistencies and you didn't pursue it, you would not be an
effective trial lawyer. These are a basis for impeachment of
his stating that there was no politics involved because there
was no case there.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Chairman, the Attorney General was trying to
explain why there was no inconsistency and he kept getting cut
off. Could the Attorney General respond to the question----
Mr. Gohmert. I was responding to the allegations about me
having no basis for my statements, and I deserve to have a
chance to respond to those.
Mr. Scott. Can the Attorney General respond?
Mr. Smith. Does the Attorney General have anything to add?
Attorney General Holder. I was simply saying that the
notion that the filing of something that says that these
people, organizations, should be treated as unindicted co-
conspirators is not inconsistent with this notion that there
wasn't political pressure brought to bear on that decision. I
don't see how one necessarily affects the other.
And you know, I am going to stick up for my people. That is
what I am doing. I am not going to let people who work in the
United States Department of Justice have their characters
assailed without any basis.
That might be something that people in this Committee feel
is easily done. It is not going to happen as long as I am
Attorney General of the United States. It is just not going to
happen.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General.
Mr. Gohmert. Now, Mr. Chairman, I should have a chance to
respond since there are allegations made about me. But I do
appreciate the Attorney General now letting us know that Mr.
Jacks is one of his people. Thank you.
Attorney General Holder. As are the 114,000 other people
who work in the United States Department of Justice.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, both.
Mr. Gohmert. So he is part of your Department?
Attorney General Holder. These are my people.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, both.
The gentlemen from Florida----
Mr. Gohmert. So people in your Department did make that
decision not to prosecute?
Mr. Smith. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Deutch, is recognized for
his questions.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Holder, thank you for being here. The Wall Street
Journal reported today that the U.S. Has filed a lawsuit
against Deutsche Bank for lying repeatedly about the quality of
mortgages so that they could profit from the resale. According
to the lawsuit, when selecting mortgages from the Federal
Housing Administration's insurance program, Deutsche Bank did
not consider whether the borrowers would be able to repay. In
clear violation of Federal Housing Administration's mortgage
insurance program, these government-insured mortgages were then
sold off, earning the bank a massive profit while leaving
homeowners to face foreclosure and the government on the hook
to pay billions of dollars in insurance claims. The claims are
startling, and the charges highlight the efforts to seek profit
at any cost while leaving thousands of people and their
families to lose their homes and the taxpayers being forced to
pay for the bank's actions.
First, I would like to commend you for the Department's
vigorous pursuit of these charges against Deutsche Bank, and I
would like to ask whether--first, whether the Department is
investigating any other large banks in possible deceptive
actions that they may have taken to fuel the mortgage crisis
that the country has been facing? We will start with that.
Attorney General Holder. Well, we have a very active
program under way looking at a variety of players in the
mortgage field. We brought a number of cases already. There are
a number of investigations that are pending.
Mr. Deutch. Next, would the Department pursue criminal
charges that would result in jail time for the heads of these
large banks and servicers if it is found that they knowingly
took actions like those described in the lawsuit filed against
Deutsche Bank?
Attorney General Holder. The scrutiny that we would bring
would not simply be at the organizations and be looking to
punish the organizations. If there are individuals who have
taken actions that would warrant individual liability, that is
something that we will pursue as well.
Mr. Deutch. And if I could just pursue one possible line of
prosecution that has been raised. I would love your thoughts on
it. And that is under Sarbanes-Oxley, the requirements under
Sarbanes-Oxley, that executives at Wall Street firms have to
establish and maintain adequate systems in internal control;
that they have got to regularly test those controls and make
sure that they are adequate; and as I understand it, that that
statute provides that in the case of knowingly making false
claims, one would be subject to fines up to $1 million and
imprisonment of up to 10 years; and that if those claims were
willful, those violations were willful, fines then of up to $5
million and jail time of up to 20 years in prison. Is this the
basis--would this be the basis of potential claims against
individuals in connection with the mortgage foreclosure cases
that are being pursued?
Attorney General Holder. Those are potential statutes.
There are other statutes that we can bring, including some as
old and tried and true as wire fraud and mail fraud. I mean,
there are a whole variety of tools that we have, including
those that you have mentioned, and we will try to make use of
all of those as we continue in these investigations.
Mr. Deutch. And so as you pursue these claims, at what
point is the determination made? Obviously, my colleagues
asked, others have asked, certainly been a big topic of
conversation, while there is a $1 billion case that has been
filed today, which I applauded you for, given the vast array of
potential claims that could be, individual claims that could be
brought, that would bring the potential of criminal violations,
when might we expect to see some of those cases filed as well?
Attorney General Holder. I mean, that is hard to predict.
We are serious about the investigating that we are doing, and
it is always hard to determine exactly when decisions will be
made either to prosecute or to decline prosecution. All I can
tell you is that we are looking at these cases seriously. We
are going to pursue them aggressively, and as soon as we can
make a determination and share that with the American people,
we will.
Mr. Deutch. So then there is, just to conclude, General
Holder, there is--we should know, the Members of this Committee
and the American people should know that your Justice
Department is vigorously investigating these potential claims
and that under Sarbanes-Oxley and a whole array of other
statutes, the possibility for criminal prosecution against
individuals in connection with the mortgage foreclosure crisis
is real and we should look forward to the potential of those
cases being brought?
Attorney General Holder. I mean, I don't want to over
promise, but the possibility that those cases could be brought,
yes, that is certainly the case. I mean, we are in the process
of looking at a whole variety of these matters, and it is
possible that criminal prosecutions will result. Civil actions
might result. We are going to try to take whatever enforcement
action we can to try to hold people responsible where that is
appropriate.
Mr. Deutch. Thank you.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Deutch.
The gentleman from Utah, Mr. Chaffetz, is recognized.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you, Mr. Attorney General. I appreciate
you being here. I would like to go back to Project Gunrunner
and Operation Fast and Furious. You said that in just the last
few weeks is when you had heard this. The President made
statements to this in a report on Univision back on March 22nd.
Were you aware of this operation before the President or after
the President made those comments?
Attorney General Holder. My guess would be probably before
the President.
Mr. Chaffetz. Who briefed the President about this? He
obviously knew something about it, he made a statement about
it. Who briefed the President?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know.
Mr. Chaffetz. Who would typically--who would do that? If
not the Attorney General, who would brief the President on
this?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I mean, we have a White
House contacts policy so that the Justice Department interacts
with the White House Counsel's Office. Now, I don't know what
process goes on from the White House Counsel within the White
House.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me move on. Are you familiar with the
President's comments then on March 22nd? He said, quote, there
may be a situation here in which a serious mistake was made. If
that is the case, then we will find out and we will hold
somebody accountable. Would you agree with that comment or not
agree with that comment?
Attorney General Holder. Yeah, I would agree with that.
Mr. Chaffetz. Would you agree that there were some serious
mistakes made in this situation?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know. That is one of the
things that we are trying to investigate. That is what I have
asked the Inspector General to look at.
Mr. Chaffetz. Now, it has been reported that at the death
of Brian Terry, one of our Border Patrol agents, that there
were guns from the operation found at that scene. Is that in
dispute?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know that to be factually
accurate. I don't know. I have heard that. I have asked the
Inspector General to look into that, and I am awaiting that
report.
Mr. Chaffetz. Is there a scenario if those guns were found
at that scene where--is there a possible scenario where
mistakes weren't made and yet we have guns at the scene of the
death of one of our Border Patrol agents?
Attorney General Holder. I think that is right. I think if
those facts are in fact accurate, I suspect that mistakes in
fact were made.
Mr. Chaffetz. Now, this program was approved by the Justice
Department. My understanding is in January of 2010. I guess I
am struggling to understand why an operation as big and as
large and as important as this has not come to your attention
for more than a year after it was originally authorized. Can
you help me understand that?
Attorney General Holder. Well, you have to understand that
something you described as big, in comparison to all the other
things that are going on in the Department at any one given
time, might not seem quite as large. I have, as I said, 114,000
or 115,000 employees; the FBI, the ATF, the DEA. You know, a
whole variety of things that we talked about here today.
Mr. Chaffetz. I guess my concern is here is an operation
where we are knowingly allowing more than 1,500 guns to go
across the border, maybe with good intention but obviously with
consequence that is unparalleled. I am just not aware of us on
a regular basis allowing and knowingly, allowing guns to be put
in the hands of bad guys and now we got--I just don't
understand why that doesn't come to your attention.
Also, my understanding is that they are receiving task
force money. And these types of programs, the task force must
be approved at some very high levels, including the level of
deputy attorney general. Who did know about this? Who did
authorize this, and when did they authorize it?
Attorney General Holder. Again, that is part of what the
Inspector General will be looking at; who exactly was involved,
what the level of knowledge was, who should be held accountable
if in fact there were mistakes that were made. That is what the
Inspector General will be looking at.
Mr. Chaffetz. So it is not--is it your intention to not
comply with our subpoena because the attorney--because
Inspector General is doing that? Or do you believe--that is,
are you precluded from complying with the subpoena because the
IG is looking into it, or can you do both simultaneously?
Attorney General Holder. We can do both simultaneously.
What I have asked is that with regard to replying to the
subpoenas, that we try to minimize the impact on the ongoing
cases. It is not the Inspector General's report. And we have
tried to come up with ways in which we will make information
available to the Committee in a timely fashion and not harm
those ongoing investigations.
Mr. Chaffetz. The ATF office involved in this was evidently
the Phoenix office. Are there any other ATF offices that you
are aware of that may have been involved or engaged in this?
Attorney General Holder. May be involved in?
Mr. Chaffetz. In the Project Gunrunner or Operation Fast
and Furious, or was it just the Phoenix office?
Attorney General Holder. I don't know.
Mr. Chaffetz. Let me move to a different issue if I could
in my short time here. I just recently went down to the border
with Mexico. I think one of the statistics that the Border
Patrol puts out there is that they only have 15 percent, 15
percent operational control. What do we need to do to secure
the border? Because I was shocked and surprised. I mean, I went
for hours in places right along the border where there is
nothing more than a barbed wire fence cut in many places and
never even saw a Border Patrol agent. So we are pouring a lot
of resources into this. But what from your opinion do we have
to do to actually secure the border, because it is not
happening?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I think that the situation
along the border is better now than it probably ever has been--
--
Mr. Chaffetz. But how do you come to that conclusion?
Attorney General Holder. You base it on the number of
people who are stopped, the amount of drugs we recover, the
number of guns that are recovered.
Mr. Chaffetz. So if that stat goes up, if the number of
apprehensions goes up, is it better, or is it if the number of
apprehensions goes down, is it better?
Attorney General Holder. It depends on a whole bunch of
things. It certainly is a function of the number of people who
are trying to get in. It also is a function of how effective
our enforcement efforts are, which is not to say that there
aren't still issues or still problems along the border. And I
think we have to do all we can to secure our border. And I
think that one of the ways in which we do that is to really
look comprehensively at this whole immigration question.
Mr. Chaffetz. No doubt. I think that we have got to fix
illegal immigration and do a lot of other things. But the
statistic of apprehension, if it goes up, are we doing a better
job securing the border, or if apprehensions go down, are we
doing a better job securing the border?
Attorney General Holder. As I said, that is a difficult one
to answer.
Mr. Chaffetz. I know, that is why I asked you.
Attorney General Holder. You can say that if we are
apprehending more people, that means we are stopping more
people coming through. On the other hand, if we are getting
fewer people, it is entirely possible our enforcement efforts
are working and fewer people are trying to get in. It is a
difficult question to answer.
Mr. Chaffetz. I at some point would love to know the answer
to that question, Mr. Chair, but I appreciate it. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chaffetz.
The gentleman from Puerto Rico, Mr. Pierluisi, is
recognized.
Mr. Pierluisi. Greetings, Mr. Holder.
In the brief time that I have, I want to address the
problem of drug-related crime in Puerto Rico. Through the first
3 months of this year, 301 homicides were committed in Puerto
Rico, a 35 percent increase over the same period last year. And
this is unacceptably high for 3.8 million people.
You might say, you know, why am I raising this local issue?
Well, the fact of the matter is that unfortunately Puerto Rico
has long been a transshipment point for drugs coming into the
U.S. mainland, so this is tied to the U.S. as a whole.
When I look at the Federal Government's efforts to combat
drug-related violence in Puerto Rico, I am troubled that key
DOJ offices on the island have vacancy rates between 17 percent
and 57 percent. From speaking with you and others at the
Department, I understand that apparently you are having
difficulty recruiting agents for places like Puerto Rico, high-
crime localities or high-cost localities.
And I wonder, how are you making these decisions? When you
assign personnel throughout the Department, different agencies;
ATF, DEA, FBI, to your knowledge, I mean, are you taking into
account homicide rates, for example, the level of violence,
issues such as recruitment difficulties? Are you giving any
incentives to your agents to locate in places like Puerto Rico,
or it could be Miami or it could be LA, I mean, different
places, maybe Detroit, places facing high crime at a certain
point in time, New Orleans? How are you doing this?
Attorney General Holder. We try to deploy our resources in
places where they are most needed. And the concerns you raise
are legitimate ones, not only because Puerto Rico is a
transshipment point, which is right, but because people who
live in Puerto Rico are American citizens and are deserving of
the protection of their government.
We try to come up with ways in which we get investigators
and agents into places that need them, such as Puerto Rico, by
coming up with incentives, by coming up with what we call TDYs,
temporary duty, by putting people there for--if people don't
want to relocate, putting people there for maybe 90 days, 180
days, something along those lines, to try to keep the numbers
up.
We are doing the best we can trying to get our resources to
the places where they are most needed. You and I have talked
about this issue. And I am very concerned about the homicide
rate in Puerto Rico and the influence of drugs on that part of
our country, part of our Nation, on the island.
Mr. Pierluisi. One other thing, in looking at this issue, I
got statistics from all the different agencies within your
Department but for the FBI. Would you assist me in providing me
that this is the number of positions that you have authorized
or available and the number that are vacant? I just want to
compare. And I believe I should have this information.
Attorney General Holder. I will get you that information.
Mr. Pierluisi. Thank you so much.
I yield back the a balance of my time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Pierluisi.
The gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Gowdy, is
recognized.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Attorney General Holder, if you would, I would be indebted
to you if you would let the AUSAs and the Federal law
enforcement officers in the District of South Carolina know how
grateful I am for their service and how much I appreciate they
do a fantastic job. And I am sure it would mean more to them to
hear it from you than it would from me. So if you would let
them know that, I would be grateful to you.
Attorney General Holder. Well, I thank you for that, and I
will pass it on. I will make a point to do that.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you. And what I hope to do with the
remainder of my time is have a constitutional conversation with
you as opposed to a political conversation.
You do not disagree that Congress has the authority to
define marriage. Your position is not that the interstate
commerce clause doesn't allow us--you are not making a States'
right argument; you are making an argument based on the three
tiers of constitutional scrutiny, right?
Attorney General Holder. Typically marriage has been
defined as something that has been seen as something that is a
State issue as opposed to the Federal Government.
Mr. Gowdy. It is. But there are thousands of instances
where Congress has to define what the family is in order to be
instructive with respect to other statutes. So you are not
challenging that Congress has the authority to define marriage.
Attorney General Holder. I think we may be quibbling here,
but not define marriage as much as to define in Federal
statutes how married people are to be treated, something along
those lines; I think I would agree in that regard.
Mr. Gowdy. All right. And would you agree with me that the
rational basis test is the appropriate test to be used with
respect to consanguinity, the marrying of family members, that
is the appropriate test, right, rational basis? You are not
arguing for a heightened level of scrutiny on whether or not
cousins can marry each other?
Attorney General Holder. No, I would not argue that. I
don't know if there is law on that. But again, off the top of
my head, I am not sure that you would need a heightened
scrutiny standard in that regard.
Mr. Gowdy. And age restrictions, we wouldn't need a
heightened level of scrutiny with respect to age restrictions?
Attorney General Holder. No. There is a four-part test I
have right here that I don't think you have a heightened
scrutiny as well.
Mr. Gowdy. And we don't need an intermediate or heightened
level of scrutiny with respect to polygamy, right?
Attorney General Holder. I would think not.
Mr. Gowdy. And since Lawrence, two Courts of Appeals have
upheld a rational basis test for sexual orientation. So that is
two that have upheld the rational basis; one that has applied a
heightened level of scrutiny. So my question is, why would you
single out the one Court of Appeals that has applied a higher
level of scrutiny ignoring the two that applied to a rational
basis test? That just strikes me as a political calculation and
not a constitutional calculation.
Attorney General Holder. No, not a political calculation. I
think what we had to do was look at--you know, Courts of
Appeals make decisions that sometimes the Department of Justice
will disagree with. To the extent that Courts of Appeals have
taken different views of what the appropriate level of scrutiny
is, we think those Courts of Appeals are wrong. The Supreme
Court will ultimately have to decide this issue. But I want to
assure you and everybody else that the decision that we made
with regard to DOMA did not have a political component to it;
it was a legal determination.
Mr. Gowdy. I want to believe you, I really do. I mean that
earnestly. But you know, when I was an AUSA, there was a Court
of Appeals that said that law enforcement officers didn't have
to read Miranda warnings anymore. It was an unusual opinion,
and it was one we didn't follow. It was one Court of Appeals
that ruled that way. There are--heavens knows, the Ninth
Circuit Court of Appeals is presumptively wrong, so we don't
change our course of conduct when the Ninth Circuit--I said
that, not you, right. When the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
comes up with something crazy, we don't change our course of
action. It is difficult to explain why it is not a political
calculation or a decision when two Courts of Appeals post-
Lawrence have said the rational basis test is the one that
applies and only one has argued for a heightened level of
scrutiny, it is tough to see how that is not political.
Attorney General Holder. I think one example, and I might
be wrong in this one, but if my memory serves me correctly,
when it came to the Dickerson case, the Fourth Circuit
indicated that that statute was passed to essentially overrule
Miranda. I think the Fourth Circuit said that that statute was
in fact constitutional. The Justice Department just argued
against that statute, said that it was unconstitutional, before
the Supreme Court. So you have the Justice Department both
arguing in the Supreme Court against the statute passed by
Congress and also taking on a Federal Court of Appeals. So
there is a basis, there is history to these kinds of actions
that we took with regard to DOMA. It is unusual. It is, you
know, rare, but it happens on occasion.
Mr. Gowdy. But you would agree the Supreme Court has never
applied a ightened level of scrutiny to sexual orientation, so
there is no precedent from the Supreme Court and only one of
the Courts of Appeals has even suggested there is a heightened
level of scrutiny while two have not.
And Mr. Chairman, could I have 30 seconds just to ask one
other question?
Mr. Smith. Without objection.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We will continue this conversation hopefully at some other
point.
You said that there were tactical reasons to try terrorists
in a civilian court rather than military tribunals. You would
agree the evidentiary rules are more relaxed in military
tribunals than in civil court.
Attorney General Holder. There are certain rules; they are
not as lax. The difference is not as great as some people
think. Certainly with regard to hearsay, you can get more
hearsay evidence in the military commissions than you can
Article III courts.
Mr. Gowdy. Discovery rules are different.
Attorney General Holder. Slightly.
Mr. Gowdy. Jury qualification and selection is certainly
different.
Attorney General Holder. Yeah, different systems there.
Mr. Gowdy. Right. So, I mean, to the extent you can, what
tactical decisions made you believe that it was better to try
these defendants in civilian court than in military court,
because you used the word tactical, and as a prosecutor, I am
thinking more likely to get a conviction.
Attorney General Holder. Well, you would be right when it
comes to tactical and how I view that. What I don't want to do,
with all due respect, because you have asked questions I think
in good faith, I don't think I can answer that question out of
concern that what I might say could have a negative impact on
the case that is pending now in these military commissions. The
tactical reasons or tactical concerns that I saw, were I to
reveal them might give to the defense an opportunity to raise
issues that otherwise might not exist.
Mr. Gowdy. Fair enough.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Gowdy.
Attorney General Holder. But I do want to say, Mr. Gowdy, I
appreciate what you have said about the assistants there, and I
will share with them those good thoughts.
Mr. Gowdy. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Johnson, is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Attorney General, I welcome you here today. And as head
of the Justice Department, you are responsible for, among other
things, enforcing the Federal criminal laws, defending the
United States against civil actions and also protecting our
national security. Now, at a time when your Department has been
adversely impacted by the ravenous budget cutting, I was
puzzled by one of my colleagues on the other side's questioning
you about the allocation of your precious resources to the
issue of adult hardcore pornography.
And I really would like to know what is adult hardcore
pornography? But because my time is limited, I will forego that
question.
But Mr. Attorney General, over the last couple of years,
you have successfully prosecuted many terrorist cases, and in
fact, under your leadership, the Justice Department has
successfully prosecuted more terrorists than any other 2-year
period in history. The recent military operation which led to
the death of Osama bin Laden is a testament as to how this
Administration handles national security in a disciplined
fashion, using all the tools at its disposal that are available
in an effort to protect the American people.
And I must take this opportunity to recognize the great,
the fabulous success of the mission which was carried out by
the CIA and the Joint Special Operations Command that resulted
in the apprehension of Osama bin Laden over the weekend.
And I know that your Department is just as effective when
it comes to prosecuting terrorists, and I deeply regret the
fact that your decision to prosecute Khalid Sheikh Mohammed,
the mastermind of 9/11, your decision to prosecute him in the
civil--I mean in the criminal courts of this country, I regret
that Congress, politicians in Congress usurped your ability to
exercise the discretion that you have with respect to where to
try that gentleman.
And because he will be tried in a secret military tribunal,
many of the things about the case that have not been publicly
revealed will not be revealed, and so the American people will
be left without the information, which I think would generate
true closure for them in this matter.
I appreciate all that you have done at Justice to protect
all Americans at home and abroad, and I applaud the Justice
Department's commitment to transparency. Under your leadership,
the Department has processed a record number of Freedom of
Information Act requests, and you have testified before this
Committee numerous times, and your dedication to State and
local law enforcement by supporting the COPS program certainly
does not go unnoticed, especially in this tight economy.
Now, General Holder, I sent you a letter on March 28th of
this year requesting information pertaining to three Federal
intelligence contractors; HBGary Federal, Palantir Technologies
and Berico Technologies, who collectively refer to themselves
as Team Themis. Are you familiar with my letter?
Attorney General Holder. I can't say that I am.
Mr. Johnson. Well, in that letter, I expressed concern that
the three firms may have broken the law by conspiring to harm
American citizens using illegal techniques, such as hacking,
planting malware, blackmail and fraud. Nineteen of my
colleagues in the House of Representatives echoed those serious
concerns in a letter sent to House Committee chairs earlier in
March, and I also requested copies of all Department of Justice
contracts with those firms within 10 days.
I have grave concerns that the law may have been broken,
and I understand that there are many demands on your time and
that your staff is busy, but will you commit to looking into
that matter?
Attorney General Holder. Yeah, we will--I have a great
staff, many of whom are right behind me, and they are
undoubtedly taking notes right now with regard to the letter
you talked about--I hope they are--about March 28th.
Mr. Johnson.Well, I hope they are also.
Attorney General Holder. They are writing. They are
writing.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. I would appreciate you all getting back
to me. And when additional information arises, I will
definitely send it to you on that case. And with that, I will
yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Johnson.
The gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King, is recognized for his
questions.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank Attorney General Holder for his long testimony
here, and this is always a challenge and always an interesting
day to serve on this Committee when the Attorney General of the
United States is to testify before the Judiciary Committee, and
I do appreciate it.
I have a series of subjects I would like to examine,
perhaps not in the depth that some of the others have. But I
recall your testimony here roughly a year ago, and we had a
discussion and exchange about Arizona's SB1070 law. And at that
time, I had asked you if there was a provision in the
Constitution that you believed it had violated or if there was
Federal preemption that it had perhaps violated or if there was
any controlling case law that it perhaps crossed the line on
it. At that point, you weren't prepared to respond to that. And
I don't ask you to do that today, but to make this point that
subsequent to that, then, of course, Justice filed a lawsuit
against Arizona. And in reading that, I come across this--it
seemed to be something I hadn't encountered before--a careful
balance that makes the case that Congress has established a
careful balance between the various and sometimes competing
immigration laws, and it is the job of Justice and the other
departments to maintain that careful balance, just to put that
in summary.
Attorney General Holder. I am sorry, again, what kind of
balance? I couldn't hear you.
Mr. King. A careful, careful balance. And I have been
involved in a lot of immigration debates, and I don't know that
anyone has alleged they had introduced legislation on
immigration that was designed to achieve or enhance a careful
balance. And so I just ask if that, I will call it illegal
theory, the careful balance theory, does that exist anywhere
else in law that you know of?
Attorney General Holder. Well, the positions that we have
taken in that lawsuit have been upheld by both the District
Court and a Court of Appeals, theories that we have brought.
The theories that we have used, which I think are mainstream
theories, as I said, by two courts now that have said that we
are in the right.
Mr. King. Boy, this is the microphone. It is not Trent
Franks' fault. The careful balance theory, however, regardless
of the two courts ruling, and we are on our way to the Supreme
Court, I presume, do you know that that careful balance theory
exists anywhere else in law?
Attorney General Holder. To the extent that we have used
particular theories, particular phrases, I am sure that the
lawyers who filed those briefs did so carefully, did so with
regard to----
Mr. King. Attorney General, just let the record show I
think it is a unique theory myself, and I would be very
interested if there is any other place that you could direct my
reference. It seems to me that that is the one that is
convenient for this case. And if there is--if it is out there
anywhere, I would like to know the answer to that.
But let me move on. And that is--and I didn't ask you the
question whether you read SB1070. But we have another piece of
legislation out there now that has been passed by one of the
States; it is called HB116. That is Utah's legislation that I
will just contend for the sake of simplified vernacular creates
Utah as a sanctuary state. Have you examined and have you read
HB116?
Attorney General Holder. I have read the Utah law.
Mr. King. And have you made a determination on whether to
bring suit against Utah?
Attorney General Holder. No, we have not. As I indicated I
think in a prior question, what we typically do is try to
interact with the State and try to work our way through any
disagreements we might have without bringing suit. The statute
doesn't go into effect until 2013, I understand. We are
prepared to bring suit if that is necessary, but that is a
decision we will make in about a year or so.
Mr. King. Let me just make the point that if Arizona is
preempted, then Utah establishing a sanctuary Sate certainly is
preempted. I would make that point between us here today.
And I move on, also, you have reviewed since your last
testimony before this last Committee the sworn testimony of the
Christian Adams and Chris Coates before the Civil Rights
Commission under oath when they had made the point that the
Justice Department has a racial component to the equation of
whether they will enforce discrimination if it disadvantages a
minority. Have you reviewed that testimony, and do you accept
it as truthful, their sworn testimony?
Attorney General Holder. I have not reviewed the testimony,
but their characterization of that is totally inaccurate.
Mr. King. And I just ask, have you then looked into the
Department and evaluated, done a further investigation,
though--I mean, you disagree with that, but have you actually
done an extra investigation within your own Department to
satisfy yourself, or was that your judgment a year ago and is
that just simply your same judgment today?
Attorney General Holder. No. If you look at the assertions
that they have made, it seems to me that they are inconsistent
with the findings that the Office of Professional
Responsibility has made looking at the whole Black Panthers
matter where the OPR made the determination that politics, race
did not play a part both in the filing of the case or in the
decision as to how the case was disposed of, which seems to me
is inconsistent with what they are claiming.
Mr. King. And Mr. Attorney General, I point out that I
believe that Thomas Perez was less than truthful with this
Committee when he testified that they achieved the highest
penalty involved under the law.
And I just ask unanimous consent for an additional minute.
Mr. Smith. Without objection, the gentleman is recognized
for an additional 30 seconds.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also wanted to bring up the issue of Pigford Farms. And
can you cite for this Committee the authorization that you had
or may believe you had to open up negotiations for a second
round of Pigford Farms we refer to as Pigford II?
Attorney General Holder. The Attorney General has the
ability to settle cases. That is part of what the--that is I
think an inherent part of what the Attorney General's----
Mr. King. Would you cite the 2008 farm bill as the
authorization for that specifically to conclude Pigford II?
Attorney General Holder. I am not sure I quite understand
your question.
Mr. King. Well, I can understand why. And then, so I would
ask, did you negotiate with John Boyd on settlement for Pigford
II?
Attorney General Holder. Did I?
Mr. King. Yes, or did anyone from your office authorized by
you do so?
Attorney General Holder. I am not sure I know who Mr. Boyd
is.
Mr. King. That is instructive to me, and I won't push my
time limits any further.
Thank you, Mr. Attorney General. I appreciate it.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. King.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Chu, is recognized.
Ms. Chu. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Attorney General, for being here. Two nights
ago, President Obama announced that Osama bin Laden had been
killed. And as Americans around the country rejoiced, President
Obama also reminded us that on that day, no matter where we
came from, what God we prayed to or what race or ethnicity we
were, we were united as one American family.
But in the wake of 9/11, we have seen a disturbing increase
of hatred and discrimination against the Muslim community in
America and those thought to be Muslims, such as South Asians
and Sikh Americans. Most recently the House Homeland Security
Committee in fact held hearings that targeted the American
Muslim community.
Considering the importance that intelligence information
played in finding Osama bin Laden, how could an antagonistic
relationship between an American Muslim community and law
enforcement hurt our efforts to combat any homegrown terrorist
threat, and what have you been doing to engage the community
and maintain their trust?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I think that is a good
question. If there were an antagonistic relationship between
law enforcement and those communities, that would have a
negative impact on our ability to protect the American people.
What we have seen is a pretty consistent level of
cooperation and provision of information from the Muslim
community here in the United States. We have started a series
of outreach efforts where I think the Department of Justice has
been leading the way in order to dispel myths, make sure that
there are open lines of communication, make sure that people
understand that our aim is to protect all Americans, Muslim
Americans as well as everyone else. And to the extent that
there is discrimination or inappropriate actions directed
toward that community, our Civil Rights Division has tried to
step in and take action.
Ms. Chu. Then let me ask about a guidance that the DOJ has.
Even 10 years after 9/11, there is racial and religious
profiling against the South Asian, Muslim and Sikh communities,
and it is of widespread concern. I do commend the Department
and especially the Civil Rights Division, the FBI and the U.S.
Attorney General's Office, which has investigated over 750
incidents involving violence, threats and vandalism and arson
against Arabs, Muslim, Sikhs and South Asian Americans in the
United States between 9/11 and March 2007. And in June 2003,
the DOJ issued guidance banning the practice of racial
profiling. Giving evidence that shows that racial profiling is
ineffective and counterproductive, policies that prohibit it
are certainly admirable. However, there needs to be much more
strength on this kind of guidance. And the guidance doesn't
profile--doesn't ban profiling on the basis of religion or
national origin and lacks a meaningful enforcement mechanism.
What is the progress of the review that I believe that you are
doing right now involving this guidance? Where is it at?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I would say, first, as a
general matter, the use of profiling techniques is not
generally good law enforcement, is not generally good law
enforcement. We have under review the policy that was initiated
back, I believe, in 2003. That review is under way, and my hope
would be that I will have some recommendations from the group
that is looking at that policy.
Ms. Chu. And I certainly would urge that you do look at the
issues of religion and national origin, as well as the
enforcement mechanisms.
Let me also say that the DOJ has engaged in this much
needed outreach, and I certainly acknowledge that, but there
certainly is also a need to better institutionalize current ad
hoc initiatives. Would the DOJ consider formalizing the
initiative to combat post-9/11 discriminatory backlash within
the Civil Rights Division of the DOJ by designating a special
counsel for post-9/11 discrimination and a special counsel for
religious discrimination?
Attorney General Holder. Well, that is an interesting idea.
I think that we have laws that our Civil Rights Division
traditionally enforces that handle those kinds of issues. We
have a community relations service as well in the Justice
Department that can contribute in this regard. So I think we
have the tools that we need, and we certainly have the
dedication of the people who are career employees and who will
be there after I leave as Attorney General who I think will
remain dedicated to the enforcement of those regulations and
those laws.
Ms. Chu. I hope you might consider that.
And my last question has to do with hate crime statistics.
And the Hate Crime Statistics Act mandates the collection of
data on hate crimes, but it lumps together those acts that are
anti Muslim or anti Arab, hence, those acts that are actually
committed against Sikh Americans or South Asian American are
not distinguished. Would the Department of Justice consider
formally tracking hate crimes suffered by Arabs, Hindus, Sikhs
and South Asians separately?
Attorney General Holder. I think that is something we could
consider. I think the greater the amount of granularity we have
with regard to who is the victims of these kinds of acts, the
more effective we can be in our enforcement efforts. So I think
your suggestion is a good one, and that is certainly something
that we can consider and work with you in trying to determine
whether that is something that we can appropriately do.
Ms. Chu. Thank you and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you Ms. Chu.
Before I recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Quayle,
for his questions, let me say that two votes have been called,
and we will need to stand in recess and go vote and then we
will return, Mr. Attorney General, if that is all right with
you. There are still several Members who would like to ask
questions.
The gentleman from Arizona.
Mr. Quayle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Holder.
I just want to get some clarification on what you talked
about with Mr. King. Is the reason that there hasn't been any
action on the Utah case, is it based on just the fact that it
is not getting implemented until 2013 and you still do see some
possible supremacy clause violations within that law?
Attorney General Holder. I think they are certainly issues
that we see now. Our hope would be that between now and 2013,
there might be some way that we can work our way through those
concerns without having to bring a lawsuit. But if we have to,
we will.
Mr. Quayle. So just working through possibly the
legislature, the State legislature passing a different law,
making some amendments to that law?
Attorney General Holder. Right. That way interpretations
that the Attorney General might take of the law, there are a
number of ways in which we might try to work our way through
it.
Mr. Quayle. Changing gears. But I read last month that the
Wall Street Journal reported that the DOJ and the FTC have
resorted to coin flips, sometimes trades and bargains when
determining which agency might have jurisdiction over cases,
which can cost the interested parties additional time and
expenses.
Recently the DOJ's anti-trust division, FTC and Congress
have conducted investigations into online search engines and
online advertising markets. As this area of our economy
continues to grow, how do you plan on dividing the work between
the agencies while preserving institutional knowledge and
consistency?
Attorney General Holder. That is a very good question, and
something that we are trying to work our way through.
The FTC and the Justice Department anti-trust division have
generally been in a good place in dividing up responsibility
for anti-trust enforcement. There have, however, been instances
where we have not been on the same page and I think we need to
get together and try to work together and that is what we are
trying to do. To figure out what the rules of the road are
going to be so that we don't end up with as you indicated
either coin flips or other ways in which we decide these
matters.
Mr. Quayle. So the DOJ and the FTC are working together to
try to get some guidance and see who is going to be overseeing
those matters?
Attorney General Holder. Yes.
Mr. Quayle. The other question I have is what role do you
think that the anti-trust division has in helping to maintain
an online marketplace that rewards without necessarily
foreclosing new competition and preventing ideas from reaching
consumers?
Attorney General Holder. I think the anti-trust division,
it is an interesting way that you phrase it but I think it is
right. Anti-trust is generally seen as trying to stop mergers
consolidation but I think the effect, the collateral, the
impact of that work is to make sure that things are kept open,
things are kept free and that is especially important when one
looks at cyber issues, the Internet, where innovation happens
so rapidly and where consolidation is not necessarily a good
thing. And so we are constantly looking in that sphere for
things that might inhibit the growth, the development of the
Internet.
Mr. Quayle. And in those investigations, have you seen any
active and actual bottlenecks or gatekeepers on the Internet
that actually is keeping content from consumers? Have you seen
any actual evidence of that? Or are we starting to get down to
conjecture and it is going to the possibility of the
gatekeepers rather than actual factual evidence pointing to
that?
Attorney General Holder. That was a good question. I am not
sure that I am capable of answering that. We can get you
something in writing from the folks in the anti-trust division
who would be able to tell you more, in a more complete and
contemporary way what concerns they have in that regard. I am
not aware of any. But just because I am not doesn't mean that
maybe there aren't things going on in the anti-trust division
that would be responsive to your question.
Mr. Quayle. So you don't know anything but you can give me
information if there is any?
Attorney General Holder. We will get you something.
Mr. Quayle. Okay, perfect. Thank you, Mr. Holder.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Quayle.
Mr. Attorney General, we will stand in recess for 20
minutes and be back then.
[recess.]
Mr. Smith. The Judiciary Committee will reconvene. Welcome
back, Mr. Attorney General.
And the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Sanchez, is
recognized for questions.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Attorney General Holder, I want to thank you for joining us
here today. It is always nice when the AG takes the time to
come and talk about the many issues facing the Department of
Justice and how they impact the population here in the United
States. I want to start with a couple of quick questions
regarding the anti-trust division first. As I am sure, the
Members of the Committee are aware, one of the major issues
facing the anti-trust division is the proposed merger of AT&T
and T-Mobile. I serve on the Intellectual Property
Subcommittee, and I am sure that they are going to be holding
hearings to consider the various impacts of this merger.
I just want to talk to you really quickly about the DOJ's
investigation into this proposed merger and the questions I
have specifically on this issue are, if you can give the
Committee a sense of how long you expect that review to take,
and then also what factors are you going to be considering as
you review that merger?
Attorney General Holder. I am not sure that I can give you,
with any degree of certainty, how long the review would take.
It will be one that will be done thoroughly and expeditiously,
and then I think the normal things that would be considered
will be the ones that will drive the inquiry, the whole
question of what the impact of the merger will have on, the
potential merger would have on consumers, on the market. It
would be just a traditional analysis even though it involves
some cutting edge technologies.
Ms. Sanchez. Thank you. I want to talk to you a little bit
about the state criminal alien assistance program. When I was a
new Member of Congress, law enforcement came to visit me in my
office to talk about how a reinterpretation by the Department
of Justice had a profound impact on their budgets. SCAAP
program was established to help reimburse State and local
governments for the costs associated with housing undocumented
criminals, but in 2003, the Department of Justice reinterpreted
SCAAP in a way that caused a drastic drop in every State's
reimbursement, and that has had repercussions throughout the
law enforcement community at a time when, quite frankly, when
law enforcement can least afford it. In my State of California,
for example, SCAAP reimbursement payments have declined from
$220 million in fiscal year 2002, that was prior to the
reinterpretation of the statute, and it has dropped to 112
million in fiscal year 2009.
And as I am sure you are aware, many States are
experiencing budget shortfalls and having to scale back on many
services.
And I am wondering if you would be willing to reexamine the
award criteria for the SCAAP program and review the
reinterpretation and see if that merits continuance?
Attorney General Holder. When I testified before the Budget
Committees, I was very conversant with SCAAP and where we were
in terms of our budget. To be honest with you, I am not now.
What I can do is promise to get you something that indicates
where we are in our budget with regard to SCAAP and also look
at that opinion and see how that impacts the----
Ms. Sanchez. I don't want to get into the weeds of it, but
it really is criteria that is nonsensical and doesn't make a
lot of sense. I am asking if you would take the time to sort of
review that opinion and figure out if that still makes sense?
Attorney General Holder. We can do that.
Ms. Sanchez. Okay, great. And then finally, I want to
address an issue that some of my colleagues earlier asked you
some questions but about the recent indictments of several
online poker Web sites. Those have a significant impact on many
of my constituents because I have heard a lot from them on this
matter. As Mr. Cohen, I believe, stated, it is a game that is
gaining in popularity and there are about 10 million Americans
that currently play poker on line and it also ends up being
about a $16 billion industry in this country.
Now, I know that there has been successful regulation of
online poker playing in places like Europe and Australia, and I
happen to be a strong supporter of legislation that would
legalize online gambling in this country and allow us to tax it
reasonably and efficiently and make sure that people were not
being cheated out of their money. I am sure you can appreciate,
again, in challenging economic times, when States are
experiencing deep budget shortfalls and the Federal Government
is trying to find a way to get its fiscal house in order, that
is one area in which we could potentially increase revenue for
the coffers.
So I am hoping that that is an area that you will look at,
again, in terms of where you dedicate your precious resources.
I think time would probably, in my humble opinion, be better
spent dealing with bigger and more impactful, serious violent
crimes, for example, than trying to trying to interrupt this
industry which, as I said, has been efficiently regulated in
other countries. And with that, I will yield back my time to
the Chairman.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Ms. Sanchez.
The gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs. Adams.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Holder, I have a few questions and I am going to go
quickly because I only have 5 minutes and I would really like
to have a lot more, to be honest with you. Earlier, I listened
and you said there were determinations as to why to follow
through on enforcing the law or not enforcing the law, and I
have a couple of questions. We are a Nation of laws, are we
not?
Attorney General Holder. We are--I can't hear you.
Mrs. Adams. We are a Nation of laws?
Attorney General Holder. Yes.
Mrs. Adams. And what determination, what do you do to
make--what do you go through to determine which laws your
agency will enforce or not enforce?
Attorney General Holder. See, I wouldn't put it that way. I
say we enforce all the laws. The question is----
Mrs. Adams. Well, we would probably disagree on that and I
am just wondering is there a process which you go through to
determine which ones you will actively enforce and which ones
you will inactively enforce?
Attorney General Holder. I think it is a question of
prioritizing. That is how I would say it.
Mrs. Adams. So you have a process to prioritize the laws
which you will enforce?
Attorney General Holder. No. Prioritize our enforcement
efforts. You try to find what is the potential greatest harms,
for instance, when it comes to violent crime, what is the most
impact when it comes to financial crime, given the limited
resources we have on those determinations that is how we decide
where we deploy our resources.
Mrs. Adams. Well, as someone who comes from a law
enforcement background, I know that I was tasked with enforcing
the laws that were on the books. If there was something wrong
with the law or we found there was an issue we went to our
legislative branch to deal with those, and I would ask that you
would do that, you would give us that opportunity because if
they are on the books, the American people expect for us to
enforce them.
Do you not agree with that?
Attorney General Holder. As I said, we enforce the laws. We
take into account the impact.
Mrs. Adams. But do you agree the American people expect us
to enforce the laws that we have on our books?
Attorney General Holder. Sure. And we do.
Mrs. Adams. The other thing is with the final end to the
chapter of bin Laden, and he is now deceased and I commend
everyone involved with his capture and ultimate demise, my
question to you is in last year, you reauthorized the
reinvestigation of CIA operatives in Gitmo even after they were
cleared once by career Department of Justice investigators.
Were any of these CIA operatives involved in getting the
detainee information that led to Osama bin Laden's death?
Attorney General Holder. The inquiries that I ordered, I
guess, was last year----
Mrs. Adams. Were any of them involved?
Attorney General Holder. The investigation that I ordered
last year----
Mrs. Adams. Were any of those involved in the ultimate
information that----
Attorney General Holder. I was trying to answer the
question.
Mrs. Adams. It is a yes or a no.
Attorney General Holder. Well, I can't answer that way. The
investigation I ordered last year was people who potentially
went beyond the OLC opinions----
Mrs. Adams. Who were previously cleared?
Attorney General Holder. Well, their information that is
being examined by a special prosecutor who had been appointed
by----
Mrs. Adams. But I am not asking exactly that. I was wanting
to know were they involved in getting the information that
ultimately caught bin Laden?
Attorney General Holder. I am not in a position to answer
that. I don't know. I am not allowed to answer the question.
Mrs. Adams. Okay.
Attorney General Holder. I am----
Mrs. Adams. Maybe in another venue you can answer that for
me.
Attorney General Holder. No. What I am saying is that I was
trying to answer the question. You are looking for yes or no. I
don't think I can give you one in that way.
Mrs. Adams. Okay. The task force that has been created, and
I am looking forward to seeing the outcome of that task force,
I know there is a lot of factors playing into what is going on
with the prices of gas and oil, and a lot of people in America
want answers, and I agree with them. They should be afforded
those answers.
One of the things I noted was that your central mission of
financial fraud enforcement task force is to enhance the
government's effectiveness and combat financial fraud. As part
of your investigations, will you also be probing into the
Department of the Interior for its efforts to restrict trade by
closing lands and holding our natural resources hostage?
Attorney General Holder. I am not sure that I am familiar
with those allegations.
Mrs. Adams. Well, we have had some closed, and permits
pulled back, and people are wanting to know and have a right to
know the answers to those questions, why? And if that plays
into the cost, the American people would like to know if it
does.
Also, the value of the dollar. Is that playing into the
cost of our oil and gas? Those are questions that I would hope
that you will answer for the American people since you have
created this--just one other thing. I am curious. Does your
agency not have the authority to do this without this
Commission being created?
Attorney General Holder. Sure, we could. But in trying to
be an effective task force, you bring into the task force those
agencies that have particular expertise. And by combining that,
we make a task force that is better than one that we might be
able to create out of simple Justice Department personnel.
Mrs. Adams. You had already started an investigation prior
to the task force being created?
Attorney General Holder. I couldn't hear you.
Mrs. Adams. You had already started investigating prior to
the task force being created?
Attorney General Holder. No.
Mrs. Adams. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mrs. Adams.
The gentlewoman from California, Ms. Waters, is recognized.
Ms. Waters. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
And I thank the Attorney General for the time that he is
spending here today, and the fact that he waited for us to come
back from the vote. I wanted to come over here despite the fact
that I am Chairing a Subcommittee of the Financial Services
Committee because I want to talk about mergers. I have spent, I
spent an awful lot of time on the Comcast-NBC merger as you, a
lot of people know. And I am concerned. I am concerned about
consolidation.
But Mr. Holder, it appears across all industries that anti-
trust enforcement under the Administration, under this current
Administration does not appear to be much different from the
previous Administration's kind of rubber-stamped approvals of
multiple mergers and consolidations. The mergers of
Ticketmaster, Live Nation, Continental-United, Southwest-
AirTran, Comcast-NBC and Google-ITA have all been approved by
your anti-trust division. It appears that the anti-trust
division is chartering new territory and positioning itself as
more a regulator than a legal enforcement agency.
The consent decrees from the Comcast-NBC, Google-ITA and
other mergers attach conditions that temporarily require DOJ
monitoring enforcement actions if breached. In my estimation,
it takes more resources for DOJ to regulate through the
Judiciary than to simply block or audit divestiture when
appropriate.
Is regulating through consent decree in areas such as
competition over the Internet and tech industry really the most
effective, efficient and transparent way to create rules of the
road for merger reviews? It is kind of a dual question here. I
just want to understand where you are going over there with
these merger questions?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I think the anti-trust
division it is tough on enforcement where it finds violations
of the anti-trust laws. And I don't think those consent decrees
or those conditions that were placed on those mergers are
insignificant. The anti-trust division doesn't go into this
with a notion that we want to try to find a way in which we
make a merger occur. You look at the anti-trust laws, apply
them, and then make a decision as to whether or not a merger
can go through or there are ways in which a merger might be
constructed that it could. But we don't go into it with a
presumption or a mindset that we want to make mergers occur.
And I think that we have through the leadership of our
assistant attorney general, I think we have been appropriately
aggressive.
Ms. Waters. Have you denied any since you have been there?
Attorney General Holder. Let's see. I could probably get
back to you with that. I am not sure.
Ms. Waters. Well, let me just register this. I spent hours
upon hours working on the Comcast-NBC merger and raised
significant, we think, questions about that merger. We
understand how they operate now. We learned an awful lot about
some of the agencies and programs that came in to support them.
We learned about how they make contributions to nonprofit
organizations. We were not talking about whether or not you
contribute to churches and civil rights groups and all of that.
We were talking about whether or not your company, your
business, is diverse, whether or not it is reflected in your
management, we talked about whether or not the programming at
NBC, et cetera, opened up opportunities for independent
operators. We talked about some serious and significant issues.
We got outplayed because they were able to roll in a lot of
folks who had gotten contributions for their yearly conventions
and their churches and all that of that. And I am just
wondering whether or not those of who us who are concerned
about consolidations and mergers should just stop fighting
these things altogether and allow them to come in with the
conditions that you think play well and you all just adopt
those conditions and let these mergers could go through. I am
really concerned about it.
Attorney General Holder. Well, as I said, the anti-trust
division is taking its enforcement responsibilities seriously.
I think, again, as I said before, we are being appropriately
aggressive in handling these matters in a way that is
consistent with the law.
Ms. Waters. I am going to ask you something that is very
sensitive. At the time that we were fighting, at the time that
we were trying to fight to get people to pay attention to
Comcast and NBC and how huge this merger was, NBC, that is
owned by GE, CEO was being considered to head up the
President's business council. Are you aware of that?
Attorney General Holder. I was not aware of it at the time.
I am aware of it now.
Ms. Waters. Was that something that should be taken into
consideration as you made a decision about that merger?
Attorney General Holder. It should not have been and was
not taken into consideration.
Ms. Waters. It should not have been taken into
consideration?
Attorney General Holder. It was not.
Ms. Waters. Why not?
Attorney General Holder. That is not the consistent with
what the enforcement responsibilities are of the anti-trust
division.
Ms. Waters. At the time that you were considering the
merger, the key player was GE that owned NBC, and it appears
that there was a relationship here with the Administration and
with GE that would cloud their objectivity about that merger.
You don't think that is worth considering? Or you don't think
that is in your mandate to consider?
Attorney General Holder. No, we certainly shouldn't
consider it, did not consider it. You have to understand that
the Justice Department acts when it comes to its enforcement
responsibilities independent of anything that the White House
might be doing with regard to----
Ms. Waters. Oh, the appointees on the FCC acts independent
of the White House also? The DOJ and the FCC have nothing to do
with each other when they are considering these mergers?
Attorney General Holder. I am talking about the Justice
Department and its responsibilities when it comes to the
enforcement of the laws that are our responsibility, we act
independently of other executive branch agencies----
Ms. Waters. Including the FCC, you are not interacting with
the FCC?
Attorney General Holder. I was going to say there are
instances where we will interact with other agencies if they
have a particular expertise or if there is a reason for us to
interact with them when it comes to a particular statute, but
when it comes to our enforcement responsibilities and
determinations as to whether or not the anti-trust laws were
violated and if those were the responsibility of the Justice
Department, we act in an independent manner.
Ms. Waters. We are not talking about whether or not the
anti-trust laws were violated past tense. We are talking about
consideration of the request or the attempts to get the merger,
and looking at all aspects of whether or not this merger is in
the best interests of the citizens of this country, the people
of this country, that is what I am talking about.
Do you, in looking at that merger interact with the FCC who
have appointees by the President and what is going on in that
overall discussion?
Attorney General Holder. Let's cut to the quick here. The
Justice Department's determinations in that case or any other
case is not affected by relationships that exist between the
White House and the head of GE or anything like that. That
didn't come into play in the determination that the Justice
Department made in that case. That is the bottom line.
Ms. Waters. And should not come into play.
Attorney General Holder. And that is the bottom line.
Mr. Smith. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Waters. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Smith. The gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino, is
recognized for his questions.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. General, welcome. I
want to thank you and your staff for waiting for us. I know how
busy you are. I was U.S. attorney from 2002 to 2008 and I was
very busy. I multiply that by a thousand for you and your
staff, and I know how you multitask. So with that said, sir, I
have to put in a plug for my middle district of Pennsylvania
staff who I miss dearly and they made me look good.
Attorney General Holder. Well, don't take this off Mr.
Marino's time, but I tried my second and third cases in
Scranton. I am an admirer of Judge Nealon, and he is a great
judge and was very kind to a young lawyer when I was up there
in the 1970's.
Mr. Marino. I know what you mean. I tried several cases
there.
Let's just switch gears here for a moment and let's talk
about the Federal Bureau of Prisons. We know over the years, we
have had officers who have been murdered, killed by inmates.
And no one knows better than I do the seriousness of when we
talk about having officers carry guns and just visiting a
Federal prison last week I sat down with the inmates and had a
chance to talk with them a little bit about how things are
operating.
And you know some of those inmates stood up and were
concerned about the safety of some of the guards believe it or
not. I had to take what they were saying as the truth. But also
the guards and I discussed the fact that the guards should not
be carrying guns for obvious reasons at least between us. But,
do you see any harm in the officers carrying mace, carrying a
spray of some type? There is a situation where a guard was
killed, he was stabbed several times by two inmates, got away
from them down into another landing, they came down and
finished him off. And I have to think that perhaps just the
fact that having some mace to fight them off for a few seconds
until help got there, it may have saved his life. So I would
ask you to please consider that.
Attorney General Holder. Yeah.
Mr. Marino. And let me know what the downside is to that if
you would because we couldn't come up with any other than the
fact that an inmate could grab that but still there would be
time to handle that situation. So if you would please.
Attorney General Holder. I am not an expert in that field,
but I am more than glad to run your suggestion by the folks at
BOP and we will get back to you on what their response is.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Now I want to switch gears here to
Countrywide Financial, particularly Angelo Mozilo. He was the
former chair and CEO of Countrywide Financial. And the SEC
filed charges against him and others on June 4, 2009, alleging
that they failed to disclose to investors the significant
credit risk that Countrywide was taking on as a result of its
efforts to build and maintain market shares.
The SEC's complaint further alleged that Mozilo engaged in
insider trading while he was aware of material nonpublic
information concerning Countrywide's increasing credit risk and
the risk regarding the poor expected performance of Countrywide
originated loans.
This gentleman received or made over, from 2001 to 2006 470
million in salaries and stock options and things of that
nature. The Federal prosecutor in Los Angeles dropped these
criminal investigations on this man in February 2011. He was
assessed civil penalties to the tune of almost $68 million and
I don't know all the facts, haven't read any indictments or
anything or potential investigator reports, only what I read in
the newspaper and catch from other individuals.
But I understand this person is still enjoying his yacht
out in the Mediterranean and based on the limited material that
I read, I think there is a question there, I think there is a
serious question that at least could have been brought before a
grand jury to determine whether to indict. I can see why he
probably wanted to hand over $68 million if he made 470 and not
spending any jail time on that.
If you are familiar with that, could you elaborate on it a
little bit and if not, could you have someone look into that,
please?
Attorney General Holder. Well, I am not sure there is an
awful lot of information we would be able to share. I am not
intimately familiar with the case. In any case, I am not at all
certain we would be in a position to share information about a
closed matter, as you will remember from your DOJ days, that is
not something that is typically done.
What we try to do obviously is to look at these matters, be
aggressive, we have good lawyers again as you know, around the
country who look at these matters and try to make cases. And
that is something that I hope I conveyed today, that these
matters are examined by prosecutors who come to the Justice
Department to try these matters, to investigate these matters
and take these matters to court and then to hold people
responsible.
If determinations are made not to proceed, it is not for
lack of trying. It is because they have made a determination
that they can't.
Mr. Marino. You made it very clear today. I applaud you for
those efforts. My office was involved in prosecuting a case
similar to this. And I never would question a U.S. attorney as
to why they did or didn't. I am sure there are reasons. But
this is the kind of situation where my constituents say, how
can someone this wealthy get away with that, and you know how
they are couching it in terms of wealth and get away with it. I
know that is not the case with the Justice Department. Thank
you so much for being here today, and I yield my time.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Marino.
Mr. Attorney General, I would like to ask you a few
questions just to follow up on some subjects that were raised
earlier, and my guess is that there are easy answers.
Does the Administration still favor having background
checks conducted by those who purchase firearms at gun shows?
We were told by your earlier answer whether the Administration
had changed its earlier position or not, but do you still favor
having those background checks conducted?
Attorney General Holder. I will say that I think that
having a system where people who are exercising their Second
Amendment rights in purchasing firearms, we would all be better
served by having background checks done. We are presently
engaged in a dialogue with a variety of members of the firearms
community. We will be having working group meetings at the
Justice Department, we talk to retailers, a whole variety of
people. We are in the process of trying to look at the state of
the law and come up with proposals about things that we might
consider to make the law better and to make the American people
being more safe.
Mr. Smith. But you do favor the background checks being
conducted?
Attorney General Holder. I would say that, as I said, I
think the American people are better served and are more safe
by having people exercising their rights in a way that when you
get to a licensed firearms dealer, you have an instant
background check done. I think that is a better way to do it.
Mr. Smith. I am talking about at a gun show, though, and
you do favor the background checks there?
Attorney General Holder. I think that having everybody who
purchases a gun----
Mr. Smith. Everybody including that. Okay. I understand.
You were asked a question earlier about price-fixing by oil
companies. Are you aware of any oil companies who have engaged
in that conduct? I know you appointed a task force that might
or might not discover that. But are you aware of any of that
type of activity today?
Attorney General Holder. I am not aware of any activity
like that today. I have to await the results of the
investigation. That is what the investigation is for.
Mr. Smith. I understand. In regard to my question about the
Utah immigration law, when I ask why you weren't filing suit
against Utah as you had Arizona, you said we are trying to work
something out with them. What were you referring to when you
said trying to work something out with Utah?
Attorney General Holder. It would depend on what Utah does.
Once we have raised the concerns that we have, the legislature
might decide to change the law. There might be enforcement
ways, there might be ways in which the law might be enforced
that are consistent with how we view our immigration
responsibilities.
Mr. Smith. It would seem it is unconstitutional, at least
it is suspect on its face because you have a law that professes
to give legal status to people in the country who are here
illegally. Why wouldn't, I don't know how you work that out,
and it seems to be a clear violation of current immigration law
so----
Attorney General Holder. It might be. The law as it exists
in 2011, it could be a violation that we would sue, by 2013, we
may be in a position that we are in a different place.
Mr. Smith. If they change the law, it would take something
like that. Okay, fair enough. Do you still favor closing Gitmo?
I wasn't sure by an earlier answer whether that was the case.
Attorney General Holder. I have indicated and the President
has indicated we both think the closure of Guantanamo would be
in our national interests.
Mr. Smith. Fair enough. Mr. General, thank you for being
here today. Thank you for answering all of our questions and we
will be in touch with you as well.
Attorney General Holder. Okay, thank you.
Mr. Smith. Before we adjourn, without objection, all
Members will have 5 legislative days to submit additional
written questions for the witness and to submit any additional
materials for the record. With that, we stand adjourned. Thank
you again.
Attorney General Holder. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 2:25 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record


