- CLOUD COMPUTING: AN OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGY AND THE ISSUES FACING AMERICAN INNOVATORS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

CLOUD COMPUTING: AN OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGY AND THE ISSUES FACING
AMERICAN INNOVATORS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,
COMPETITION, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 25, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-122

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
75-311                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO R. PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             JARED POLIS, Colorado
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Richard Hertling, Staff Director and Chief Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman

BEN QUAYLE, Arizona, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
Wisconsin                            JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   JUDY CHU, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          TED DEUTCH, Florida
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     JERROLD NADLER, New York
TED POE, Texas                       ZOE LOFGREN, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                MAXINE WATERS, California
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
SANDY ADAMS, Florida                   Georgia
MARK AMODEI, Nevada

Blaine Merritt, Chief Counsel

Stephanie Moore, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

JULY 25, 2012

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet...........     1

The Honorable Lamar Smith, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on the Judiciary.......     3

WITNESSES

Robert W. Holleyman, II, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Business Software Alliance (BSA)
Oral Testimony.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

Justin Freeman, Corporate Counsel, Rackspace US, Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17

Daniel Chenok, Executive Director, Center for the Business of
Government, International Business Machines Corporation (IBM)
Oral Testimony.................................................    27
Prepared Statement.............................................    28

Daniel Castro, Senior Analyst, Information Technology and
Innovation Foundation (ITIF)
Oral Testimony.................................................    33
Prepared Statement.............................................    35

LETTERS, STATEMENTS, ETC., SUBMITTED FOR THE HEARING

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a
Representative in Congress from the State of North Carolina,
and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet..................................     2

APPENDIX
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Letter from Robert W. Holleyman, II, President & Chief Executive
Officer, Business Software Alliance (BSA)......................    64

Supplemental Material submitted by Robert W. Holleyman, II,
President & Chief Executive Officer, Business Software Alliance
(BSA)..........................................................    67

Report by TechAmerica Foundation.................................   114

Prepared Statement of William Weber, General Counsel, Cbeyond,
Inc............................................................   149
OFFICIAL HEARING RECORD
Material Submitted for the Hearing Record but not Reprinted

111th Congress hearing entitled ECPA Reform and the Revolution in Cloud
Computing, September 23, 2010, Subcommittee on the Constitution,
Civil Rights, and Civil Liberties, Committee on the Judiciary,
submitted by the Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a Representative in
Congress from the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the
Internet. The hearing is not reprinted in this record but is
available at the Committee and can be accessed at:

http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/printers/111th/111-149--
58409.PDF.

CLOUD COMPUTING: AN OVERVIEW OF THE TECHNOLOGY AND THE ISSUES FACING
AMERICAN INNOVATORS

----------

WEDNESDAY, JULY 25, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:10 p.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Bob Goodlatte
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Smith, Marino, Watt,
Nadler, and Lofgren.
Staff present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Counsel; Olivia Lee,
Clerk; and (Minority) Stephanie Moore, Subcommittee Chief
Counsel.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good afternoon. The Subcommittee of
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet will come
to order. And I will recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today we are holding a hearing on cloud computing. Cloud
computing represents a fundamental shift in the delivery of
services, software, and data storage. The move toward cloud
services helps lower the barriers to entry and democratizes
access to technology for small- and medium-sized businesses.
Companies no longer need to purchase or build server farms
or have an IT team to deal with security issues and hardware
malfunctions. The cloud brings together reduced costs, device
and location independence, reliability, scalability, security,
and performance.
But with new technology come new issues that deal with
security, privacy, and market access. As more software becomes
cloud or Internet-based, cybersecurity and privacy issues
become intertwined.
To set the stage for today's hearing, we have witnesses
that can speak to the key service areas of cloud computing.
These include infrastructure, platform, and software.
Infrastructure as a service refers to storage where companies
offer dedicated or share servers to customers to store their
information. Platform as a service means that a company is
delivering an operating system that allows others to build new
apps on top of their system. The third flavor of cloud refers
to software as a service. Here the software is installed in the
cloud, eliminating the need for physical copies of software.
Updates occur seamlessly, and customers access the software
through the Internet.
But apart from the overall technology, there are issues
that companies in this industry are concerned about, and there
are issues that our customers are concerned about. In the
market access arena, cloud companies need to be able to operate
globally, and restrictions placed on cloud providers in
particular countries can effectively limit market access and
prevent services from being delivered to and adopted by
consumers.
There are also issues dealing with international
operability. As cloud computing services take hold, it is
important for there to be clear rules of the road when it comes
to industry standards and international rules. Cloud companies
and customers also have a strong interest in ensuring that the
privacy and security of the data stored and used on their
systems is secure.
For consumers, it means they want to know how their
personal information is being used and protected. For
companies, the concern is on security, ensuring that company
trade secrets and business information is adequately protected
and easily accessible in the cloud.
I look forward to hearing from all of our witnesses on
these and other issues that they are seeing, and also engage in
a discussion on the issues that cloud computing faces going
forward. We need to ensure that as this new American technology
sector grows, it is able to compete on a level playing field
abroad and to promote U.S. innovation technology and jobs.
And with that, it is my pleasure to recognize the Ranking
Member, the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I think the Chairman
has sufficiently outlined the range of issues that are, I
think, important to this hearing. It is an important hearing
about things in the cloud, which some people say that is where
I always am. So I want to figure out what is going on up there.
I think I will just submit my statement for the record. I
will have some questions about how we can incentivize
competition in the cloud. But except for that, I think the
Chairman has outlined the issues. So I will submit my statement
for the record.
I know we have got a very short time window that we are
operating in, and I think hearing the witnesses is a lot more
important than hearing me. So I will yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman, and without
objection, his entire statement will be made a part of the
record.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Watt follows:]

Prepared Statement of the Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a Representative in
Congress from the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet

Thank you, Mr. Goodlatte.
I will be brief. This hearing promises to cover a full range of
issues involved with cloud computing. For many consumers, migration to
the cloud has been driven by fast broadband connections, low-cost
mobile devices and a mobile population that expects access to data and
applications anywhere and anytime. This generation has become
accustomed to the luxury of never having to delete an e-mail or
document because of the ``unlimited'' and safe storage capabilities
cloud computing affords. Organizations, including start-ups, are also
embracing cloud computing because of the flexibility and agility it
provides. A business, for example, can scale up or down its information
technology ``IT'' usage according to demand with no long term
commitments and no high imbedded costs.
These extraordinary benefits to companies and individuals alike
also come with increased concerns about reliability, security and
privacy. The power outages earlier this month at Amazon's Web Services
datacenter in North Virginia due to fierce thunderstorms throughout the
Mid-Atlantic region of the U.S. raise lingering concerns about the
reliability of cloud services. Two weeks later, the District's Metro
subway system experienced a mysterious software failure that has been
widely subject to speculation that its data center was hacked. As the
migration to the cloud continues, companies must take care to ensure
the security of their systems on several levels.
There are multiple layers of privacy concerns as well. Although I
am sympathetic to the barriers companies are facing internationally due
to other countries' perceptions of our privacy laws, I am more
concerned with the consumer's right to privacy within the cloud. While
I continue to believe that consumer privacy is paramount, the cloud
offers new and innovative ways for the technologically savvy criminal
to exploit the cloud for nefarious purposes. The ``Backpage''
prostitution scandal with Craigslist is just one example. The cloud
must develop with caution to ensure that illegality does not flourish
within the cloud, and Congress should update the Electronic
Communications Protection Act (ECPA) to provide clear guidance on when
and how law enforcement is entitled to access otherwise private data
and communications.
Finally, one area that I do not think has been given enough
attention is competition in the cloud computing industry. Although news
accounts suggest that competition is currently robust, there are
concerns that it may be changing. I am interested in hearing more in
this area--how we ensure continued competition and lower costs to
businesses and consumers.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
__________

Mr. Goodlatte. And it is now my pleasure to recognize the
Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, the gentleman from Texas,
Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to point
out to those who are present that I believe this is the first
time this Subcommittee or any Committee has had a hearing on
this particular subject. And I think that, Mr. Chairman, that
is to your credit. This is an important subject and an
important area of tech that is going to do nothing but increase
in the future.
I have a short opening statement, and then we will get on
to the panelists.
America's economic success has been built on innovation.
Cloud computing can transform everything from business
operations, data storage, and analysis to the delivery of
software and services to businesses and consumers alike. The
cloud industry is growing rapidly. Wall Street Journal reported
that technology cloud services worldwide had $16 billion in
revenue in 2009, and cloud service revenue is expected to
double this year and hit $73 billion by 2015.
Because cloud providers can offer more robust data services
at a lower cost than would be possible for a company to
replicate for itself, the move to the cloud will help companies
reduce information technology costs and add to their technical
capabilities.
But as these new technologies and products develop, it is
clear that certain foreign governments have taken steps to
disadvantage American cloud companies by imposing barriers to
market access. Some of the barriers include restrictive
regulations or policies that mandate the use of certain
technologies or require a cloud service to be placed in country
as a condition of doing business.
Cloud computing relies on the seamless flow of data across
borders and international interoperability. Unfortunately, some
countries have adopted rules that limit the specific types of
data that can leave their borders, and have put in place
restrictive regulatory frameworks.
Some countries also have spread deliberate misinformation
about U.S. laws, like the PATRIOT Act, saying that it
negatively affects the security and privacy protections that
U.S. cloud providers offer compared to European providers.
These actions hurt the competitiveness of American companies
and cost Americans jobs.
Today's witness panel represents a range of cloud services,
and I am pleased that Rackspace is here today. They are a San
Antonio, Texas-based company that has operations throughout the
world. Founded in the late 1990's, Rackspace now has nearly
half of the Fortune 100 as clients. They provide cloud
computing services for computing, cloud files for storage, and
cloud applications for e-mail collaboration and file backups.
They also manage web-based IT systems for small-, medium-, and
large-sized business, and offers scalable services depending on
its customers' needs.
Though the technology of cloud computing is new, the issues
are not. As the U.S. government develops domestic policies and
our policies with our international trading partners, we need
to ensure that American innovators are treated fairly.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the Chairman.
Mr. Watt. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Goodlatte. The gentleman from North Carolina is
recognized.
Mr. Watt. I just wanted to make one minor correction to
what Chairman Smith said. There was a hearing on Electronic
Communications Protection Act reform and cloud computing. It
was done September 23, 2010, by Jerry Nadler's Subcommittee,
the Subcommittee on the Constitution of this Committee. And so
technically we have not had a hearing specifically on the
cloud, but this was an aspect of it, so I will submit the
record of that hearing with unanimous consent just so it will
all be part of the record.
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, the noting of the
previous hearing in the Constitution Subcommittee will be duly
noted.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
*The hearing submitted by Mr. Watt, entitled ECPA Reform and the
Revolution in Cloud Computing, is not reprinted in this hearing record
but is available at the Committee and can be accessed at http://
judiciary.house.gov/hearings/printers/111th/111-149--58409.PDF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Without objection, other Members' opening statements will
be made a part of the record.
Mr. Smith. I said this was the first time this Subcommittee
had had such a hearing on this----
Mr. Watt. Or any Committee. That is where you went awry.
But I acknowledge that technically you were probably----
Mr. Smith. Let us not waste any more time on that.
Mr. Goodlatte. We will be pleased to begin the first
hearing on cloud computing of this Subcommittee by hearing from
our witnesses. We have a very distinguished panel of witnesses
today.
Each of the witnesses' written statements will be entered
into the record in its entirety, so I ask that each witness
summarize his testimony in 5 minutes or less. To help you stay
within that time, there is a timing light on your table. When
the light switches from green to yellow, you will have 1 minute
to conclude your testimony. When the light turns red, it
signals that the witness' 5 minutes have expired.
And as is the custom of this Subcommittee, before I
introduce the witnesses, I would like them to stand and be
sworn.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much, and please be seated.
Our first witness is known to and a good friend of many
Members of the Judiciary Committee, Mr. Robert Holleyman. He
serves as the President and CEO of the Business Software
Alliance. He has headed BSA since 1990, expanding their
operations to more than 80 countries and launched 13 foreign
offices in addition to their D.C. headquarters.
Mr. Holleyman has been named one of the 50 most influential
people in the intellectual property world by the international
magazine Managing IP. He was also named by the Washington Post
as one of the key players in the U.S. government's
cybersecurity efforts for his work on behalf of industry on
national cybersecurity policy.
Before joining BSA, Mr. Holleyman served as counsel in the
U.S. Senate and as an attorney with a leading law firm in
Houston, Texas. He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree at
Trinity University in San Antonio, Texas, and his Juris Doctor
from Louisiana State University Law Center in Baton Rouge. He
also completed the Executive Management Program at the Stamford
Graduate School of Business.
And it is my pleasure to turn to the Chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary, Mr. Smith, to recognize and
introduce our second witness.
Mr. Smith. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to
introduce Mr. Justin Freeman, Corporate Counsel of Rackspace
Hosting based in San Antonio.
Rackspace, founded in 1998, has grown into a multinational
company with operations spanning the globe. They provide cloud
computing services and manage web-based IT systems for
businesses of all sizes.
Mr. Freeman is part of Rackspace's legal team and deals
primarily with the rapidly expanding field of cloud computing.
He represents Rackspace in technically complex enterprise
transaction agreements, leads product review and development
efforts, and directs public policy matters with a focus on
cloud computing security and privacy issues. He has an
extensive technical background, including specialization in
network security systems and patient care, critical healthcare
IT systems.
Mr. Freeman received his law degree from Southern Methodist
University School of Law and his undergraduate degree from the
University of Texas at Austin. We are pleased he is here today
to talk more about this important and growing sector of our
tech economy. Welcome, Mr. Freeman.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Freeman, welcome. And, Mr. Chenok,
welcome. Our fourth witness is--third witness is Mr. Dan
Chenok, Executive Director of the IBM Center for the Business
of Government. The center connects public management research
with practice, helping executives improve the effectiveness of
government with practical ideas, which has included several
center reports that address cloud computing.
Mr. Chenok also serves as the Chair of the Federal
Information Security and Advisory Board, which has explored
numerous issues where security and privacy intersect with cloud
computing.
Before joining IBM, he was a Senior Vice President for
Civilian Operations with Pragmatics. He also served in the
Office of Management and Budget, in the Executive Office of the
President, as the Branch Chief for Information Policy and
Technology. Mr. Chenok left the government in 2003.
He received his Master of Public Policy from Harvard
University John F. Kennedy School of Government and his B.A.
from Columbia University.
Our fourth witness is Mr. Daniel Castro, Senior Analyst at
the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, ITIF. Mr.
Castro specializes in IT policy, including issues relating to
data privacy, e-commerce, e-government, and information
security and accessibility. Before joining ITIF, Mr. Castro
worked as an IT analyst at the Government Accountability
Office, GAO, and was a Visiting Scientist at the Software
Engineering Institute in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Mr. Castro received his B.S. in Foreign Service from
Georgetown University and an M.S. in Information Security
Technology and Management from Carnegie Mellon University.
Welcome to you all, and we will begin with Mr. Holleyman.

TESTIMONY OF ROBERT W. HOLLEYMAN, II, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, BUSINESS SOFTWARE ALLIANCE (BSA)

Mr. Holleyman. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Watt,
Chairman Smith, thanks to companies like those who are in the
Business Software Alliance and sitting here at this table,
America is the top player in cloud computing. But we better
watch out. Other countries are doing everything they can to
knock us off the block.
They have seen the forecasts that we all have seen. Public
IT cloud revenue, which exceeded $28 billion last year, will
grow to more than $73 billion by 2015. But the big thing that
is happening is the innovation enabled by the cloud. A recent
study found that cloud-driven innovation across all sectors
will generate more than a trillion dollars in revenue and
millions of jobs in the years ahead.
Because the stakes are so high, and because of U.S. cloud
companies' early leadership, some countries are taking policy
steps to shut us out of their markets. The stakes of this are
enormous, and if we want to get things right and to continue
leading in the cloud, there is an urgent need for Congress and
the Administration to forge an open and competitive global
landscape.
I would like to cover three things today: first, the scope
of the problem, second, the mix of public policies that are
needed to address it, and, third, some specific things that
this Committee can do.
The problem before us is unfolding around the world. As was
indicated in my introduction, BSA has 13 foreign offices, and
we have done a lot of on-the-ground work and two ground-
breaking studies about the cloud. One is a global ``Cloud
Scorecard'' that looks at 80 percent of the global ICT market
and ranks the competitiveness and a host of factors that affect
the U.S. and other countries, and the ability of companies to
succeed in the cloud. And the second is ``Lockout,'' which is a
report about a new wave of IT barriers that are being erected
internationally.
Our research shows that governments in many countries are
doing things to carve the cloud up into country-sized pieces so
that local players can dominate their own backyards without
competition. For example, in the name of privacy and security,
we are seeing some countries require data to be hosted inside
their borders, even non-sensitive commercial information. You
would have to build a local data center to do business in some
of these countries, and that could put a prohibitive burden on
international cloud players.
Some countries are even adopting rules that would
explicitly prevent the transfer of personal information outside
their borders. Now these are bad signs for the global economy,
but especially for America since we are so heavily dependent on
selling products and services overseas.
It is critical for Congress and the Administration to show
the world a better mix of cloud policies. And we can do that by
getting three things right. First, we need to ensure that
privacy and security rules protect consumers while also
encouraging robust digital commerce. Second, we need to promote
a free trade agenda that ensures that data can flow across
borders. And third, we need to promote innovation in the cloud
the same way we promote it everywhere else. That means
protecting innovators' rights when they bring new products to
market, and it means stopping all forms of cybercrime and
theft.
This Committee has an important role to play in this issue.
For example, there is a myth that cloud computing puts an end
to software piracy. In reality, piracy is evolving. This
Committee can ensure that we have tools to vigorously enforce
laws against IP theft no matter where that technology or how
that technology is used. Secondly, this Committee can take a
lead role in reforming the Electronic Communications Privacy
Act, ECPA. In the cloud era, digital files should be subject to
the same laws and protections as paper files. And finally, we
need to dispel myths about the PATRIOT Act. Foreign governments
are scaring customers away from U.S. cloud services by
portraying our law as unusually invasive. The fact is every
government has authority to access data to protect national
security, and everyone needs to understand that.
We look forward to discussing these issues with you and to
working with the Committee. The future of the cloud computing
industry and American leadership depends on your work. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Holleyman follows:]

------------
See Appendix for the attachments submitted with this statement.

__________
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Freeman, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF JUSTIN FREEMAN, CORPORATE COUNSEL, RACKSPACE US,
INC.

Mr. Freeman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On behalf of both
myself and Rackspace, I would like to express my appreciation
for the time of this Committee and the opportunity to provide
some additional insight into the key elements of cloud
computing, and address some of the primary challenges of the
competitiveness of American cloud providers.
Congressman Smith, I appreciate your introduction of
Rackspace.
With our focus on fanatical support, which is a fierce
commitment to a customer-oriented set of core values, Rackspace
has grown rapidly and now serves more than 170,000 customers in
120 countries, including most global Fortune 100 companies.
Rackspace focuses on providing the cloud infrastructure and
support technologies that enable the modern economy to benefit
from the cost savings that cloud computing provides. Our latest
focus is open stack, which is an open source cloud platform
jointly developed with NASA. Open cloud technologies are the
forefront of the cloud technology revolution. By fostering
industry standards for cloud computing, which span multiple
providers, open technologies advance security and help
eliminate proprietary lock-in, which would be a requirement
that cloud applications be tied to a specific provider,
permitting cloud users to move their applications and data from
provider to provider as they see fit.
While the phrase ``the cloud'' encompasses a set of
technologies, services, and use cases, far too broad to go into
detail here, I want to provide you with a sense of the critical
elements of cloud computing. At its most basic, cloud computing
is simply the use of remote computing resources, relying on the
storage and processing capabilities of a remote system rather
than, say, your local laptop.
We have all been using the cloud in some fashion for quite
a while. Whenever we store e-mails with a web service like
Gmail or Hotmail, we are essentially ceding control of that
data to the cloud.
One of the most critical impacts of the cloud is of the
shift to using remote shared resources, permits businesses to
consume information technology in a utility or a pay-for-what-
you-use model. This cost-effective delivery method makes
information technology resources scalable, dynamic, and
flexible, in turn driving efficiency and innovation across all
sectors of the economy.
In order to continue promoting the resulting economic
growth, it is essential we establish a supportive legal and
regulatory environment, which is alignment with the critical
cloud technologies.
We see two major barriers to the ongoing competitiveness of
American cloud providers: market access issues, which were
substantially informed by privacy concerns, and the
exploitation of the U.S. patent system by patent trolls.
Concerns about privacy and security of data have become
heightened as businesses hand off their data to systems in the
cloud. And they are a major barrier to the competitiveness of
American cloud companies internationally. Concerns about data
privacy limits, the willingness of foreign companies to do
business with United States firms, and threatening to exclude
American companies from competing abroad.
The lack of international privacy standards is a growing
source of distrust amongst regulatory agencies seeking to
enforce their domestic laws, and businesses struggling to
ensure their compliance. There is a perception, even if
unfounded, that U.S. privacy protections are insufficient to
protect the data which is stored either on U.S. soil or with
U.S. companies. This concern results in a reluctance by foreign
companies to do business with U.S. cloud companies, and we
increasingly see regulatory authorities, especially in the EU
and European economic area, moving in the direction of denying
U.S. cloud providers access to the European market.
It is critical to the ongoing competitiveness of American
cloud companies that we take the lead and move toward to a
consistent international privacy and data transfer framework
while also providing clear interpretation of U.S. law which
impact the obligations of cloud companies at managing the data
of foreign citizens and businesses.
The second major threat to U.S. cloud providers is the
exploitation of the patent system by so-called patent trolls.
These are non-practicing entities which gather portfolios of
patents with the sole intent of using them to extract
settlements from companies unwilling to engage in expensive and
protractive litigation.
These patent trolls are not protecting inventors or
benefitting startups. To the contrary, a recent study
calculated that their predatory tactics have resulted in the
direct costs in excess of $29 billion to the industry, with
approximately 40 percent of those costs formed by small and
medium businesses.
Patent litigation costs routinely exceed $2 to $3 million
per suit, and patent trolls seek settlement after settlement in
order to artificially increase the value of a patent portfolio
without any relation to its actual market value. The result is
a cascading extortionist abuse of the patent system.
Cloud technologies are advancements to existing information
technologies and require a fair and balanced patent system in
order to remain innovative. Cloud and open technology standards
cannot survive in this environment. It is essential that we
protect the growing use of standardized cloud technologies, the
benefits they bring, and allow cloud companies to reinvest in
technologies, jobs, and innovation instead of revenue draining
litigation.
We at Rackspace share your commitment toward creating
successful legislation that enhances U.S. business
competitiveness, while ensuring the Internet remains a free and
open driver of innovation for our long-term future.
Thank you for your time. We look forward to working closely
with you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Freeman follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Freeman.
Mr. Chenok, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF DANIEL CHENOK, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, CENTER FOR THE
BUSINESS OF GOVERNMENT, INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES
CORPORATION (IBM)

Mr. Chenok. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, Chairman Smith, and the entire Subcommittee.
Mr. Goodlatte. You may want to turn your microphone on
there and pull it close.
Mr. Chenok. Will do. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Watt, Chairman Smith, and the Subcommittee for the
opportunity to speak today. And thank you for the introduction
earlier.
I am Dan Chenok, Executive Director of the IBM Center for
the Business of Government. The center helps government
executives improve the effectiveness of their agencies and
programs and has addressed cloud computing from a number of
perspectives over the past few years. My testimony today draws
on this and other experience with the growth of cloud
computing.
Moving the cloud brings numerous demonstrable and positive
outcomes, such as cost savings, shared resources, increased
program effectiveness, energy and environmental improvements,
and, as others have noted today, innovation.
I will focus today on three key issues that we see cloud
can best be leveraged now and in the future. First, how to
implement cloud efficiently, second, how best to address
security, and third, how to leverage the cloud's global model
effectively.
The key for success with cloud implementation is a strategy
to define how to increase efficiency, save costs, and improve
performance of programs in the cloud. A small investment in up
front planning can pay large dividends in measured outcomes
from any cloud migration because most entities integrate cloud
into their existing legacy environments. They must make choices
as to what technologies, processes, and data should migrate to
the cloud over what period of time and at what cost.
I would note that the Federal Government has already begun
to realize the benefits of cloud computing. Movement to the
cloud can fundamentally transfer how Federal agencies leverage
IT. And
efforts such as the OMB cloud strategy and GSA FedRAMP
initiatives are spurring progress. Our center has produced
papers
on cloud implementation available at our website,
www.businessof
government.org.
With respect to security, despite perceived concerns about
security risks, cloud can provide for an environment that is
superior for applying many critical security measures.
Centralizing data storage and governance in the cloud can
actually provide better security at a lower cost than is the
case with traditional computing environments.
Moreover, cloud can improve certain key security practices,
such as detection of threats, remediation to minimize those
threats, prediction of where threats may occur next, and
protection of data and devices.
Regarding the global model, the benefits of cloud computing
increase when providers can move computing and data power to
locations that are most cost-effective rapidly and with no loss
of service quality or security. Real time movement of computing
resources points out the need to understand, as others have
noted today, issues involved in cross-border data flows in the
cloud. Most issues in this space are best addressed via
contracts between parties who can designate jurisdiction and
establish clear provisions for ownership, privacy, and
security.
I would like to highlight several issues that impact the
cloud's global nature. These areas are the extent to which
government can access data across borders, international
privacy collaboration, and open standards.
The extent to which government can access data across
borders can be a subject of confusion among cloud providers and
users. However, as has been indicated today, many nations have
similar domestic data policies. A recent white paper from the
law firm Hogan Lovells found that each of the 10 countries
studied vests authority in the government to require a cloud
service provider to disclose customer data in certain
situations. And in most instances, this authority enables the
government to access data physically stored outside the
country's borders.
And as Chairman Smith indicated in his opening remarks,
this study also indicated that in a number of cases,
protections from government intrusion in the U.S. were actually
greater than in other countries.
Regardless of jurisdiction, individuals whose data resides
in the cloud will have greatest confidence if, to the extent
permissible under law, they do not lose protection solely based
on where their data is stored and processed.
Cloud computing would also benefit from an international
regime that promotes privacy and supports efficiency cross-
border data flows. While complete harmonization of rules is not
practical or desirable, countries may be able to recognize each
other's rules, including privacy safeguards.
Finally, the benefits of cloud can best be achieved by
reliance on open standards that promote data portability and
interoperability, which are critical for successful adoption
and delivery of cloud-based solutions. An open standards
approach would also help to address location-based mandates.
While certain practices by governments to locally-sourced cloud
computing may be understandable, governments could enhance the
cloud's efficiency and cost-effectiveness by avoiding local
mandates and leveraging and encouraging an open global model.
Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Watt, Chairman Smith,
the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity, and I welcome
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chenok follows:]

Prepared Statement of Daniel Chenok, Executive Director,
Center for The Business of Government, IBM

Good afternoon, and thank you Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, and the entire Subcommittee for the opportunity to speak with you
about cloud computing.
I am Dan Chenok, Executive Director of the Center for The Business
of Government at IBM. The Center connects public management research
with practice. Since 1998, we have helped public sector executives
improve the effectiveness of government with practical ideas and
original thinking. We sponsor independent research from the academic
and non-profit sectors, and we create opportunities for dialogue on a
broad range of public management topics. The Center has addressed cloud
computing from a number of perspectives over the past few years.
I also serve as Chair of the Information Security and Privacy
Advisory Board, which is the chartered under the Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA) to advise the government about
information security and privacy issues affecting civilian Federal
agencies, and has addressed security and privacy issues involved in
cloud computing.
My testimony today draws on this and other experience that I have
had with the growth of cloud computing, primarily with respect to how
government can best promote the efficient, secure, and cost-effective
use of this technology. After addressing context and benefits, I will
focus on three key issues that impact how cloud can best be leveraged,
now and in the future.

CONTEXT

Many descriptions of cloud computing are cited across government
and industry, including a formal definition from the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST). I would offer that the cloud
includes environments where physically distributed computing
resources--including infrastructure, applications, or databases--
connect in real time to help a company, consumer, or government agency
perform a transaction, service, or inquiry.
Cloud services can be provided over the public Internet, but can
also be done through connections over networks that run independently.
Government agencies often establish clouds independent of the open
Internet due to perceived risks of making data available over public
channels--but the government is moving in the direction of more use of
the open Internet for cloud as well.
Indeed, whether consumers, companies, and governments realize it,
they are already in the cloud all the time. Many popular email
services, including Gmail, Hotmail and Yahoo, function over the
distributed networks that constitute the cloud, and provide access to
millions of people. Businesses and governments are increasingly using
the cloud for email as well.

BENEFITS OF THE CLOUD

Cloud computing is much in the news and lexicon these days.
Questions about the cloud include: does cloud help end users, will
cloud help businesses and federal agencies carry out their mission, and
will cloud reduce costs? The answer to all of these questions is
``yes.''
Moving to the cloud brings numerous demonstrable benefits:

Cost Saving. Cloud computing allows customers to pay for
just the computer resources that they use. They can avoid both a large
initial upfront expenditure in hardware and software, and ongoing
operating and maintenance expenses
for their own IT. Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and
reported
in a transparent way for both the provider and consumer of the cloud
service. Indeed, a Brookings Institution study found that ``. . .
agencies generally saw between 25 and 50 percent savings in moving to
the cloud;'' this same report refers to other studies which claim
savings from 39% to 99%. (http://www.brookings.edu/ /media/research/
files/papers/2010/4/07%20cloud%20
computing%20west/0407_cloud_computing_west)

Increased Effectiveness. Network outages are an ongoing
challenge for IT departments. Cloud computing can offer a higher level
of service and reliability, reduce the harm that can come from network
outages, and provide for a more immediate response to emergency
situations by enabling real-time transfer of IT services to areas that
are not affected by emergency.

Optimized Computing Usage. IT service providers see cloud
computing not only as a means to better serve their customers, but also
to optimize data center usage. In many centers, only a small fraction
of computing capacity is used at any time; the remaining capacity sits
idle. Cloud enables flexible scaling across customers based on demand,
which increases capacity and cost-effectiveness.

Energy and Environmental Improvements. While most
computers and servers are certified as energy efficient, cloud takes
green computing one step further--decreasing electricity use, slashing
carbon emissions, and reducing IT costs through cost-effective use of
computer and network infrastructure. Cloud also opens avenues for
telecommuting (e.g., through internet-based email), which brings added
environmental benefits.

Innovation and Transformation. Cloud computing can help
to spur innovation and transform operations. In the next several years,
andthe use of the cloud to pave the way for for business model
innovation is likely to increase significantly--innovation that
includes entering new lines of business, reshaping an existing
industry, or transitioning into a new business role.

In addition, and as has been noted by both the current and previous
Federal Chief Information Officers at the Office of Management and
Budget (OMB), Federal computer users have lagged behind industry in IT
productivity gains from IT, with outdated applications and burdensome
rules governing acquisition and management of IT services. Movement to
the cloud can fundamentally transform how federal agencies leverage IT,
and to make federal workers far more effective in their use of IT.
The Federal government has, of course, already begun to realize the
benefits of cloud computing. Examples include:

the development and implementation of governmentwide and
specific cloud strategies from OMB and agencies,

the recent introduction of the General Services Agency
(GSA) Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)
program that fosters interoperability in cloud services across
agencies. Indeed, other governments are studying FedRAMP's
implementation closely to possibly emulate the model; and

work by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) to clarify and guidance on the cloud.

KEY ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION

Today, I would like discuss three main challenges for government in
order to realize the full benefits of the cloud:

how to implement cloud efficiently,

how best to address security in the cloud, and

how to leverage the cloud's global model effectively.

Implementation
Key for success in any cloud implementation is a strategy to define
how to increase efficiency, save costs, and improve performance of
programs in the cloud. A small investment in upfront planning can pay
large dividends in measured outcomes from any cloud migration. This is
especially important because most entities do not build brand new
computing environments where all activities operate in the cloud.
Rather, they integrate cloud-based infrastructure, applications, and
services into existing legacy environments, and must make choices as to
what technologies, processes, and data should migrate to the cloud,
over what period of time, and at what cost. To guide those choices,
organizations need a sound up-front strategy that considers investments
relative to resource availability and mission objectives.
The IBM Center for the Business of Government has produced a number
of papers that address cloud implementation, especially in the Public
Sector. For example:

In a 2009 report for the Center, ``Moving to the Cloud:
An Introduction to Cloud Computing in Government,'' David Wyld provides
non-technical executives with a roadmap to understand key questions to
ask as their organizations move to the cloud. He frames key challenges
facing government leaders in the space, including scalability,
security, open standards, procurement, and legal issues.

In 2010, author Costas Panagopoulos wrote in our semi-
annual journal, The Business of Government, about the lessons learned
in cloud implementation by the Census Bureau (``Counting on the Cloud:
Early Reflections on the Adoption of Cloud Computing by the U.S. Census
Bureau''). He outlines key lessons that include the need to start early
in cloud design, to partner with other adopters, and to correct
problems as soon as they arise.

Many perspectives on how best to implement cloud appear
on our blog site, concentrated primarily in ``Strategies to Cut Costs
and Improve Performance.'' (http://www.businessofgovernment.org/blogs/
cut-costs-and-improve-performance)

In addition, much research and experience demonstrates that to
maximize the cloud's benefits, organizations must move aggressively to
adopt more standardized offerings across organizations. That is, they
must change current technology, procurement, and business processes to
conform to best commercial practice, rather than modifying the cloud to
fit existing organizational processes. Standardized offerings provide
economies of scale and allow providers to automate processes that
result in lower costs for users.
In addition, while savings can be achieved by migrating current
applications, not all existing applications can run in a cloud
efficiently. Organizations can collect data on how applications are
being used to make informed decisions about which applications to
migrate to the cloud, and in what order. This data can also help to
sunset unneeded applications and optimize IT more efficiently and
effectively.
Finally, cloud implementation can enable innovation. Developers who
come together over cloud-based platforms that rely on open standards
can share ideas and test approaches in ways that take advantage of the
wisdom of many, rather than the few who work on a custom application.

Security
Relinquishing direct control of the IT infrastructure by adopting
the cloud has raised perceived concerns about security risks. Cloud
computing, however, can provide for an environment that is inherently
superior for applying many critical security measures. By centralizing
data storage and governance, clouds can actually provide better
security at a lower cost than can traditional computing environments.
Cloud environments can also provide differentiated levels of security,
reflecting the fact that some data requires a great deal of protection
while other data requires far less. Cloud providers can work with their
customers to deliver security efficiently and effectively based on
different levels of risk--security services can be built into the cloud
up front to optimize protection at a given risk level.
Moreover, by facilitating uniform management practices across a
distributed computing environment, cloud can improve certain key
security practices, such as:

Detection--the cloud creates the ability to link together
millions of security nodes on the net. By working together, these nodes
can better detect new threats how to implement cloud efficiently.

Remediation--Quick remediation is vital for cyber
security--the less time the malware is present, the better the
protection. The cloud allows implementation much more rapidly than the
older model of having to load the solution onto multiple machines.

Prediction--Increasingly, cyber security focuses on
limiting the ability of bad actors to act in the first place. The cloud
helps security teams to identify machines that create and disseminate
malware, and to quickly isolate those machines--blocking their ability
to infect customer systems.

Data and Device Protection--A significant security
threat, and one that has impacted the Federal government, is breach of
data, especially from lost or stolen laptops or mobile devices. Cloud
provides for centrally stored data with continuous and automated
network analysis and protection, so that if a device is lost, the data
and applications are not lost with it (unless the user has been allowed
to load them separately onto the device).

As noted earlier, I also Chair the Federal Information Security and
Privacy Advisory Board (ISPAB). Building off a Board-hosted forum on
best practices in this space several years ago, the ISPAB has
highlighted numerous ways that the Federal government can best
addresses security in the cloud, especially with regard to the
operation of the FedRAMP program and the monitoring of traffic that
flows in and out of agencies over cloud-based applications (see more at
http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/ispab).

Global Model
The cloud can be either localized or global in nature. The benefits
of cloud computing increase, however, when providers can move computing
and data power to locations that are most cost-effective, rapidly and
with no loss of service quality or security. For example, consider the
recent storm and power outages in Washington, DC--in a situation like
this, using a cloud that allows the online relocation of computing
resources would provide continuity of service far more quickly and
cheaply than a platform restricted to local computing locations.
Real-time movement of computing resources points out the need to
understand issues involved in cross-border data flows in the cloud. Of
course, data has moved across borders for decades--airlines,
pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, and technology companies are among
those with long history here. The cloud has amplified attention to
cross-border data flow issues such data sovereignty and jurisdictional
questions. Most of these issues are best addressed via contracts
between solution providers and customers; contracts can designate
jurisdiction and establish clear provisions for ownership, privacy,
security, and consumer protection.
I would like to highlight some recent findings and observations in
three areas that affect the cloud's global nature and American
competitiveness in this space--the extent that government can access
data across borders, international privacy collaboration, and open
standards.

Government Access to Data
The extent to which governments can access data across borders is a
subject of confusion among cloud providers and users. However, many
nations have similar domestic data policies. A recent HoganLovells
White Paper, ``A Global Reality: Governmental Access to Data in the
Cloud,'' reveals that U.S. law provides some greater privacy
protections:

``In jurisdictions outside the United States, there is the real
potential of data relating to a person, but not technically
``personal data,'' stored in the Cloud being disclosed to
governmental authorities voluntarily, without legal process and
protections. In other words, governmental authorities can use
their ``influence'' with Cloud service providers--who, it can
be assumed, will be incentivized to cooperate since it is a
governmental authority asking--to hand over information outside
of any legal framework. United States law specifically protects
such data from access by the government outside of legal
process.''

Furthermore, the paper notes that ``it is not possible to isolate
data in the Cloud from governmental access based on the physical
location of the Cloud service provider or its facilities. Governmental
access to data in the Cloud is ubiquitous, and extends across
borders.'' As the paper concludes, a detailed analysis of ten countries
revealed that:

``every single country that we examined vests authority in the
government to require a Cloud service provider to disclose
customer data in certain situations, and in most instances this
authority enables the government to access data physically
stored outside the country's borders, provided there is some
jurisdictional hook, such as the presence of a business within
the country's borders. Even without that ``hook,'' MLATs allow
access to data across borders.'' [Governments cooperate with
each other through ``mutual legal assistance treaties''
(MLATs)]

Regardless of jurisdiction, individuals whose data resides in the
cloud will have greatest confidence if, to the extent permissible under
law, they do not lose protection solely based on where their data is
stored and processed.

International Privacy Collaboration
With the understanding that many nations have similar laws and that
where a company stores its data should not reduce protections,
consumers, enterprises, and governments can look at cloud providers'
experience with providing security and privacy protections in order to
make informed decisions about how to use applications in the cloud.
In addition, cloud computing would benefit from an international
regime that promotes privacy while supporting the efficient flow of
data across borders. While it is neither practical nor desirable to
seek the complete harmonization of rules, countries may be able to
recognize each other's rules (including privacy safeguards) to the
greatest extent possible, and to honor those rules through means such
as contracts and service level agreements (SLAs). This approach to
interoperability would not require the same laws in each jurisdiction,
but it would allow data and computing transfers to take place over the
cloud based on shared understanding of how law and policy should apply.
Initiatives such as the US-EU safe harbor, the use of binding
corporate rules, and the cross-border privacy initiative in APEC serve
as building blocks for such an interoperable international privacy
regime. The benefits of such a regime would extend beyond cloud
computing; they would support any entity that builds data centers in
different jurisdictions. But because cloud computing relies heavily on
the efficiencies gained from real-time data flows across different
countries, the adoption of an interoperable privacy regime would
facilitate cost-effective adoption.

Open Standards
The benefits of cloud can best be achieved by reliance on open
standards that promote data portability and interoperability, which are
critical for successful adoption and delivery of cloud-based solutions.
Open standards enable users to reap value from a diversity of cloud
providers, and to move data and applications based on a choice of
available applications without friction. Consider the analogy to
Internet-based computing since the 1990s: the Internet has seen
phenomenal growth and spurred so much innovation because its networks
dependent largely on open standards--no one company or handful of
companies has a dominant position and can single-handedly determine its
architecture and development.
An open standards approach would particularly help to address the
issue of location-based mandates. Over a dozen countries have recently
drafted or are considering laws that would mandate in-country location
of cloud data servers and storage facilities. The Business Roundtable
recently released a report, ``The Growing Threat of Local Data Server
Requirements'' (http://businessroundtable.org/uploads/studies-reports/
downloads/Global_IT_Policy_Paper_final.pdf), which provides details on
this issue. While certain practices by governments to locally source
cloud computing are understandable--for example, for a country's
national security information--governments could enhance the cloud's
efficiency and cost benefits by avoiding location mandates, and
leveraging and encouraging an open, global model.

CONCLUSION

Cloud computing has great promise to enable consumers, businesses,
and governments to reduce IT costs and improve IT performance. Key
considerations in leveraging the benefits of the cloud include
implementation, security, and leveraging the efficiencies of the global
model. Greater education, investment and appropriate incentives can
allow government and businesses to help all stakeholders use the cloud
most effectively.
Chairman Goodlatte and Ranking Member Watt, thank you for the
opportunity to speak with the Subcommittee. I welcome the chance to
answer any questions that you may have.
__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chenok.
Mr. Castro, we are pleased to have your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF DANIEL CASTRO, SENIOR ANALYST, INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION FOUNDATION (ITIF)

Mr. Castro. Thank you. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, Chairman Smith, and Members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity----
Mr. Goodlatte. Could you put that microphone----
Mr. Castro. There we go. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, Chairman Smith, and Members of the Subcommittee, I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss cloud computing with you
today.
I would like to focus my remarks on two principles that
policymakers should keep in mind with regards to cloud
computing. The first principle is cloud neutrality. Cloud
computing is an important trend for how organizations use
information technology, but the technology itself is not so
different from other forms of computing that there is a need to
create cloud specific regulations. That does not mean there are
not important policy issues that affect cloud computing. For
example, one important issue is addressing the complex
jurisdictional questions that arise from having data subjects,
data owners, and service providers under different legal
jurisdictions and facing conflicting regulations.
Meaningfully addressing these issues may eventually require
countries to develop agreements on questions of jurisdiction or
standardize some data practices, or, alternatively, advances in
technology that allow data policies to actually bundle with
data, and ensure that these policies are enforced may help
resolve some of these questions.
While all these issues are important for many cloud
computing companies, they are not necessarily unique to the
technology. However, creating cloud neutral policies will
require some change to ensure that laws and regulations do not
favor or disfavor cloud computing.
One important step Congress can take in this direction is
to update the laws that govern the electronic surveillance of
data. The Electronic Communications Privacy Act was enacted in
1986, and has not kept pace with the advancement of technology
and the growth of cloud computing. As a result, there are
different levels of protection afforded to the privacy of an
individual's data depending on where and for how long the data
has been stored. Consensus is forming around the idea that
reform is needed in this area to protect Fourth Amendment
rights.
The second important principle for cloud computing is for
policymakers to address anti-competitive foreign practices that
challenge the dominance of cloud computing service providers in
the United States. As a leading provider of cloud computing,
U.S. companies stand to benefit tremendously from the large
expected growth in cloud computing worldwide. Not surprisingly,
other countries are aggressively challenging U.S. leadership in
this market.
While fair competition is legitimate, some countries are
using unfair policies to intentionally disadvantage foreign
competitors and grow their domestic cloud computing industry.
The rise of cloud mercantilism is an emerging threat to the
global trade and information technology.
Some countries are using data security and data privacy
regulations to create geographic restrictions on where cloud
computing service providers can store and process data. Other
countries have policies that explicitly require cloud computing
service providers to operate data centers domestically. These
requirements have the effect of making cloud computing less
efficient since decisions about where to locate data centers or
how to operate them must be made on political mandates rather
than technical or economic factors.
Localization requirements also serve as a form of
protectionism for domestic cloud computing providers since it
may not be economically viable for a foreign competitor to
build a domestic data center. Examples of this type of behavior
can be found in many countries, for example, Greece, Vietnam,
and Brunei have all passed laws which require data generated
within the country to be stored on servers within those
countries. Both the Norwegian and the Danish protection
authorities have issued rulings to prevent the use of certain
cloud computing services when those servers were not located
domestically. The government in Kazakhstan issued an order to
require that all dot.kz domain names operate on servers located
within the country. China, Russia, Venezuela, and Nigeria have
all passed localization requirements ostensibly to protect
national security and payment processing. And similar types of
laws are pending in other countries, including Indonesia,
Malaysia, and Ukraine.
Strong U.S. leadership is necessary to combat the unfair
trade practices that other nations are using to block foreign
competitors in the rapidly-growing cloud computing industry.
First, the U.S. government should clearly and definitively
state its opposition to local data center requirements and
highlight instances of non-compliance by foreign governments.
For example, this type of behavior could be highlighted by the
USTR in a Special 301 report. Second, the U.S. government
should affirm its intention to refrain from imposing its own
local data center requirements. These policies may be tempting,
but they diminish the capacity of the United States to hold
other countries accountable for similar forms of protectionism.
The long-term goals of the U.S. government should be to
work toward eliminating geographic restrictions on cross-border
flows of data. U.S.-based cloud computing service providers
have the most to lose if these type of areas become widespread.
After all, the domestic market for cloud services is much
smaller than the global market.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Castro follows:]

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. The Chair is going to diverge from regular
order because the gentleman from North Carolina has some other
obligations, and we want to recognize him first to ask his
question. So we will turn now to him.
Mr. Watt. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thank you for
accommodating my schedule. Unfortunately, I have got something
that has started, and I need to be at immediately. But I did
not want to miss the testimony or miss the opportunity to ask
questions.
All of the testimony was very interesting and raises some
very, very interesting issues. It seems to be unanimity on the
question of cloud neutrality. I take it everybody is in
agreement on that.
That means, I take it, that the same rules that apply to
things outside the cloud should apply to things inside the
cloud. Would that be a fair definition of cloud neutrality?
Mr. Castro. Yes, I do think that is a fair definition.
Mr. Watt. Okay. So but then you raise some interesting
questions which, in essence, brings us back to a lot of the
same issues that we have been dealing with outside the cloud--
protection of personal security, personal information for
consumers, an issue outside the cloud, protection against
trolls suing each other, although the owners of patents are
suing each other regularly, which is a big problem, protection
against piracy, which Mr. Holleyman raised in the context of
the cloud, I presume to protect programs and what have you. But
that is not unique to programs. Piracy is a problem.
And I do not want this to devolve into another question of
how we protect ourselves against piracy, but it does raise the
question of whether in light of the failure of our Committee to
be able to deal with that effectively and the withdrawal of the
proposal that was on the table, whether any affirmative steps
are being made by the industry to address piracy either in the
cloud or outside the cloud. If you are going to have a neutral
cloud neutrality and you have got problems outside the cloud,
then we have got to commit ourselves to working on the problems
outside the cloud so that when we adopt the principle of cloud
neutrality, those same principles will protect us inside the
cloud.
So is anybody making any progress in the sector? You all
obviously are all involved in this SOPA thing on one side or
the other. We are not here to recreate that debate today. I
just want to see whether you all think any progress is being
made because if we are going to transport that issue to the
cloud, we are going to have cloud neutrality, I think we got to
deal with it. So, Mr. Holleyman?
Mr. Holleyman. Mr. Watt, thank you for the observation and
question. The point which I want to make clearly about piracy
in the cloud is there was a common myth, and candidly, I
probably believed this myth as recently as 2 years ago, that
software piracy goes away when software is used in a cloud
context, and that where you actually have piracy is with the
physical media, but that when you shift it to the cloud, you do
not have the problem of piracy. And, in fact, what we found is
that the piracy evolves.
I do think you will have less software piracy in a cloud
context. We identified at least four ways in which it can
occur, one of which will occur when unscrupulous hosters--
fortunately, there are none that I know of at this point, but
they may be ones outside elsewhere----
Mr. Watt. All right. You are identifying a set of problems
in the cloud that are unique to the cloud, and I want to deal
with. But that was not really my question.
Mr. Holleyman. Okay.
Mr. Watt. And I am running out of time.
Mr. Holleyman. I think your question--if I understand your
question correctly, it was saying that some of the problems
that we currently see are simply going to be transferred into
an environment in the cloud. So what we need is effective tools
to deal with those, and that is going to require self-help by
industry. And that is also going to require appropriate use of
law enforcement resources when the piracy can be identified,
whether it is in the cloud or outside the cloud.
Mr. Watt. Well, my question was whether we are making any
progress toward solving this problem outside the cloud or in
the cloud. I guess that is the baseline question I am asking.
Mr. Holleyman. Yeah, I think we are making some progress
outside the cloud where piracy is bigger in reducing levels of
piracy. I think we have seen some good cases the Justice
Department has brought that have been helpful. We bring about
10,000 cases a year. We are seeing piracy rates for software
come down. What we have to make sure is that the tools that we
need can continue to work in a cloud-based environment.
Mr. Watt. I would just open up one other area of inquiry. I
know my time----
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, the gentleman is
recognized for an additional minute.
Mr. Watt. My time has expired, because it seems to me that
this debate about whether we protect ourselves against other
countries putting up barriers that allow hosting only in their
countries is similar to this question of whether we do not
prohibit call centers from going offshore.
The question is, how do we protect ourselves, how do we
protect our own consumers' information without those kinds of
barriers in our own country? And if we put them up in our own
country, does that not incentivize other countries to put them
up there? The same thing with national security concerns. If we
are allowing our national security apparatus access to
information in the cloud, would it not be a legitimate concern
for other countries to be concerned about the extent to which
our national security apparatus would have access to their
information in the cloud?
I am not looking for answers necessarily to all of these
questions, but it just seems to me from my simplistic mind that
if we are setting up a set of neutral standards internationally
and we are trying to get people to play by those rules, we have
to anticipate that we have got our own set of issues we must
deal with domestically before we can start fussing at everybody
internationally. Am I off on the wrong cloud here, or do you
all agree with what I am saying?
Mr. Holleyman. I will start by saying, hey, look, I think
we need to do both simultaneously. I mean, there are some gaps
in U.S. law that we think need to be resolved, like the need
for ECPA reform that would ensure some greater levels of
privacy for data that is stored in the cloud. And that would be
an important signal for other countries.
And, secondly, we have to be aggressive in making sure, as
one of my colleagues said, that we do not put rules in place
that require all data on all U.S. citizens in all contexts to
be held in the U.S. We do not require that now. There are some
people who would like to do that, but if we did it, it would be
a signal to every other country that they could do the same. So
we have to live by that openness, but know that there are
appropriate privacy and security regimes that will protect
appropriate levels of data for U.S. citizens, wherever it's
hosted.
Mr. Watt. Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your accommodating my
schedule. I wish I could stay for another round of questioning
because really I came with the intention of talking more about
competition in the cloud, and I did not ask a single question
about competition.
Mr. Goodlatte. If you would submit your questions for the
record, we would be happy to submit them to all the witnesses
and ask them to respond.
And we appreciate the gentleman's participation. And the
Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Chairman Smith
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to try to
see if I can squeeze in questions on the subject of patent
trolls, privacy security, and foreign countries.
Let me direct my first question to Mr. Freeman. You and I
have talked about this subject, and I have talked with two
others within Rackspace on the problem of patent trolls, and
the frivolous lawsuits they file, and the cost to the company
and to other companies across America.
I think we are aware of the problem, though if you want to
discuss it in greater detail, you are welcome to. But what do
you think are some of the solutions to this almost exponential
growth in lawsuits, litigation derived from these patent
trolls?
Mr. Freeman. Thank you, Congressman. I think two key
mechanisms that limit the incentives that patent trolls have to
bring actions for profit without practicing their invention or
practicing the patent. One approach along those lines is to
limit the potential reward from litigation to the actual value
of the license or that the troll are acquiring entity paid for
a patent if it is not also practicing the patent. That is a
case where the patent troll is essentially not being harmed by
the practice of the invention by another entity, so it should
not essentially get an ill-gotten gain simply as a result of
holding onto a patent in an attempt to block innovation.
Another mechanism is to shift toward a framework where
legal costs and responsibilities are borne more equitably
between the two parties. A loser pays a price has been floated,
and there are some interesting potential reforms along those
lines. They can make it so that a patent troll has a lot or a
litigator has a lot on the line when they file a claim for an
infringement action.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Good suggestions in regard to the first. I
think we would have to probably be careful so that we would not
apply such a reform too broadly. You cannot say it is illegal
for someone to hold a patent just because they are not using
it. But I understand the thrust of your reform, and I agree
with that.
Mr. Holleyman, on the subject of privacy, what are some of
the privacy issues involved with cloud computing that we need
to be aware of? And you just started getting into that a little
bit I think in response to the question from Mr. Watt.
Mr. Holleyman. Right. On the issue of privacy or piracy?
Mr. Smith. Privacy.
Mr. Holleyman. Privacy. Well, look, I think on the issue of
privacy, one of the single biggest issues is going to be how we
work in the context of the European Union, which is moving to
adopt a data privacy regulation that will be unlike a
directive. This will be mandatory across all 27 member states.
There is sort of an 18- to 24-month process in which that is
happening, and that is going to require a regular dialogue with
U.S. government, both Administration and U.S. Members of
Congress, because at the end of the day, we have to have a
regime that preserves the safe harbor, provisions that
currently have been negotiated between the U.S. and the EU so
that data can be exchanged appropriately across borders. And
that we also have to ensure that the Europeans do not adopt a
privacy regime that is so restrictive that will have a de facto
effect of blocking access by U.S. companies.
Mr. Smith. And as you say, we have seen some signs of that
already I think.
Mr. Holleyman. Absolutely.
Mr. Smith. Thank you. Mr. Chenok, I want to ask you about
security issues involved with cloud computing. You touched on
them a minute ago, but can you elaborate?
Mr. Chenok. Yes, thank you for your question. Security in
the cloud is----
Mr. Smith. Is your mic on?
Mr. Chenok. Yes, I will do that. Thank you for your
question, Chairman Smith. Security in the cloud is not
dissimilar to how security is handled in other forms of
technology. You could imagine a cloud with very strong security
protections built into the system--lots of surveillance of the
Internet traffic coming out of the cloud, immediate warnings to
the operators of the system that then go out to the users of
the cloud if there is an incident. Similarly, you could imagine
those same kinds of protections being built into a well-
constructed system that is a more traditional system, let us
say a client server system or another type of computing system.
So security issues in the cloud in some ways can be built
very well or not. And the key is to incentivize, and for
companies like ourselves that are here with you today to
understand how to build security into solutions that we develop
for the cloud from the beginning so that customers of ours--
consumers, businesses, and governments--have confidence that
the solutions that we provide and the solutions that are
discussed in the context of government to government
discussions are secure and private.
The other point I would make, just reiterating what was in
the testimony, is that the cloud itself can provide for a much
more rapid response if there is a security incident that comes
in. If you are in a traditional environment with lots of
different servers in different places and different people
worrying about those, and a computer security incident occurs
in a patch to fix the incident is delivered, it is often
delivered essentially manually from place to place and person
to person. With the cloud, you can deliver that patch
automatically, instantaneously, and the problem is rectified
immediately.
Mr. Smith. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chenok. I am out of time.
Mr. Castro, I just want to thank you for answering my question
a minute ago in your opening statement about the threat of
foreign countries and what our government should do. You were
very specific. I hope the Administration will listen.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
New York, Mr. Nadler, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Nadler. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Castro, a key guiding principle articulated by several
company witnesses at one of our prior hearings held in
September 2010 when I was Chairman of the Constitution
Subcommittee was the desire for technology neutral or cloud
neutral, as it has been described today, standards for
government access to communications under the Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, ECPA. This would mean that with
regard to government access to content communications stored in
the cloud, communications stored in the cloud would be treated
the same as communications stored locally by a customer.
If a primary goal for ECPA reform is establishing clear and
consistent standards, it does seem that this would be
essential. Do you agree?
Mr. Castro. I do agree.
Mr. Nadler. Anybody else agree or disagree on that?
Everybody agrees that we should have the same standards for
government access to material stored in the cloud as for
government access stored on your laptop.
And, Mr. Holleyman and Mr. Chenok, the principle we are
discussing, that of cloud or technology neutrality, is a core
principle of the Digital Due Process coalition. DDP takes the
position that ``Government access to content and communications
should require a search warrant issued based on a showing of
probable cause, regardless of the age of the communications,
the means or status of their storage, or the provider's access
or use of the communications in its normal business
operations.''
This technology-neutral standard adopts the current
standard for communication stored by an individual locally for
the communication stored in the cloud. IBM and BSA are members
of the Digital Due Process coalition, so I presume your
companies would support a bill adopting this standard. Would
you agree with that or comment on it, Mr. Holleyman first.
Mr. Holleyman. BSA is a member of the Digital Due Process
coalition, and we support their recommendations.
Mr. Chenok. And IBM is a member of the Digital Due Process
coalition and support it, yes.
Mr. Nadler. So you would agree that the standard should be
a due process standard, a search warrant based on a showing of
probable cause, regardless of age. We have in ECPA now these
different standards based on whether it is longer than 180 days
or less than 180 days based on assumptions 25 years ago that if
you had it on your computer or on somebody else's computer for
more than 180 days, obviously you did not care about it. You
did not care about your privacy. Does everybody agree that that
logic is no longer the case?
Everybody seems to agree?
Mr. Holleyman. Mr. Nadler, I agree with that logic, and,
again, we are part of that coalition and support those
recommendations. I would actually like to follow up with some
additional detail for the record for your question.
Mr. Chenok. I would join Mr. Holleyman in following up.
Mr. Nadler. I thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Marino, is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Marino. Thank you, Chairman.
Good afternoon, gentleman. Thank you for being here. As a
former prosecutor, I believe that for every action there is an
equal and opposite reaction. So with that said, we in America,
we are very good at developing technology, the best in the
world I think. But nevertheless, we fall short worldwide of
anticipating the downside of our advancements and our
technology. And pursuant to our topic today, the clouding
issue, I am going to ask each of you to take a moment and
perhaps predict what you see the downside of the technology
that we are achieving today concerning clouding. Do you
understand my question? Mr. Holleyman?
Mr. Holleyman. Look, I think the biggest downside I see is
that there are going to be a lot of changes in the economy that
result, as you move to using this new technology, which means
that the nature of some jobs will change, the nature of how
information is stored has changed. But as I began with the IDC
report, there is also a huge value add to the economy, as much
as a trillion dollars in new growth, not just in technology,
but across all sectors because of cloud-enabled innovation.
Mr. Marino. Okay. Mr. Freeman, do you have a comment?
Mr. Freeman. I think I echo those thoughts. There is going
to be an economically disruptive effect as the amount of data
that is available and information about individuals'
consumption behaviors is magnified exponentially. If there is
not an alignment of the legal principles and the legal system
applicable to types of data, regardless of whether they are
stored in the cloud or locally, I think that is going to pose a
big challenge and potentially be disruptive to continue cloud
innovation.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Mr. Chenok?
Mr. Chenok. Thank you, Congressman Marino, for your
question. I think two points. One, if not implemented well as
with any technology, cloud can increase issues involved in how
a technology is placed in a work location or used by a user. So
the concern would be address cloud's implementation and make
sure that it is done in a manner that addresses some of the
issues that we have discussed here today earlier with regard to
location mandates and open standards to make sure that those
types of policy choices are built into the implementation.
Without that, you could get some unintended effects.
And also misperceptions. Some of us have talked this
morning about certain beliefs about the cloud that are not
necessarily true in fact, but color how people come to it and
color the uptake in terms of use of the cloud. And so thinking
of fact-based, I think, is very important.
Mr. Marino. Thank you. Mr. Castro, do you have a thought?
Mr. Castro. Yes. You know, I think cloud computing
technology is disruptive businesses and organizations and
government in very positive ways. But it is also, of course,
there is a duality to technology, and it can be used for
negative purposes as well. So just as we see legal businesses
becoming more productive and doing more with this technology,
we can also see that taken up by illegal activity to be more
productive. And obviously that is a very bad thing.
Mr. Marino. A good segue into my next question concerning
the illegality of it and the potential of those outside. It
should not be in a particular area garnering the information,
penetrating the system. How about our security end of the
thing, anyone?
Mr. Holleyman. In a cloud context, you need to look at kind
of the access controls and how it is secured. I mean, the
cloud, if configured properly, can be a much more secure
environment than the highly distributed environment we have
today where people leave laptops or they leave their thumb
drive. And so if done properly, the cloud can be a net
positive.
Mr. Marino. Well, let us take it a step further, and I am
going to use an example. Years ago in law enforcement, we
develop a basic walkie-talkie where law enforcement can
communicate with one another. But then quickly, there was
developed a scanner where we could--where the criminals could
hear that we were coming after them. So how do we prevent that?
Has that been taking into consideration at this point? I know
we're anxious to put this all together, but are we thinking of
the ramifications and the technology that can really counter
what we intend to do?
Mr. Chenok. So, Congressman Marino, there are technical
protections that can be built into data in transit that can be
established and assigned to the cloud in terms of understanding
how information is moving and whether there is interception of
that information while it is moving, and can very quickly spot
when somebody is trying to penetrate a system or penetrate a
set of information resources that are moving along, and then
quickly identify how to resolve that situation.
And continuing to build those technologies in and designing
the system properly from the front will help to address those
types of risks.
Mr. Marino. And, Mr. Castro, I am going to flip a question
to you. I am running short of time here. How many entities
within when I send my e-mail to whoever is receiving it are
going to have access that information within that cloud?
Mr. Castro. In theory, you could have just one. You know,
you could have just the one actual provider, depending on how
the cloud computing environment is set up. Ideally, you have it
virtualized in a way that the data is actually segmented in
ways that other providers that might be offering services would
not actually have access to your specific data.
Mr. Marino. I see my time has run out. Thank you,
gentleman. My daughter is going to be proud of me because I was
talking about the cloud system today. [Laughter.]
Thank you. Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. Does she think most days you have your head
in the clouds? [Laughter.]
Like my teenagers did when they were that age? The Chair is
pleased to recognize the gentlewoman from California, Ms.
Lofgren, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My apologies for
being late. I had a competing meeting. But I do think that this
is a very important discussion. I understand Mr. Nadler raised
the issue that I have also been working on, the need to update
ECPA for our current technology times. It has been a long time.
And there are certainly privacy issues that need to be
addressed, and certainly some of the assumptions that Americans
have about the privacy afforded their digital data is not, in
fact, adhered to under the legal standards. And so that is
something that I hope to help address as time goes on.
I am wondering, in terms of as we deploy throughout the
world, whether there are issues that we also need to address on
standard setting for interoperability and portability of data
when it comes to cloud computing, something I have not heard
discussed at all, and yet I think it is pretty obviously
something that needs to at least be attended to. Am I mis-
advised to be concerned about that?
Mr. Freeman. I think that is very correct. I think there
are two key types of portability that have to be considered.
The portability of user data, you can rapidly see adverse
effects if cloud data or user data is stored within a given
provider, and users of businesses are essentially held hostage
and unable to extract that data later.
Ms. Lofgren. That is right.
Mr. Freeman. The other thing is the portability of
applications, the services that essentially are the cloud. If a
government agency or a business is too reliant on a single
provider's proprietary infrastructure and may find itself
unable to migrate out to either another provider in the case of
a service issue or be left without an alternative solution in
the case of a service failure.
Ms. Lofgren. I am interested as well--I think some of the
security issues have been dealt with. But I think there is an
overlap between, maybe for lack of a better word, security
issues and interoperability. And I wanted to raise the issue
of--and I will use the U.S. as an example. We recently took an
action, we as the United States government, against a site
alleged to be a big pirate site, Megaupload. But in a way, that
is also cloud computing. I mean, it is not what we think of in
the business world, but that is what it is.
Have you addressed the issue of governments aggressively
enforcing property rights when it comes to cloud computing that
then disadvantages other users? We have heard for example that
why somebody would store their baby pictures on Megaupload, I
do not know, but apparently some people did. And now their baby
pictures are going to be toast.
Have we addressed that issue as a group that thinks about
it, how we can protect innocent users when there are
enforcement actions?
Mr. Holleyman. Ms. Lofgren, I am totally familiar with
Megaupload case, and I know that there are some pending
proceedings both at Justice and in the courts, of which I am
not privy to----
Ms. Lofgren. Right. I just use that as an example. You do
not have to talk about that case.
Mr. Holleyman. Look, I think one of the questions is given
the scope of some of what I would refer to as just, you know,
storage facilities, and how to ensure that you have protection
for the legitimate data that is stored, recognizing that you
still need tools to be able to deal with the illegitimate data
that may be stored or the hosting entity.
And I think it is going to take, you know, a balance of
laws. What is important, though, is that you still have to have
tools, both civil and criminal, that allow you to take action--
--
Ms. Lofgren. Oh, I am not arguing that case. But nobody
seems to feel any responsibility toward people who are
completely innocent here. And there is no standards. There
seems to be no interest or obligation to innocent bystanders to
this action. I am wondering if there is not something that we
ought to do to address that issue.
Mr. Holleyman. Again, I cannot suggest an answer to that. I
think that is a legitimate question. It is a legitimate
question you are asking. I mean, we had, as BSA, been engaged
in a lot of notice and takedown activity with Megaupload, and
there were certainly some illegal software that was part of
that.
Ms. Lofgren. Sure.
Mr. Holleyman. And there has now been, we both
independently and obviously through Justice, have had some
recourse. But I cannot go beyond that to talk about----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, let us just use it as an example, not
that----
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection, the gentlewoman is
recognized for an additional minute.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If any of the
witnesses have a suggestion on whether we should not have some
standards so that innocent bystanders, if you will, have some
recourse and rights, I would be maybe off calendar eager to
hear them.
Mr. Freeman. I would like to speak to that, if I may,
Congresswoman. I think the key is an alignment of existing
privacy and criminal standards with regards to search and
access, regardless of the location or the nature of how data is
stored.
You highlighted ECPA earlier, and e-mail is treated
differently when I print it out and put it in my desk than it
is when it is on my computer than it is when it is on Gmail
server. That alignment, along with a bit of international
consistency, I think will solve the problem for both businesses
and consumer.
Megaupload is a case that, for example, highlights the use
of mutual legal assistance treaties to create a coherent and
enforceable regime. But if those standards are not consistent
with regards to the data type, regardless of technology, and if
they are not consistent internationally, there will be a lack
of transparency and perceived lack of protection for users'
data.
Mr. Goodlatte. The time of the gentlewoman has expired.
Ms. Lofgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goodlatte. And the Chair will recognize himself for
questions.
Mr. Holleyman and Mr. Freeman, what are some of the more
egregious market access issues that BSA or Rackspace or other
businesses have found foreign countries engaging in against
American cloud computing companies in the European Union or in
countries like Canada, Australia, India, Japan, China? As I
prepared this question, it seemed to have gotten longer. We
will start with you, Mr. Holleyman.
Mr. Holleyman. Mr. Chairman, it is unfortunately an
increasingly long list, as we pointed out in our report. I will
give you two countries at opposite ends of the spectrum. China
has a requirement that you must have a joint venture with a
Chinese entity to provide a cloud service in China, and there
is a condition of providing source code in conjunction with
that. And China is no longer allowing joint ventures, and of
course companies are rightly resisting any source code
disclosures. So effectively, you have a great wall that has
been erected and continuing to be erected that is going to shut
out companies in the China market.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, you have the concerns
I see happening in Germany where German government officials
are talking about the fact that all German data should be
stored in Germany, both high sensitive and low sensitive and
medium sensitive data, not only for the German government, but
for German citizens. And then you have a marketing campaign by
Deutsche Telecom, which is effectively a third owned by the
German government, that is invoking the PATRIOT Act and citing
the PATRIOT Act as a reason why customers should use Deutsche
Telecom's hosting services over U.S. providers.
And so I think those are two ends of the spectrum, and we
need to address those problems in both countries. And they are
just an example of what we see elsewhere.
Mr. Goodlatte. Does Deutsche Telecom still own T-Mobile? Is
that the relationship there?
Mr. Holleyman. Well, my understanding is that they still
do, but I am not the expert on that.
Mr. Goodlatte. Following up on that very distressing point,
having worked as hard as I have on the PATRIOT Act, what are
some of the misconceptions that they are spreading about the
PATRIOT Act, or data privacy policies in the United States in
general that would help them steer business to Germany
companies or other countries that may be doing the same thing?
Mr. Freeman. I can tell you at Rackspace, we commonly see
almost occasionally absurd positioning of what the PATRIOT Act
permits to the extent that it allows almost any U.S. government
agency to, without notice or warrant, access any private data
that is on a server contained within the United States. That
sort of----
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, that is totally false.
Mr. Freeman. That sort of fear, uncertainty, and doubt I
think inform Canada's FOIPA law, which is a good example of a
protectionist measure that excluded U.S. participation in the
marketplace. Canada passed a patient privacy bill that
prohibited the storage of any patient health information on any
server located in the United States based on this sort of fear
and uncertainty. Now I think it was more of a protectionist
measure that has leveraged that type of fear. But our great
concern is that we see the same types of positioning being
touted in marketing campaigns such as in Germany and the rest
of Europe.
Mr. Goodlatte. So what do you do to counter that? Do you
have a Rackspace Germany that is a separate entity with your
cloud computing capabilities there, or what do you do?
Mr. Freeman. Thank you, Chairman. Even having a subsidiary
entity these days is being targeted. Essentially, there is an
approach that anyone who has either a server in the United
States or is a subsidiary or joint venture with the U.S.
company is becoming suspect.
Again, I think these are really pretenses for protectionist
pressures, and that they are not based on legitimate
understanding of the legal principles. I think the best way to
deal with it is through education, and the establishment of
international standards, and clear statements from the U.S.
government about how the PATRIOT Act works and how it is
utilized and implemented.
I think we all are sort of aware that foreign countries all
have access in certain circumstances to data for servers that
are located on their soil.
Mr. Goodlatte. I would argue most countries have far
greater access to that data in their countries without the Bill
of Rights that the United States Constitution provides for
protection of U.S. citizens that would extend to anybody
storing their data in the United States.
So what do you suspect we should do with regard to this in
the sense that it is a trade issue, that it is a protectionist
policy? Have any of you approached the U.S. Trade
Representative to address this issue?
Mr. Holleyman. Chairman, I will give you a couple of
answers. One is that the State Department has actually been
very aggressive in raising this with other countries.
Ambassador Riviere is leading that effort. There is a new myth
busters document that State and Justice are working on to try
to dispel the myths about the PATRIOT Act, and dispel the myth
that somehow the U.S. has powers here that other countries
have. And I think there has to be a bilateral, aggressive
negotiation. And I also think that you see through USTR on
efforts like the Trans-Pacific Partnership and building new
trade agreements that deal with issues around cross-border data
transfers that are related to, but an important complement to
dispelling these myths about the PATRIOT Act.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Chenok, as more data moves to the cloud,
where do you see the future of data analytics? What are some of
the innovations that we can expect in this new field of
technology?
Mr. Chenok. Analytics is----
Mr. Goodlatte. Put the microphone on again.
Mr. Chenok. Analytics runs on a parallel track, Mr.
Chairman, if you will, with the cloud. The cloud enables
companies of all kinds and governments to understand
information regardless of where it sits. Through the cloud, you
can use technology to get to information more effectively and
efficiently and at less cost. So it enables the type of
analytics that can be done to really make decisions very
quickly and rapidly based on data regardless of where it sits
over an open cloud, without having to establish point to point
agreements or computer interface exchanges that might take time
and increase costs to achieve the same level of the data coming
together to make an analytical decision. So the two are related
and mutually reinforcing.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you. Those are the questions that I
have. Since the buzzer for the votes have not gone off yet, I
will ask the gentleman from Pennsylvania or the gentlewoman
from California if they have an additional question they would
like to ask the panel of experts before we dismiss them. The
gentlewoman from California.
Ms. Lofgren. Mr. Chairman, thank you for that opportunity.
There was some testimony on abusive patent litigation. And it
is something I am concerned about, but I am not sure we have
got the energy to wade back into patent reform. But I am
wondering if we could get some suggestions on how the Patent
Office itself might make that situation a better one.
Mr. Freeman. Thank you, Congresswoman. I think it is
difficult to approach it with the current regulatory authority
of the Patent Office itself. I am reluctant to tell you that I
have all of the solutions to the problem because it is really
based on behavior----
Ms. Lofgren. Well, join the club.
Mr. Freeman. Yeah. It is really based on the behavior of a
set of entities who are exploiting a system that works well in
many cases. And there is no need to throw out the baby with the
bath water, so to speak, but I think sort of responsive action
is necessary.
One area is particularly in regards to the development and
increasing use of open source cloud software. The patent system
does not work particularly well when it comes to collaborative
open source projects because it really did envision more of a
focus reward and innovation generating system.
Ms. Lofgren. Well, we did have just recently some further
discussion on standard setting in the patent system and how we
might work with that. So, again, I am sorry I was unable to get
here for all the testimony, but I do think that when you look
at what, as the Chairman has said, certain countries are doing
in terms of using tools to block market access, sometimes with
legitimate concerns honestly about the lack of standards in
American law. I mean, EPCA is one of them.
We have a lot of work to do in this area, and I am glad
that we had this hearing, Mr. Chairman. And I think we will be
working diligently in the coming months to address some of
these issues. And I yield back.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentlewoman. The gentleman from
Pennsylvania does not appear to have any additional questions.
So we will thank our witnesses for their excellent testimony
today.
And without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative
days to submit to the Chair additional written questions for
the witnesses which we will forward and ask the witnesses to
respond to as promptly as they can so that their answers may be
made a part of the record.
Without objection, all Members will have 5 legislative days
to submit any additional materials for inclusion in the record.
And with that, I again thank our witnesses. And the hearing
is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:25 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

Supplemental Material submitted by Robert W. Holleyman, II,
President & Chief Executive Officer, Business Software Alliance (BSA)

__________

Prepared Statement of William Weber, General Counsel, Cbeyond, Inc.

Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, Cbeyond appreciates
the opportunity to provide a statement for the record for today's
hearing. Cbeyond provides cloud and communications services to more
than 62,000 small and medium businesses (SMBs) nationwide; in our most
established markets including Atlanta, Dallas, Denver and Houston, we
provide services to more than 15% of all businesses with between 5 and
250 employees. Our annual revenue is nearly $500 million, and we have
approximately 2000 employees. Forbes magazine recently named us one of
America's Most Trusted Companies and--together with Kraft Foods and
Timberland--we were recently given the Points of Light Corporate
Engagement Award of Excellence.
I hope today to give you a brief overview of what cloud computing
is, why it matters to SMBs, the role that competitive
telecommunications providers play in advancing the technology and
barriers that may prevent SMBs from making use of the cloud to create
jobs and drive innovation.

What Is Cloud Computing?

Unfortunately, I am old enough to remember the giant computers of
the 1960's with their punch cards and putty-colored terminals with
ghostly green type. These machines differed from the computers our
children grew up with in that their computing power was not in the
terminals themselves; the computing power was in a mainframe computer
located in another room or another building. This was why you sometimes
heard the machines you typed on described as ``dumb terminals.''
Beginning in the late 70's and moving through the 80's, computing
power gradually migrated from the network core to the network edge.
This was the rise of the personal computer, and as competition
blossomed and prices tumbled, true computing power became available to
home and small business users for the first time. This democratization
of computing resources remade our economy and fundamentally changed the
way many of us work.
As PCs became ever smarter, faster and cheaper, we began to make
demands on them that were difficult to achieve without a network. So we
built a new kind of network. These new networks were fundamentally
different from the old because now the computing power resided
primarily at the edges. The networks themselves served to route
information (like email) from PC to PC and to store information in
central locations that needed to be accessed by many people
simultaneously (like databases).
Soon, though, we discovered a need to return some real computing
power to the network itself. Let's take a law firm as an example. By
the mid-90s, law firms got tired of having to buy the same programs for
all their computers, particularly the programs they used to bill their
time, store and access important documents and organize their
calendars. Software makers responded by creating versions of their
software that could reside on a central server connected to individual
computers via the Ethernet cables of the law firm network. Now multiple
attorneys and assistants could access the same central information,
bills could be generated automatically and the vast document databases
that made legal work simpler could be shared, searched and accessed by
dozens of people simultaneously.
This model worked well, but it had one major drawback: it required
the law firm to maintain what amounted to a server farm on their
premises and extensive Information Technology (IT) staff to take care
of the servers and the internal network. It was also capital intensive
because the firm had to purchase enough servers to run their enterprise
software applications and back all those applications up. And, of
course, they had to buy more resources than they actually needed to
account for potential growth and be able to respond immediately to
problems with an individual server; for a law firm--as with any other
business--downtime would mean lost revenue. And this brings us to what
people call ``the cloud.''
So what is the cloud? At a high level it is the movement of server-
based computing power off the premises and onto servers that users
access in a remote location over a private network or, in many
instances, over the Internet. You already know about more consumer-
focused, cloud-based services than you may think. Netflix's streaming
video service is one. Facebook is another. Both these applications
store vast amounts of information on remote servers somewhere on the
Internet and deliver that information (and the computing power
necessary to process it) to you on demand.

Why Do SMBs Care About the Cloud?

Understanding the basics of cloud computing is important, but it is
just as important to understand how the businesses in your home
districts use the cloud. A few examples might look like this:

A seventeen-location Los Angeles furniture company
sending all of its security footage directly to the cloud where
they can store it securely and use server processing power to
review and search it.

A major insurance company with its US headquarters in
Minnetonka moving its IT test environment to Amazon servers to
avoid the capital costs associated with purchasing dozens of
servers it will only need several times a year.

A mid-size law firm with offices in Atlanta,
Charlotte and Louisville moving its billing, time-keeping and
accounting software to Cbeyond servers so that all of its
offices can access the same data at the same time.

A group of orthopedic surgeons in Denver moving all
its patient records to the cloud to avoid the cost of
maintaining the servers necessary to store, search and access
x-rays and to ensure it meets its HIPPA obligations.

Why would these businesses want to move these applications and
information to off-premise servers? There are many reasons, some of
which are embedded in the examples above. First, getting someone else
to manage their servers allows an SMB to focus on their business rather
than their infrastructure. Lawyers want to practice law, doctors want
to practice medicine, real estate agents want to close deals and
architects want to design buildings. They don't want to spend time
taking care of internal IT resources. Cloud computing allows them to
realize this dream.
Second, cloud computing allows companies to preserve capital.
Rather than buying servers that they then have to pay to maintain and
upgrade, the business can rent only the server capacity it needs for
the time it needs it. There are no installation cycles and no need for
extra square footage or additional air conditioning or electrical
upgrades.
Third, cloud computing is fundamentally more secure in a variety of
ways. It is physically more secure because data centers--unlike most
places of business--are consciously designed to the highest access
security and fire control standards. Business data is also more secure
because a server operating in a data center is monitored around the
clock and potential failures can often be detected and dealt with
before they occur; this kind of monitoring and response simply cannot
occur in SMB IT environments. Data in the cloud can be backed up to
multiple, geographically diverse locations automatically; if there is a
tornado that destroys a data center in Indianapolis, a business can
seamlessly and without pause access that data from its duplicate in a
Denver data center. And, finally, servers in a data center are sitting
behind the most sophisticated, well-monitored firewalls available, and
their anti-virus software is constantly updated with no intervention or
action required by the business; it's all part of the service a
business buys when it moves its data to the cloud.
Fourth, cloud computing gives a business IT flexibility in that
they can grow and shrink their computing resources on-demand,
preserving both capital and time. If a business needs to test major
software releases under heavy loads a few times a year, it can simply
spin up cloud servers, run their tests and then spin them down, saving
time, saving money and avoiding the cost of infrastructure it has only
occasional need for.
Finally, the cloud allows businesses to increase IT velocity. If an
innovator has an idea, it can be put to the test immediately. No more
waiting for a server to ship and get installed. This compresses
planning cycles, keeps our entrepreneurs focused on innovation rather
than the infrastructure of innovation and allows new ideas to launch at
the speed of the idea rather than the speed of FedEx.

How Do Competitive Telecommunications Providers Help SMBs Take
Advantage of Cloud Computing?

If my comments thus far make cloud computing sound like the answer
to many of the problems that SMBs confront as they launch or grow,
good. Because that's an accurate view: cloud computing helps preserve
capital, increases security and makes launching or growing a business
both cheaper and faster. But SMBs need help to make the best use of
cloud computing, help that can only come from their service providers.
Unlike the large businesses that first began making use of the
cloud, SMBs do not have extensive IT resources. They don't know how to
move the applications that run their business into the cloud, and they
don't know how to migrate the associated data. In fact, they generally
don't even know what cloud computing resources they actually need to do
whatever it is they want to do.
The large telecommunications and large cloud-only providers do a
great job serving enterprise businesses with big IT staffs who know
exactly what they need. The giant telecom companies and cable providers
also provide high-quality services to the small businesses that need
basic services like Internet bandwidth, phones and email. But what
about the sophisticated SMB that wants to use the cloud to preserve
capital for job creation and innovation? They are in a tough spot: they
don't have the IT staff to help them with their migration to the cloud,
and the big cloud providers are not set up to help them get QuickBooks
and similar enterprise applications up and running in their data
center. This is where companies like Cbeyond can help.
Competitive telecommunications providers are the experts in the
technology needs of SMBs because it's all we do. We have direct sales
people who introduce businesses to the power of the cloud and personnel
whose only job is to help businesses choose exactly the resources they
need for the job at hand. We innovate to serve our small business
customers by creating cloud offerings tailored specifically to their
needs, building applications specifically designed to migrate their
data and providing the kind of personalized support they need to
succeed. In short, without competitive telecommunications providers,
most SMBs will simply be shut out of the cloud computing revolution to
the detriment of our economy, our unemployment rate and our global
competitiveness.

What Are the Barriers that May Prevent SMBs from Making Use of the
Cloud to Create Jobs and Drive Innovation?

As the Committee well knows, small business is the economic engine
that drives our economy and creates more jobs than any other sector.
Small businesses inject almost a trillion dollars into the economy each
year. They have created more than ninety-three percent of all new jobs
over the last twenty years and employ more than half of the U.S.
workforce. They also employ forty-one percent of the nation's high-tech
workers who generate about thirteen times more patents per employee
than do workers at large firms. SMBs that want to leverage the cloud to
launch, grow, innovate and create jobs face two primary obstacles:
assistance with their migration--which I discussed above--and abundant,
high-quality bandwidth.
Cloud services are broadband intensive. Unlike traditional web-
based services in which the heaviest bandwidth usage is downstream-
only, an SMB using QuickBooks or other applications in the cloud is
sending and receiving large volumes of data in both directions; it
needs at least 10 megabits per second of private, symmetrical Ethernet
bandwidth. While this may not sound like a lot in an age when cable
companies routinely dangle 100 Mbps claims in the market, the key
adjectives here are ``private'' and ``symmetrical.'' What this means in
plain language is that an SMB accessing cloud-based enterprise
applications needs bandwidth that is not shared and has a guaranteed
upstream speed that is the same as its guaranteed downstream speed.
Unfortunately, competitive technology providers--the real
innovators in the cloud for SMBs--are limited by aging rules
administered by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) that have
the perverse effect of locking small businesses into the broadband
status quo of six years ago, undercutting the normal business cycle of
innovation and denying our nation's SMBs benefits they should have
received as broadband technology improved. These rules force
competitive technology providers to buy the wholesale broadband inputs
they need to reach their customers in small, 1.5 Mbps increments of
time-division multiplexed (TDM) bandwidth; TDM technology was invented
in the 1870s for the telegraph and evolved to its current form in 1962.
This broadband gap leaves the rollout of the best cloud technologies
almost exclusively to in the hands of large enterprise customers while
innovative technology competitors try to serve SMBs, the job growth
engine of our economy, with inadequate bandwidth resources. And--worst
of all--SMBs are left using twentieth century business tools to try to
create jobs in a twenty-first century global marketplace. This is no
small issue.
The FCC could fix this problem simply and almost without cost by
implementing relevant provisions of the Business Broadband Docket which
have been languishing at the FCC for almost three years: the FCC should
ensure the survival of a competitive market by requiring the giant
phone companies to sell--at retail prices--the packet-based bandwidth
necessary for technology competitors to provide cloud services to SMBs.
Unleashing this existing broadband capacity for use by technology
competitors at market-based rates will create an immediate cycle of
investment, innovation and job creation by allowing our most
entrepreneurial SMBs to do what they do best: focus on innovation
rather than infrastructure.
Mr. Chairman and members of the Subcommittee, I appreciate the
Committee's interest in this important topic and thank you for the
opportunity to provide this statement for the record.


