- DRIVING AMERICAN INNOVATION: CREATING JOBS AND BOOSTING OUR ECONOMY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

DRIVING AMERICAN INNOVATION: CREATING JOBS AND BOOSTING OUR ECONOMY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY,
COMPETITION, AND THE INTERNET

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 9, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-19

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on the Judiciary

Available via the World Wide Web: http://judiciary.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
65-075                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY

LAMAR SMITH, Texas, Chairman
F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
Wisconsin                        HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina         JERROLD NADLER, New York
ELTON GALLEGLY, California           ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT,
BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia                  Virginia
DANIEL E. LUNGREN, California        MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  MAXINE WATERS, California
J. RANDY FORBES, Virginia            STEVE COHEN, Tennessee
STEVE KING, Iowa                     HENRY C. ``HANK'' JOHNSON, Jr.,
TRENT FRANKS, Arizona                  Georgia
LOUIE GOHMERT, Texas                 PEDRO PIERLUISI, Puerto Rico
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     MIKE QUIGLEY, Illinois
TED POE, Texas                       JUDY CHU, California
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 TED DEUTCH, Florida
TOM REED, New York                   LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania
TREY GOWDY, South Carolina
DENNIS ROSS, Florida
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona

Sean McLaughlin, Majority Chief of Staff and General Counsel
Perry Apelbaum, Minority Staff Director and Chief Counsel
------

Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia, Chairman

HOWARD COBLE, North Carolina, Vice-Chairman

F. JAMES SENSENBRENNER, Jr.,         MELVIN L. WATT, North Carolina
Wisconsin                            JOHN CONYERS, Jr., Michigan
STEVE CHABOT, Ohio                   HOWARD L. BERMAN, California
DARRELL E. ISSA, California          JUDY CHU, California
MIKE PENCE, Indiana                  TED DEUTCH, Florida
JIM JORDAN, Ohio                     LINDA T. SANCHEZ, California
TED POE, Texas                       DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, Florida
JASON CHAFFETZ, Utah                 JERROLD NADLER, New York
TOM REED, New York                   ZOE LOFGREN, California
TIM GRIFFIN, Arkansas                SHEILA JACKSON LEE, Texas
TOM MARINO, Pennsylvania             MAXINE WATERS, California
SANDY ADAMS, Florida
BEN QUAYLE, Arizona

Blaine Merritt, Chief Counsel

Stephanie Moore, Minority Counsel

C O N T E N T S

----------

MARCH 9, 2011

Page

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Honorable Bob Goodlatte, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Virginia, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet...........     1
The Honorable Melvin L. Watt, a Representative in Congress from
the State of North Carolina, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the Internet........     3
The Honorable John Conyers, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from the State of Michigan, Ranking Member, Committee on the
Judiciary, and Member, Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet..................................     3

WITNESSES

Anthony Atala, M.D., Director, Wake Forest Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, W.H. Boyce Professor and Chair,
Department of Urology, Wake Forest University School of
Medicine
Oral Testimony.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Michael S. Fulkerson, Ph.D., Chief Technology Officer, Rosetta
Stone, Inc.
Oral Testimony.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Scott Smith, Ph.D., Professor and Chair, Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Engineering Science, University of North
Carolina at Charlotte
Oral Testimony.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    28

DRIVING AMERICAN INNOVATION: CREATING JOBS AND BOOSTING OUR ECONOMY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property,
Competition, and the Internet,
Committee on the Judiciary,
Washington, DC.

The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 2141, Rayburn Office Building, the Honorable Bob Goodlatte
(Chairman of the Subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Goodlatte, Coble, Sensenbrenner,
Chabot, Poe, Chaffetz, Reed, Marino, Adams, Quayle, Watt,
Conyers, Berman, Chu, Deutch, Wasserman Schultz, and Jackson
Lee.
Staff present: (Majority) Vishal Amin, Counsel; Olivia Lee,
Clerk; and Stephanie Moore, Minority Counsel.
Mr. Goodlatte. Good morning. This hearing of the
Subcommittee on Intellectual Property, Competition, and the
Internet will come to order.
Given the subject of this hearing, I think it is noteworthy
that we mention that the United States Senate passed the patent
reform bill by a vote of 95 to 5 yesterday. So we will look
forward to introduction of a House bill and action on this side
of the Capitol very soon.
This hearing is on driving American innovation, creating
jobs, and growing the economy.
I will recognize myself for an opening statement.
The American experience has been shaped not just by who we
are but by the things that we have done, and as a Nation, we
have accomplished a lot. America owes much to the genius of
inventors like Thomas Edison, the Wright Brothers, Alexander
Graham Bell, Samuel Morse, and many of the Nation's Founding
Fathers. Indeed, many of our Nation's Founders were also
inventors and authors. Perhaps that is one of the reasons they
had the incredible foresight to include protections for
intellectual property in the U.S. Constitution.
Article I, section 8 of our Constitution lays the framework
for our Nation's patent and copyright laws. It grants Congress
the power to award inventors and creators for limited amounts
of time exclusive rights to their inventions and works. The
Founders realized that this type of incentive was crucial to
ensure that America would become the world's leader in
innovation and creativity.
Almost 225 years later, this incentive is still producing
dramatic results for our Nation. The American innovative spirit
continues to thrive based on our Nation's strong intellectual
property laws. We are seeing entirely new industries and
economic sectors springing to life from high technology to
biotech to aerospace and defense.
It is true that our Nation is weathering a very difficult
storm right now, one that has left many people out of work and
has stalled business development. Our goals need to be squarely
focused on reducing unemployment, helping get businesses
growing again, and moving our economy back into gear.
I believe American innovation and creativity will lead us
out of this storm and back to strong economic growth. However,
to encourage this result, it is crucial that we have strong and
effective laws in place that protect inventions and creative
works. This will send the message that innovators can feel
secure in dedicating precious resources to a new product or
idea. It will also continue to bring predictability to the
values of intellectual property which will, in turn, encourage
banks, venture capitalists, and others to invest in America's
ideas.
Today's hearing, ``Driving American Innovation: Creating
Jobs and Boosting Our Economy,'' will focus on how our Nation's
intellectual property laws encourage innovation and how
innovation then creates jobs and spurs our economy. In
addition, this hearing will show how intellectual property
plays such a strong role in our daily lives, from advancing
education and health care to helping keep us safe and improving
the lives of people throughout the globe through science and
technology. This showcase hearing will also be an opportunity
for us to see and hear about some of the latest and exciting
inventions and innovations being developed by our witnesses,
which I am really looking forward to.
One is an exciting new idea of science called
``regenerative medicine'' that seems to verge on science
fiction but is indeed a reality. Technologies are being
developed that can create organs and tissues using 3D printing
technology, and in the near future, we may even see these
technologies help in the regeneration of actual limbs. This
groundbreaking work is also being done in partnership with the
U.S. military through the Armed Forces Institute for
Regenerative Medicine established under President Bush, known
as AFIRM. AFIRM is a partnership between universities and the
Defense Department that is yielding real-world benefits to both
our wounded warriors and civilian patients.
We are also pleased to have Rosetta Stone here, a Virginia-
based company which started in a seed warehouse in my district
whose story embodies the American dream. Having gone from a
small start-up to a global success, they now bring their
educational software to individual students and teachers, the
military, and our diplomatic corps around the world.
And finally, we have the Mechanical Engineering Department
chair from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. He is
an inventor and holds several patents and has begun the process
of commercializing his inventions through his own start-up
company.
By highlighting the real-world implications of IP and
innovation outside the legislative arena, we will see these
issues come to life and demonstrate the tangible link between
invention and job creation.
In addition, we will see that inventors and businesses in
all stages of development rely on strong intellectual property
laws to succeed.
I look forward to hearing from our distinguished panel
today. They represent a variety of perspectives and industries,
and I look forward to working with my fellow colleagues and the
stakeholder community as we work to ensure that America's
innovative industries remain strong and vibrant.
It is now my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Watt?
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to rush to our witnesses to hear what they have to
say, so I will be brief.
Over the past few hearings, we have heard about the
connection between innovation and American job growth.
Innovation in businesses with path-breaking technology and high
growth potential can jump start the economy, make America more
competitive, and accelerate job creation.
Public/private partnerships with universities all across
the country advance revolutionary research and development
efforts. Copyrights, patents, trademarks, industrial design
rights, trade secrets, and other forms of intellectual property
incentivize America's inventors and facilitate the
commercialization of their talent which in turn results in
substantial benefit to society.
Greater and deserved recognition of the importance of these
intangible assets to our country's future has increased over
the past months, with this Administration shining the spotlight
on intellectual property-intensive industries and education.
This is a unique moment in time to leverage this opportunity to
sustain and build upon America's role in the global economy.
Today's witnesses are examples of the ingenuity and
creativity that will keep us moving forward. I am happy to say
that two of them--not only one of them--two of them--are from
my congressional district, and I have had the pleasure of
working with and knowing both of them. Dr. Smith, welcome. Dr.
Atala--I have been in his laboratory--made an ear. So I can
attest to how cutting edge what he will be talking about is
today. So I am looking forward to their testimony and I welcome
all of the witnesses.
I will yield back the balance of my time. I think Mr.
Conyers wanted to make a statement too.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
Yes. It is my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of
the full Committee, the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Conyers?
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Bob Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Mel Watt.
This is a hearing that I can fully embrace and endorse. I
want to congratulate the new leaders of the Committee because
we all start out with the premise and agreement that innovation
creates jobs and boosts the economy. And I think this gets us
off to a very good start. The whole idea of regenerative--what
Dr. Fulkerson will be talking about is extremely important. And
I have talked to some doctors about this before the hearing. I
do not know if you know Dr. Samuel Epstein or the Physicians
for a National Health Plan in Chicago, Dr. Clinton Young. They
all are enthusiastic about it.
Now, Rosetta Stone is, of course, by their own admission
the most popular learning process for languages. What I think
may be important to the Committee this morning is how do we get
immigrants into English fast and easy. Watt and I are studying
Spanish at a furious rate. You will not know which is our first
language pretty soon. We will become so articulate.
And, of course, we welcome Dr. Smith for where we are
going.
Now, here is the challenge that the Committee faces. We
have an intellectual property office--how long does it take to
process? Years. So we are going to hear a lot of good things
this morning, but behind the scenes--I hope it will be brought
out in our discussion--we have got to get the office--all this
innovation and wonderful inventions are really going to be on a
totally different track from reality because it takes up to
years to get anything through. And that is why I applauded the
creation of this kind of subcommittee so that we can really
focus in on that.
Then, of course, now we have a lot of the issues from the
Senate side coming in. We have a lot of work to do.
Now, there are two things that we can do here, and we will
appreciate your guidance. One, we can ratify the Senate bill
and say, hey, let us move it on. Let us get going. But I am not
so sure because locked up in that are some huge issues around
``first to file'' and other things that I think have to be
carefully examined.
Now, all those who have been following the Senate and their
actions on the patent bill, fine. This is one Member that has
not had that opportunity, and I think all these issues converge
at the hearing this morning.
So, Chairman Goodlatte, I congratulate you and the Ranking
Member again, and I look forward to a great hearing.
Mr. Goodlatte. Well, I thank the gentleman, and I can
assure you that we will work in a bipartisan fashion to
construct our own patent reform legislation and certainly
appreciate what the Senate has done, but do our own thing even
without the benefit of 3D printing technology or some other new
invention that would make the Congress more efficient in
creating legislation.
It is now my pleasure to introduce our very distinguished
panel of witnesses. Each of the witnesses' written statements
will be entered into the record in its entirety, and I ask each
witness to summarize their testimony in 5 minutes or less. To
help you stay within that time, there is a timing light on your
table, and when the light switches from green to yellow, you
will have 1 minute to conclude your testimony. When the light
turns red, it signals that the witness' 5 minutes have expired.
And before I introduce each of you, I would like you to
stand and be sworn.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much and be seated.
Our first witness is Dr. Anthony Atala, Director of the
Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine and the W.H.
Boyce Professor and Chair of the Wake Forest University Medical
School's Department of Urology. Dr. Atala is an internationally
recognized expert in tissue engineering and through his
research, he has applied for or received over 200 national and
international patents and helped create several spinoff
companies. Dr. Atala heads a team of over 270 physicians and
researchers, and in 2007 his work was ranked as one of Time
Magazine's top 10 medical breakthroughs of the year.
Dr. Atala has successfully created fully functioning
bladders in the lab from patient's cells, and his team is
currently working on regrowing over 30 other organs and
tissues, including the liver, bone, corneas, heart, and
kidneys. His team is developing new technology that can print
human tissue on demand, and at least week's TED conference, it
was reported that Dr. Atala literally printed a fresh kidney on
stage.
Dr. Atala received his bachelor of arts from the University
of Miami and his M.D. from the University of Louisville School
of Medicine and did his fellowship at Harvard Medical School.
Our next witness is Dr. Michael Fulkerson, the chief
technology officer of Rosetta Stone. Rosetta Stone, founded in
1992 as a family business in Harrisonburg, Virginia is now a
global software company that currently employs about 2,000
people. Dr. Fulkerson is in charge of developing Rosetta
Stone's innovative products and solutions to help people unlock
their natural language learning ability. Previously he headed
the company's advanced research and development group which was
tasked with developing Rosetta Stone's future products. He
started his career as a surface warfare officer in the United
States Navy.
Dr. Fulkerson received his doctorate in computer science
from Duke University where he did his dissertation work on
techniques for building voice-enabled software systems. He
received his bachelor's and master's degrees in computer
science from Villanova University.
And I yield to the gentleman from North Carolina to
introduce our third witness.
Mr. Watt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to welcome the Duke graduate and the Wake Forest----
Mr. Goodlatte. Now you are claiming all three. [Laughter.]
Mr. Watt. I am claiming all three of them today. So, hey, I
am doing all right.
Mr. Goodlatte. You will recognize the bipartisanship on
this Committee.
Mr. Watt. Part of Wake Forest University is in my
congressional district and all of the Center for Regenerative
Medicine is in my district.
But I am here to introduce Dr. Scott Smith who is presently
the professor and chair of mechanical engineering and
engineering science at the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte, which is also in my district.
Dr. Smith received his B.S. degree in mechanical
engineering from Tennessee Technological University and his
master's degree and Ph.D. from the University of Florida. His
research areas include high-speed machining, process
optimization, and machine dynamics.
Dr. Smith joined the faculty at the University of North
Carolina at Charlotte in 1997 and became the deputy director of
the Center for Precision Metrology. He assumed the role of
department chair in July of 2009. He is a member of a number of
prestigious organizations and has co-authored the book
``Machining Dynamics: Frequency Response to Improved
Productivity.''
He has a distinguished career, having received several
awards. Most recently he became the recipient of the 2010
Research and Development 100 Award. He holds five patents and
has served as a consultant to a variety of companies and
organizations, including Alcoa, Apple, Bell Helicopter, Boeing,
Caterpillar, and General Motors. The list goes on and on.
So we welcome you and look forward to each of your
testimonies.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Conyers. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Goodlatte. Yes?
Mr. Conyers. Before we begin, could I recommend that we
hold a hearing in North Carolina so that it would save us a lot
of money. [Laughter.]
Mr. Goodlatte. Maybe right on the border between Virginia
and North Carolina.
Mr. Conyers. All right.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman for his suggestion.
We will turn now to Dr. Atala. Welcome.

TESTIMONY OF ANTHONY ATALA, M.D., DIRECTOR, WAKE FOREST
INSTITUTE FOR REGENERATIVE MEDICINE, W.H. BOYCE PROFESSOR AND
CHAIR, DEPARTMENT OF UROLOGY, WAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF
MEDICINE

Dr. Atala. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member
Watt, Vice Chairman Coble, and Members of the Committee. It is
a pleasure to be here to talk to you today about the field of
regenerative medicine.
Regenerative medicine is basically a field that aims to
replace or repair damaged tissues and organs in the body. It is
actually a field that uses three different areas. You can
actually use either biomaterials alone or small molecules to
actually regenerate your body's own organs at the time of
healing, or we can actually use cells for therapy, or we can
actually use cells and biomaterials together to try to engineer
tissues and organs for your body.
I do work at the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, a center that actually involves the work of about 300
scientists, all working together to bring these technologies
from the bench to the bedside.
In our area, inventions and disclosures are extremely
important, as you can imagine. We actually over the last 7
years have submitted or filed over 260 invention or patent
applications from our team.
We at the institute work in over 30 different types of
tissues and organs. We also are part of the Armed Forces
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, a partnership that was
built between Government and academia to actually try to
overcome some of the challenges of organ disease and injury by
focusing on basically five specific areas: burns, craniofacial
injuries, limb and digit injuries, accelerating wound healing,
and another injury that is called compartment syndrome that
occurs when tissues are actually compressed and lead to tissue
loss.
What are the potential benefits of regenerative medicine? I
would like to define for you four benefits of the field of
regenerative medicine.
The first one is basically the one which is most obvious
which is the patient's own benefit because regenerative
medicine, as opposed to other areas, has the potential to not
just help to manage disease but it also has the potential to
cure. So that is a very important difference between this field
and the potential that it can achieve for our patients in the
future.
The second benefit involves health care costs. Basically
just imagine that instead of managing diabetes, you could
actually cure it. Or imagine that instead of just managing
heart disease, you could cure it. So basically it is estimated
by very carefully performed studies that the health care costs
that could be saved through regenerative medicine is around
$250 billion per year if we were able to achieve a lot of these
technologies for just the major disease areas that we deal
with.
The third advantage involves economic advantages. It is
estimated that the global market by 2013, just 2 years from
now, will approach $118 billion. So there is a major economic
benefit that can result through these technologies.
And finally, the fourth benefit is job creation. If we are
able to create these technologies here and retain them here in
the U.S., we would then be able to establish our manufacturing
and commercial facilities right here by preserving the
scientific lead in this area, and by allowing these
technologies to be produced, we could generate more jobs. And
in the biotechnology industry, there is a multiplier effect.
For every job that you create in the biotechnology sector,
there are approximately 5.7 jobs that are also created.
So to summarize then, our goal is to improve innovation
through these technologies, and we are able to improve
innovation but we do need several things to happen to make sure
that we can do this in the field of regenerative medicine. This
includes increased funding to this area.
It includes ensuring intellectual property protection for
everything we do and to accelerate the process by which we can
do that. That is critical for the commercial strategies that
lay ahead for this field. This field is at risk of not
accomplishing its goals if we cannot retain the leadership we
need worldwide for these areas and these technologies.
And finally, to be able to expand our commercial
strategies. And of course, that also depends on our innovative
strategies that we can perform.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Atala follows:]

__________
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Dr. Atala.
Dr. Fulkerson, welcome.

TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL S. FULKERSON, Ph.D.,
CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, ROSETTA STONE, INC.

Mr. Fulkerson. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Watt, and honorable Members of the Subcommittee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today and want
to thank you and your colleagues for recognizing the important
role that innovation in private industry plays in job creation
and the growth of the American economy.
Rosetta Stone epitomizes the critical role that investment
in product innovation and development can play in the growth of
jobs and business expansion. Innovative product development has
enabled Rosetta Stone to grow from a small family-owned
business founded in the heart of the Shenandoah Valley in
Harrisonburg, Virginia to approximately 2000 employees, most of
whom are based in our headquarters in Arlington, Virginia, our
main operational facilities in Harrisonburg, Virginia, and a
research center in Boulder, Colorado.
Our company was founded on the innovative idea of using
computer technology to teach a new language by simulating the
way people learn their native language, through the use of
visual and audio context, without translation from another
language. Our founder's original idea is much older than our
company. The advent of CD-ROM and multimedia technologies in
the early 1990's gave him a practical means of converting his
innovative idea into a viable product. Through continued
investment and research and development, Rosetta Stone has
utilized technological and pedagogical innovations to create an
effective way to learn languages in a convenient and engaging
manner. Now available in 34 languages, Rosetta Stone solutions
are used by schools, our armed forces, Government agencies,
corporations, and millions of individuals in over 150 countries
throughout the world. Every day our innovations in language
learning help people improve their lives and make the world a
better place by improving our ability to communicate.
Rosetta Stone's investments in product innovation and
development have dramatically accelerated our growth. Our
employee base has grown from less than 300 in 2004 to
approximately 2,000 employees today, and our revenues have
grown 10-fold from roughly $25 million in 2004 to approximately
$259 million in 2010. In addition, revenues generated from our
international business has grown from a negligible percentage
in 2004 to 18 percent of our revenues in 2010. Our company's
growth demonstrates the important impact of investment and
technology and product innovation on the American economy.
Rosetta Stone's latest major innovation was the
introduction of Rosetta Stone Version 4 TOTALe which augments
our self-study computer software with live, over-the-Internet
conversations with native speakers. We call this future Rosetta
Studio. We all recognize that speaking with a native speaker is
truly invaluable to learning a new language, and our failure to
do so or have the access to do so is one of the reasons many of
us have been frustrated with previous language learning
attempts.
The problem that faced us in developing Studio is that
early learners have a very limited vocabulary, say, 25 words.
You would not think you could interact in a language for very
long or say anything interesting with so few words. However,
the innovations in Rosetta Studio have solved this problem. Our
learners get the same sense of accomplishment that our children
get early in their development when they first successfully
accomplish a goal using language, something as simple as asking
for a glass of milk.
It is worth noting since the introduction of TOTALe, our
company has hired approximately 250 U.S.-based language coaches
to conduct these online conversation sessions with our
customers. In doing so, we are exporting the services of these
and many other U.S.-based employees to countries around the
world as we expand the availability of our product overseas. As
TOTALe becomes available in schools, its online features will
enable children learning Mandarin to interact online with
school children in Shanghai or children learning Spanish to
interact with a school in Costa Rica, thereby enhancing not
only their language learning experience but also their
awareness of other cultures.
In addition to contributing to the growth of our own
company, our investments in innovation and development are
enabling our customers to take advantage of our products to
contribute to their own success. From supporting English as a
second language programs in school systems, supporting the U.S.
military, preserving endangered languages, to assisting in
speech therapy, our customers are finding innovative and often
unforeseen ways to benefit from our products.
At Rosetta Stone, we are committed to developing the best
commercial language learning solutions through continued
investment in innovation to meet our customers' widely diverse
needs. At the same time, however, we need to protect our
investments from criminals who seek a free ride on the back of
Rosetta Stone's innovations and profit from the illicit
counterfeiting of our products. Criminals, often operating out
of China, Russia, or other foreign countries, routinely offer
pirated copies of our products over the Internet. This illicit
activity substantially weakens our ability to create jobs and
to continue to invest in innovative products. It also tarnishes
our brand and harms U.S. consumers. Therefore, Rosetta Stone
welcomes any legislative initiatives that the subcommittee may
consider to effectively combat the threat posed by online
piracy so that criminals cannot continue to harm consumers,
innovation, and the growth of the U.S. economy.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fulkerson follows:]

ATTACHMENT

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Dr. Fulkerson.
And Dr. Smith, we are pleased to have your testimony.

TESTIMONY OF SCOTT SMITH, Ph.D., PROFESSOR AND CHAIR,
DEPARTMENT OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERING AND ENGINEERING SCIENCE,
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA AT CHARLOTTE

Mr. Smith. Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking Member Watt, full
Committee Ranking Member Conyers, Vice Chair Coble, it is a
great honor for me to testify before you today.
Innovation is the foundation of our modern society and the
continuing source of strength in our economy. To ensure
continued prosperity in the United States, we must continue to
innovate and such innovation requires that we have laws,
regulations, and policies that foster innovation.
During my introduction, you heard that I am chair of
mechanical engineering at the University of North Carolina at
Charlotte. UNC Charlotte is a relatively new university founded
after World War II. Our annual research budget is small
compared to many other universities, on the order of $35
million annually. We have particular expertise in optics,
bioinformatics, and precision metrology and manufacturing which
is my area.
While we are young, we have some impressive distinctions.
UNC Charlotte has consistently ranked in the top five of all
universities for number of inventions created, number of
patents issued, number of new companies created per research
dollar spent. Over the past 10 years at UNC Charlotte, we have
created 541 new inventions, received 67 issued patents, and
formed 38 new start-up companies. Innovation is important in
North Carolina generally and at UNC Charlotte especially.
Our department houses one of the best dimensional metrology
laboratories in the world and one of the highest concentrations
of faculty researchers in manufacturing.
The prestigious International Academy for Production
Engineering allows no more than 20 fellows per country. Of the
16 current U.S. fellows, four are in our department. All of
them have strong industry research partners. Faculty and
students in our department have founded more than 10 start-up
companies in recent years.
I was personally instrumental in the development of
technologies used to stop vibrations in machine tools and to
replace sheet metal assemblies by monolithic machining. These
technologies have saved billions of dollars in the aerospace
industry. I am an inventor on 15 UNC Charlotte patent
applications, one of which was recognized as one of R&D
Magazine's top 100 inventions of 2010. I am working with
industry to help bring this invention to the marketplace.
UNC Charlotte has a history of working closely with
industry and commercializing innovation. On average, about 20
percent of our research funding comes through industry. By
comparison, the average amount of industrially sponsored
research for American universities is only about 5 percent.
University research can take innovation only so far.
Innovations often need substantial additional investment and
development for successful commercialization, and patents do
three principal things that promote commercialization. They
decrease risk by ensuring that if research leads to innovation,
the effort can be protected. Because the risk is reduced,
patents induce investments. Patents allow for an innovation to
be quantified. Intellectual property is often the only tangible
asset that a new company has.
Collaboration between universities and industry is
certainly important for our country. Even in a supportive
environment, few patents become products. By some estimates,
less than 2 percent of all patents that are issued are ever
embodied in a commercial product.
Nevertheless, patents are a necessary tool for turning many
types of ideas into products. What company would fund research
work at a university like mine if the results could not be
protected by a patent? Who would make the investment required
to turn an innovation into a product if others could easily
copy that product after the expensive work was done?
While virtually every industrialized country has its own
patent office, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office was one of
the first and is one of the most developed. Both foreign and
domestic inventors apply for patents in the U.S. Many of the
inventions are patented only in the U.S. because the U.S.
market alone is often large enough to justify the costs of
commercialization.
To maintain and grow the U.S. economy, we need a strong
patent system that encourages investment and innovation and
rewards inventors and risk-takers. Specifically, inventors,
particularly university inventors, need the 12-month grace
period to file the patent after a publication or presentation.
Universities, small businesses, and independent inventors
benefit from ``first to invent'' over ``first to file.'' A
three-tier fee system could make it more affordable for small
companies and independent inventors to obtain patents.
Better quality patent reviews could be achieved by allowing
third parties to submit printed references to the patent office
for a pending patent, and by allowing the patent office to
retain more of its fees for their own operations.
This concludes my oral testimony, Mr. Chairman. I am happy
to answer any questions you may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]

ATTACHMENT

__________

Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Dr. Smith.
Before we go to our usual round of questioning, each of our
witnesses has a presentation. So we will start with you, Dr.
Atala. I understand you brought some visuals and items from the
lab of actual organs and tissues that you have created and I
would like you to share with us how far regenerative medicine
has come and what the future may hold.
Dr. Atala. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Video shown.]
Dr. Atala. I want to just give you a few examples of
regenerative medicine and just to remind everybody why we are
doing this. The fact is that every 30 seconds, a patient dies
from diseases that could be treated with tissue replacement.
That is why we are relying on your own ability to regenerate,
the patient's own ability to regenerate.
So what you see here on the left is actually an injured
organ, and what you see in the center is actually a smart
biomaterial that we developed. And we then use this biomaterial
alone to actually replace your tissue. So we replace the top
portion of that injured area that you see here, and by
replacing that top portion with a scaffold, the cells are
actually able to walk on that smart biomaterial and fully
regenerate. And when you take a tissue biopsy from this
patient, you actually can see the full organ regenerated just
using these smart biomaterials. And that actually has been used
now in patients. This was the first demonstration of this
technology back in 1996 in patients, and that is now being
done.
The strategy here for all of regenerative medicine is that
for larger defects, you absolutely need the patient's own cells
because you can only use smart biomaterials for short
distances. For larger distances, you do need the patient's own
cells. So the concept is you take a small biopsy from the
diseased tissue or organ, less than one-half the size of a
postage stamp. We then are able to take those cells, expand
them outside the body, create these three dimensional
biomaterials, and then place the cells on those biomaterials to
replace the tissue.
You are seeing a bioreactor with muscle, engineered muscle.
The same concept here. We take the biomaterial. We take a very
small piece of the patient's muscle. We grow the cells outside,
place those cells on these scaffolds, and then we start
stretching that engineered muscle so we can exercise it before
implanting them.
Here is another strategy that we use to create blood
vessels. This is actually an engineered blood vessel. What you
see here is a scaffold that was tubularized. We place the
patient's muscle cells on the outside of that tube, the blood
vessel lining cells on the inside, and to the right you see a
carotid artery that was replaced using these techniques
experimentally. That is the vessel that goes from the neck to
the brain.
This is actually a bladder, a more complex organ. This is
actually showing you the engineered organ in a patient, and
this is actually showing you the scaffold and how we seed those
in patients.
This actually is another hollow organ which is a little bit
more complex. This is an engineered heart valve that we are
creating. You can see here the heart valve itself that has been
now coated with the cells, and we are exercising the heart
valve so it knows what to do. You can see here the leaflets
opening and closing from the structure so that we can implant
these. This is still also experimental.
This is actually work that we are doing with the Armed
Forces Institute for Regenerative Medicine where we are
creating engineered ears, and this is actually showing you how
we seed those and place them in this oven-like device that
actually has the conditions of the human body.
Another project also for the DOD is engineering these
digits. You can see here we are actually placing the bone cells
in the central portions. We would place the cartilage and then
we would use those muscle strips I showed you in that first
slide to actually finish off the digit. This is still, of
course, experimental.
Solid organs are by far the most complex, and this shows
you a strategy that we used early on. This is actually a
desktop inkjet printer. We just showed you the inkjet
cartridge, but instead of using ink in the cartridge, we use
cells. You can see the desktop inkjet printer going back and
forth actually printing this two-chamber heart. It takes about
40 minutes to print a two-chamber heart. About 4 to 6 hours
later, you can actually start to see the little heart beating.
You can see the heart structure is beating away, and this is,
of course, also experimental for solid organs which are more
complex.
Another strategy for solid organs includes more
sophisticated printers where we actually use x-rays. We are
able to go down three-dimensionally in these x-rays and we are
able to get right down to the organ. And by looking at the
organ itself--in this case, it is a kidney--we are able to
three-dimensionally rotate the image of this patient's x-ray
and take the information necessary to actually create the CAd
printing that goes on. We take this information down for the
CAd printing into the computer three-dimensionally. We then
place the cells on these cartridges and this actually shows the
printer actually being initiated printing this three-
dimensional kidney structure, this construct that you see here,
one layer at a time. These are actually, of course, still
experimental where we are using these for implantation
purposes.
And then I am just going to share briefly with you now for
30 seconds this brief clip of a patient who received an
engineered bladder. So you can see firsthand from this patient
what he is thinking. This was just recently recorded.
[Video shown.]
Dr. Atala. That was Lucas Masella. He is now 10 years out
from having received his engineered organ. So you see for us
the promise of regenerative medicine is not about the
technologies we choose. It is about the ability for us to help
our patients, and having innovation, the patent on intellectual
property is an important part of this process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Dr. Atala.
Dr. Fulkerson, I understand you have a demonstration for us
of Rosetta Stone's latest language learning program. If you
could take a moment to show us and I believe introduce us to
your language coach.
Mr. Fulkerson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So what I am going to show you is a quick introductory
video that is the first exposure that our customers have when
using Rosetta Stone v4 TOTALe to introduce the product to them.
And then I will make a few comments at the end.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Fulkerson. As a technologist, this is embarrassing.
[Laughter.]
Since we don't get to hear it, I will pause it and talk
through the main part of our product.
The way Rosetta Stone works is we use pictures, sound, and
text to convey meaning. So most language learning systems that
you have used, going back to school, have always relied on
translation where someone teaches you in the language that you
already know about the language that you are trying to learn.
At Rosetta Stone, we feel strongly that that just is not the
right method. The right method is to try to immerse people in
the language they are trying to learn and use those same
cognitive processes that our children use to learn language as
adults learning.
So we have set up situations, almost little puzzles, that
give you a situation that you can start to see differences
between pictures or hear differences between sounds, the same
challenge that our kids do when they learn a language to try to
figure out what is that new thing that mommy or daddy just
said. My 5-year-old probably doesn't know what a microphone is,
but if I were to say I'm talking in a microphone, he could
figure out that this thing in front of me is probably a
microphone and from context start learning. And that is exactly
how Rosetta Stone works. So we don't rely on the crutch of
translation. We rely on your own ability reason and to think
and solve those sort of small, little micro puzzles, but as you
do, you start feeling much more confident in your own ability
to learn as opposed to memorizing things that are hard for us,
even in our native languages, like grammar. Most of us probably
don't look fondly on the days of learning English grammar, but
that is how we try to teach people their second language or
their third language. So the idea of immersing you in a way
that feels fun and light and engaging is how Rosetta Stone
works.
Our newest innovation that we call Studio is the idea that
just using interactive software is better than most other
methods to learn the language. You can start speaking. We have
proprietary speech recognition that you can speak a substantial
amount of time in our product. But talking to a native speaker
is still invaluable. Having the opportunity--again just like
our kids have the opportunity to talk to their parents and
listen to their parents, that interaction with a native speaker
is a critical piece.
But when you are very early in your language learning
journey and you only know a small number of words, you know,
10, 20, 100 words, it is very hard to be successful. If I were
to teach you 10 words of Portuguese and send you to San Paolo,
you wouldn't think you could be very successful. But kids with
a very small number of words can be successful. They can ask
for something and get a response from their parent that starts
making them feel confident and gain the confidence to try to
use that language. And that is exactly what we have captured in
Rosetta Studio. Rather than try to get you to finish your
language learning journey, get you to the point that you know
2,000 words and can actually go to San Paolo.
We want you to feel successful very, very early, that sense
that I can do it, I can learn a language because, to be honest,
that has been the impediment for many of us learning a language
is you feel you can't do it. You don't have a means to
practice. You don't have a means to be successful. So the
advent of Rosetta Studio and the ability from a business
perspective to affordably provide native speakers to language
learners around the world via the Internet is an innovation
that we rolled out in 2009 and then mass rolled out just last
September across the U.S. to our consumer business and are in
the process now of rolling out around the world. By the end of
this year, it will be live in all of the Rosetta Stone offices
in Japan, Korea, Germany, the United Kingdom, and hopefully by
the end of the year China and Brazil.
Sorry about the technical problem.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much.
We are going to have to recess in a moment to attend a
joint session of Congress where the Prime Minister of Australia
will address the Congress. We are required by our House rules
to do so.
But you might use that opportunity to see if you can get
that to work.
Dr. Smith, we will try to get your presentation in before
we go.
Mr. Smith. Okay.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Smith. I am going to show you three different things.
These are innovations that came out of my work at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte.
The first one is the technology that was used to replace
sheet metal assemblies in aerospace applications with
monolithic machinings. So in the top left, you can see an
avionics tray that came out of the F-18. And on the left part
of that figure, you can see the pieces that used to be
assembled together from folded sheet metal components. And on
the right, is the monolithic piece that was cut down from a
solid. Now, you might think that we are throwing away a lot of
aluminum, and that is true, but that is not where the cost was.
The cost was in the hand labor and all the special fixtures and
tooling that were required to do the assembly. The end result
of this kind of a switch was huge. On the little avionics tray,
it was a 73 percent reduction in cost. But all over the F18,
Boeing estimates more than $1 billion in savings in that
program. Between the C/D model and the E/F model of the F-18,
the plane got lighter and less expensive and cheaper, and
getting all three of those together is really unusual.
So now the technology has spread over into commercial
aerospace. So there are lots of parts like this on jumbo jets,
for example. And you can see in the bottom picture this person
is machining a cargo deck floor for the 777, and this thing is
10 feet by 5 and a half feet. It is about 5 inches thick. It
starts out as a 2,500 kilogram slab of aluminum, and by the
time the machining is all done, it is down 113 kilograms. The
parts continue to get bigger and bigger because there is cost
savings every time that happens.
Additionally, there are weight reductions because of the
assembly. When you put together the sheet metal pieces, you
have to have two layers of sheet metal and a fastener that goes
between them. If it is monolithic, you don't have that. If the
sheet metal pieces don't quite fit, then you have to put a shim
into the space between them to make the fit tight. A typical
jumbo jet has something on the order of 2,000 pounds of shims,
and you carry those shims through the whole life of the
aircraft. You pay a weight penalty, a fuel penalty the whole
life of the aircraft. So we have a technology to make the
machining of these monolithic components more accurate.
This one shows a concept. After the machining of something
that is thin, we switch to a different tool which we use to
push the thin parts around into a different configuration. So
this part is about the size of my hand, and it is a heat sink.
So a heat sink means that it dissipates the heat that something
else produces, an electronic component, for example. So this
has a lot of surface area, not much mass. It means it can
dissipate a lot of heat.
Now, ordinarily something like this is relatively expensive
and difficult to make. We made this in about 10 minutes on a
relatively simple three-axis machine that most shops have
commercially.
The last one that I will show you here is a technology that
we developed for the breaking of chips. There are a lot of
manufacturing operations that produce long, stringy chips in
the cutting operation. We are shaping the metal from one size
to another. As the metal peals off, it makes a long, stringy
chip that gets tangled up on itself. And you can see in the
pictures on the top left, the top right, the bottom left, these
things often make a big snarl. They call it a bird's nest.
Sometimes the operator is injured in trying to remove this.
Sometimes the work piece is damaged. The sponsor for this was
Oak Ridge Y-12, and their material is pyrophoric. It means it
can catch on fire from the heat of the cutting. So the snarl is
very dangerous.
What we did was to use the axes of the machine tool, the
motion of the machine itself, to cause the chips to break, and
this makes the chips break all the time. That is the photograph
on the bottom left, just above the picture of the team. So this
has applications across a wide variety of industries, including
biomedical and plastics, in addition to the metal ones that I
have shown you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you very much.
The Committee will stand in recess. We anticipate that we
will reconvene at about 11:45 or sometime hopefully not too
long thereafter. And we will take questions from the Members of
the Committee at that time.
[Recess.]
Mr. Goodlatte. The subcommittee will reconvene.
We will go now to our questions, and I will begin with a
question for Dr. Fulkerson.
How important is brand protection and copyright enforcement
to Rosetta Stone's business, and what proactive steps has your
company taken to protect their products overseas and online?
Mr. Fulkerson. Thank you for that question, Mr. Chairman.
Obviously, in the technology world, especially in the
consumer technology world, the power of your brand is in some
ways as important as the quality of your product. It sets the
initial expectation with customers of what they expect and what
they are buying. So the power of Rosetta Stone as a brand is
tremendously important. We spend a considerable amount of time
protecting, both actively and sort of defensively, our product
from both copyrighted type infringement where people would take
our content, repurpose it in their own version of a software
application. We also work very hard to protect just the
software itself, in some cases actually to the detriment of our
customers because we do things like put in additional
safeguards to lock the software, which is sort of a nuisance to
customers, but we have to do it to make it harder for pirates
to copy it and sell it.
And then I think the most egregious form that we see is
people who just flat out pirate our software, who take the code
that we have written, put it on their own CD's or DVD's,
advertise it on search engines, and then sell it in some cases
as our product even as Rosetta Stone. So it is not uncommon to
find pirates often overseas who have taken our exact website,
replicated it 100 percent, sitting on servers in a place where
it is hard for us to reach them, and then selling what looks to
be Rosetta Stone software, taking unexpecting folks credit
cards, sometimes delivering software, sometimes not delivering
the software. But what we often find out when we get copies of
that in, it is often not only a pirated copy but a copy that
actually doesn't even work. So they are seriously hurting our
brand from folks who get software that is actually broken.
I would say the amount of money that we spend to defend
against that is money that we could be spending on other
things. We could be spending that same money--the millions of
dollars we are spending to protect that we should be spending
on innovation and the next generation products, but instead we
are spending that money on defense.
Mr. Goodlatte. Taking that a step further, there is a
general shift in the software industry from packaged software
to cloud computing. Do you see the future of the software
industry in cloud computing as a way to clamp down on piracy
and push innovation to consumers at a much faster pace, or do
you see it as a problem?
Mr. Fulkerson. As in everything, there is a little of both.
I think in the enterprise computing space, people who are
selling software to companies, cloud computing is sort of an
immediate answer to provide better service. In the consumer
space--and we are split. We have, obviously, customers that are
large enterprises and customers that are consumers. Some of the
cloud computing and the online and streamed kind of products
are slower to be adopted by consumers. Consumers like the idea
of buying it and having it, knowing they own it, and knowing if
they change computers, they can reinstall it. But I think, as
you point out, the trend is increasingly toward those kind of
cloud computing initiatives.
I think the free services that we see in cloud computing,
obviously, with explosive growth are a different case, but when
you are actually trying to sell a product or sort of lease a
product for a certain amount of time in a cloud environment,
that is something that consumers, as of today, are not
comfortable with. But as you also point out, it is a place
where it is safer for us because when we control the servers
and when it is very clear that we can sign those in a way that
we can sort of validate that this is Rosetta Stone and our
customers can come to our servers, it is much harder for folks
to just flat out copy it. People will and there are famous
examples of where people have copied and cloned cloud services
also, but I think it is a much safer place and a place where if
the consumers would appreciate it more and value that kind of
service more, we would love to move in that direction.
Mr. Goodlatte. Dr. Atala, you described this new field of
regenerative medicine that uses a person's own reprogrammed
stem cells. You mentioned in your remarks about how this could
impact health care costs. What kind of new industries can you
see developing around this field, and what steps have you taken
toward commercializing your patents?
Dr. Atala. So there are many areas that you can actually
direct these therapies for. For example, a lot of these cells
can actually be used to help with diagnostic tests. So you can
actually use a patient's own cells with specific disease
states. For example, you can take patients who have congenital
disorders who have a gene-specific disease and pull cells and
actually use those cells to help with diagnostic kits.
Another area where these cells can help is not just to use
the cells to engineer organs, but actually just to inject them
for therapy in the same patients. And there are many ways to do
this. Some of the steps that we have taken to actually get this
in the path is to actually get these technologies to patients.
That is really the first step. How do we get these technologies
to patients? Of course, we have to work very closely to go
through the typical phase I, phase II, and phase III clinical
trials that we need to go through with regulatory oversight by
the FDA. After those clinical trials are done, then you can
actually start to make that technology available to many other
patients through industry. That is where these two factors come
into play.
One is to make sure that we have the intellectual property
necessary so that we can protect these technologies and to make
sure that those patents are strong, that people can't contest
those patents.
Second is to make sure that we get those technologies
early, that we can assure that we have protection early with
these technologies so we can go forward. And that is important
because otherwise it is hard to get that kind of investment,
especially when it is so costly.
And third, once we actually go through that process, the
regulatory process is extremely important. And that is also
something that really needs to be dealt with. We need to
somehow help to streamline that process and then finally get
those technologies out. I must comment, though, that the
typical technology right now that goes through the FDA takes
about 14 years, over $1 billion.
Mr. Goodlatte. So given that this work started in the mid-
1990's, do you have developed technologies that are
commercially available now, or are you still waiting on FDA
approval? Or are you not to the point of even requesting FDA
approval?
Dr. Atala. Yes, we are through the FDA process now
actually. We are currently involved with the FDA process in
some of these technologies. Some are already commercial. Some
of these regenerative medicine technologies are already
commercially available, but some of them are still in the
regulatory process, and that has been actually for two reasons.
One of them is that we did that on purpose to go slow. We
have to go slow at first. So the patient that you saw, the clip
that you saw earlier today, for example--we actually waited
until we had an experience of up to 8 years of follow-up before
we actually even published the study. And the reason we did it
slowly and carefully was because it was a new technology, and
we really did not know what to expect long-term. There were
many unknowns, but that was now in 1998 when we put that first
technology in.
So now we can afford to accelerate the technology. We do
not need to wait--to have a 5-year follow-up in all our
patients like we did before. We can now afford to do this in a
quicker manner and to actually translate these technologies in
a more accelerated fashion because now we have tissues in
patients, and there are many different clinical trials for over
14 years in some cases.
Mr. Goodlatte. One more question. I will start with Dr.
Smith and then turn to you, Dr. Atala.
As you have worked to commercialize your research, how
important has the patent process been in securing funding and
partnerships with larger companies and other entities?
Dr. Atala. Extremely important, extremely important. Of
course, one of the challenges that we have right now is the
major backlog of the patents. So we have a lot of intellectual
property that we are waiting to get a final result on. So that
has actually been a challenge for us in the more recent years.
All these applications that we have in, but not going through
in an expedient manner.
Mr. Goodlatte. Can you do the patent process and the FDA
approval process at the same time, or does one have to begin
before the other? How does that----
Dr. Atala. Well, the challenge for us is that if you don't
have intellectual property secured, it is very hard for
investments to come in. So we need intellectual property so
industry can trust that they will have something that will
really give them the protection they need to go and make those
large investments. So basically you can't have one without the
other, which means that you really can't go and start treating
patients necessarily through industry unless you have that
protection.
Mr. Goodlatte. Dr. Smith, what has been your experience?
Mr. Smith. Well, certainly there is a lot of work that has
to happen between the time that an idea has been shown as proof
of concept, something that could be patented, and when a
commercial product is created. There is a lot of work. There is
a lot of expense that comes after the invention and before the
commercialization. And the patent provides the protection to
those investors. It draws the money to the idea because you
know that you have protection for that hard work.
Now, certainly I will concur that the backlog in the patent
office makes this difficult. But it is critical, especially to
a startup company where the intellectual property is often the
only tangible asset that the company has. The company is formed
based on an idea, and it needs to draw the investment. And the
patents are what makes that possible.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you.
I will now turn to the gentleman from North Carolina.
Mr. Watt. I guess this is a variation or an extension of
Chairman Goodlatte's question because I was going to ask you
about your experiences with the patent office. Have they been
good? I guess both of you all--all three of you possibly--have
suffered the delay process. Is that correct? Is that true of
all three of you?
Dr. Atala. Yes.
Mr. Fulkerson. Yes.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Watt. Except for that, how have your experiences with
the patent office been? Do you find them competent, I mean,
well prepared to do it once they get to it?
Mr. Smith. I will say in my experience the eventual outcome
was often quite good. But the backlog is high. So the time to
get to the outcome was long. And often the first review that we
got was relatively perfunctory. It was more or less like a
keyword search. And I think that this is because of the
backlog. So the eventual result, after some responses from us
to their reviews, was usually quite good, but the initial
response that we got from them was often not satisfactory.
Mr. Watt. I guess if I followed Mr. Conyers' entreat, I
should have been asking these questions in Spanish. [Laughter.]
So hablo espanol un poquito, muy poquito. So I am not going
there. But that was for Chairman Conyer's benefit when he looks
at the record. I did want him to know that if he were here and
he were challenging me, I would compete with him. Gracias.
Dr. Smith, we have been hurtling down the road toward doing
converting from a ``first to invent'' to a ``first to file''
system. I am led to believe that you have some wisdom to share
with us on that. So let me allow you to get that wisdom into
the record, and if either of the other two witnesses have
either pros or cons to say about ``first to file'' versus
``first to invent,'' I would like to hear whatever comments you
have on that.
Mr. Smith. Okay. I know that this is a somewhat
controversial issue at the moment.
I will start by saying I think that the Constitution talks
about protecting the rights of the inventors, and it seems to
me hard to argue that the inventor is the one who filed first.
I think the inventor is the one who made the invention. So that
seems clear to me.
But beyond that, I would say that ``first to file'' tends
to favor those organizations that have large patent staff on
board, a large funding base and a large number of people to
help prepare the patents because the motivation is to file
quickly and often. So you file, file, file, file, file. I think
it is disadvantageous to small companies, small universities,
small inventors. I think particularly at the university level,
I said that we need the protection of the 12-month grace
period, and it seems difficult to reconcile the 12-month grace
period with ``first to file.''
Mr. Watt. Any other comments?
Dr. Atala. Yes. One of the challenges so that we can face
with our patent system is that when you look at the patent
system internationally, it goes through a ``first to file.'' So
in a way, we are not consistent with that system, and that
becomes a little bit problematic when we go to the
international arena because a lot of the patents that we file
we are not filing just for U.S. protection but also for
European protection and Asian, basically all over the world for
the most part, and that in a way may put us at a disadvantage
not to be in the same system of ``first to file,'' which is the
current system that is used pretty much internationally.
Mr. Fulkerson. I would add in the technology world I think
things may be different than in manufacturing and biomedical
where someone can grow a multibillion corporation that was
started in the dorm room. That person sitting in their dorm
room isn't thinking about the 5-year or the 6-year process and
the tens of thousands of dollars to get a patent. They are
trying to get their product to market. And so I think the
initial Rosetta Stone innovations don't have adequate
intellectual property protections in some ways. At this point,
it is moot. But at the time, our Founders were trying to get
products to market and were trying to raise capital by selling
and raise revenue by selling products. So I think in that
situation, clearly we would not have had a filing advantage.
I believe there is a problem right now with our patent
system with the concept of trolls, folks who aren't making
products. They are trying to generate revenue through the
courts with patents. I think ``first to file'' makes that
worse. You will have folks that are trolling to file first, not
innovators, not product companies. So I am envisioning what
could happen, but to me that is a dangerous situation.
Mr. Watt. Except for shortening the backlog and speeding up
the process, are there any other specific procedural changes
that either of the three of you would suggest to improve the
patent process?
Mr. Smith. Okay, I will go.
Mr. Watt. All right.
Mr. Smith. Certainly there is an issue that in the current
law it is one-size-fits-all, and yet there is a range of
different kinds of products which are being patented. So some
of them like software have relatively short lifetimes, and some
of them like medical products have relatively long development
cycles. So in one case the lifetime of the product expires
before the patent is even examined, and in another case the
patent protection expires before the product comes to market.
And so certainly some kind of a recognition of this variation
in the products which are being patented might be useful.
I would also say in the current fee structure, there is a
two-tier system. So even the lower tier is still prohibitive
for many small entities. Maybe there is a possibility for a
third tier, a micro-sized company.
Dr. Atala. I would have to agree with Dr. Smith that in
terms of biotechnology, it does take longer to develop these
technologies, and it does take longer to go through the process
of trials. So I do agree with the statement that Dr. Smith made
in terms of the length of the patents.
One of the challenges is to be sure that one's patents do
get issued, that one is certain that we can assure the inventor
that the invention is actually true, that we can actually
retain that patent as being one that is solid in terms of its
claims. And that is certainly a challenge these days in many
areas that we experience where patents are being challenged and
other types of procedures are being done. So it would help us
tremendously to assure that the patents that in fact are issued
are solid and true to what they represent.
Mr. Watt. Dr. Smith, it seems to me that in--well, even I
guess all three of you--possibly there would be some
consideration of prior art, if you are basing what you have
done on somebody else's invention, research. How has that been
a factor in the way you have proceeded?
Mr. Smith. Certainly when we prepare a patent application,
we try to disclose the prior art. We disclose everything of
which we are aware. And when the examiner examines the patent,
they look for additional prior art that we might not have been
aware of. Yet, this is a really tall order for the examiner.
How can they be aware of all of the trade journals, all of the
publications, all of the places where the prior art might have
appeared? It is a demanding task. And I think giving third
parties the ability to submit written documentation about a
patent which has been published but not yet granted would be
useful. Essentially you get interested parties assisting the
patent office in finding the relevant prior art.
Mr. Watt. Finally, I don't see lights up there, so I am
kind of wondering here.
The technology transfer from the research to the
commercialization of it is always a challenge there for
universities in particular. Is there some way we can streamline
that to make it clearer, or is it just a different case for
every technology commercialization and just too hard to develop
a set of rules for?
Mr. Smith. Well, certainly I will say that it is helpful
that the university can own the intellectual property even
though the research might have been funded by an agency of the
Federal Government, for example. The tech transfer office at
our university is motivated to try to get those technologies
commercialized. We view that as one of our key missions at the
university to get the research work out into commercial
practice.
Dr. Atala. In terms of the technologies that we develop, it
is very important that we continue with the protection from the
Bayh-Dole Act. It is critical because that actually allows us
to do the research with national initiatives, programs which
are designated by the Nation to be of great need. And if we
didn't have that ability, we would then be relying mainly on
just special interest of specific groups to actually pursue
that research.
Mr. Watt. The Senate has passed a bill, and we may be
calling on you all's technology transfer people to take a
closer look at what they have proposed and what may or may not
be in the House version of the bill. So I may be calling on--it
is nice to have experts I can call on, though. So I appreciate
you being here.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Goodlatte. I thank the gentleman.
It is my pleasure to recognize the Ranking Member of the
full Committee, Mr. Conyers from Michigan.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you, Chairman Goodlatte.
Can we get a credit for medical school for the performance
and the work that was offered here today?
Mr. Goodlatte. It will be part medical and part law school.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Smith. Some engineering.
Mr. Conyers. Dr. Atala----
Mr. Watt. I wanted you to know that I challenge you to do
your questioning in Spanish.
Mr. Goodlatte. Right and your tests will be in Spanish too.
Mr. Watt. I did mine in Spanish.
Mr. Conyers. I should have expected----
Mr. Watt. You issued the challenge. I rose to the occasion
in your absence.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you.
You mentioned heart disease and diabetes as things that we
need to pay more attention to, but what about cancer where
treatment is given more attention than prevention?
Dr. Atala. Absolutely. Well, I think that is where
regenerative medicine really has a role, a very special role,
because currently if you think about disease, most of the time
you are not aware that you have that problem until your organ
is very far gone. I will give you an example. You may be
playing tennis once a week, and you have never experienced any
problem. Yet, one day you play tennis and right after you get
chest pain. You go to the doctor's office. They do an
arteriogram and they find out that your vessel is now over 90
percent occluded. Interestingly, that is when you start having
symptoms, once you are over the 90 percent range. You didn't
have that pain when your vessel was 70 percent occluded or even
80 percent occluded. So regenerative medicine has the ability
to actually start treating you much earlier. By prevention, by
you being more aware of your body's functionality over time,
you may be able to prevent that end stage part of your disease
by picking up these diseases early and addressing them earlier.
Mr. Conyers. Now, what about the annual checkup? Does that
give us any consolation?
Dr. Atala. Well, you know, the annual checkups that you go
through are good and they are certainly something that should
be done, but the challenge is that doing a 360 analysis of your
body currently is not necessarily economically feasible or
possible because it is so complex. And so I think a lot of the
work that is being done currently with genetics where we will
be aware of what your genetic predisposition is based on your
genome so we can actually take a small sample of your saliva,
for example, and do a genome analysis where we know what your
traits are, what genes are you expressing. We can then take
those genes and start correlating to disease, and we will know
what you are prone to get. And now we can start focusing in
those specific areas based on your family history and your own
genetic code and start preventing diseases that you are more
prone to have.
Mr. Conyers. Well, I don't want to get too personal but Mel
Watt and I both try to play tennis at this stage of our life,
and what I am interested in is that at the 90 percentile,
before we get a little heartburn after tennis, you are telling
me, in effect, that the annual checkup will not have us
discover that before we get to this very advanced circumstance.
Dr. Atala. Yes, that is correct. Not all the time. that is
the challenge and that is why people come with a chest pain
when they do with heart disease. I mean, that is the challenge.
And really, the only way to do that--let us say we want to look
at your blood vessels. I mean, you have to go through an
arteriogram. So your heart disease and your symptoms is what
really prompts the physician to do that.
So that is why prevention is so important, and regenerative
medicine really does play a major role in that because you have
the capacity to actually hold off disease when you first detect
it. And so better detection and better prevention are totally
part of what regular health care should be.
Mr. Conyers. Could I get a couple minutes more, Mr.
Chairman?
Mr. Goodlatte. Without objection.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you.
Dr. Fulkerson, we will be holding a hearing Monday on rogue
websites and the piracy and so forth. I hope that you will be
able to follow that along with us and give us your subsequent
comments and recommendations as a result.
Now, we have got some legislation called ``Combating Online
Infringement and Counterfeits,'' and we are trying to get that
through to stop pirates from getting payment. Your comments?
Mr. Fulkerson. I am not familiar with that exact piece of
legislation. But the problem of rogue websites--both their
existence and the ease that they are found are things that I
think that your subcommittee--we would welcome you to think
about those problems.
Related to the intellectual property side, the patent
reforming law gets a lot of attention. The trademark law and
policy, which ends up making it easier for these rogue websites
to be discovered through search engines, is something that we
would also love the subcommittee to think about, which is all
terms in a search engine aren't equal. Some of those terms are
trademarks. And when someone types in a trademark's term,
that's not just like typing anything else. It has special
protections in most cases under our laws. But trademark law and
policy hasn't caught up in my opinion to the modern use of
search engines and trademarks. That makes it easy for consumers
to both find and to be duped by those rogue websites. It makes
it very easy to type in a term and, bang, you are on a site
which you may think is the owner of that trademark where in
fact it is a bunch of people in the back of an alley in a place
that isn't Harrisonburg, Virginia. So that is something that we
would love to see legislative action and investigation from
your Committee.
Mr. Conyers. Dr. Smith, ``first to file'' is something that
businesses and foreign companies recommend, but universities
and small businesses and garage-type inventors are less
enthusiastic about it. What are your comments?
Mr. Smith. Well, certainly ``first to file'' provides
clarity, and clarity is useful in drawing investment to a
company. I understand that. I also hear the argument that
``first to file'' would harmonize our patent law with the laws
of other countries. I don't find that argument particularly
compelling. Certainly there are countries that don't respect
intellectual property at all, and we don't want to harmonize
our law with them. So I think the issue is protecting the
rights of the inventor, and clearly the inventor is the one who
created the invention.
I will say I think there is also an issue that ``first to
file'' encourages frequent filing of patents that may be of
lower quality than if you have time to develop the idea more
fully. So I think it makes the problem of the backlog at the
patent office worse.
Mr. Conyers. Is there anybody here more enthusiastic about
``first to file'' among the witnesses?
Dr. Atala. Well, I mentioned that one of the challenges
that we have is that if we are not consistent with the
international system, that may place us at a disadvantage.
Mr. Conyers. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chaffetz [presiding]. Thank you.
I want to talk, Dr. Atala, about--can you walk us through
the Armed Forces Institute of Regenerative Medicine's most
immediate research goals, and are there companies that you are
currently partnering with?
Dr. Atala. Yes. The Armed Forces Institute of Regenerative
Medicine is really an effort to bring together the best
technologies that we have for our wounded warriors, and this is
in one of four major categories, five areas but four major
categories, which include burns, craniofacial injuries, limb
and digit injuries, including compartment syndrome, and
scarless wound healing. And it really brings together over 30
institutions with every branch of the military supporting this
effort to bring these technologies faster. And we are
developing technologies right now for our wounded warriors. The
goal of AFIRM was to actually have one technology ready for our
patient before the 5 years of the initial program were
completed. We are now basically just starting year 3, and we
have 15 clinical trials currently at some stage of development.
Mr. Chaffetz. What do you see happening with jobs? Assuming
that everything continues to progress to the optimism that we
all hope that this happens, what is going to happen to the job
market in this sector, if you are able to have that success?
Dr. Atala. Hopefully that will increase markedly. And so by
having all these technologies at the clinical trial level, we
already have many commercial partners which we are bringing
into the Armed Forces Institute for Regenerative Medicine, and
these commercial partners together with AFIRM investigators
being able to bring these technologies to industry so that
these products can be manufactured here in the U.S. and thus
increase jobs and create jobs for our citizens.
Mr. Chaffetz. Dr. Fulkerson, your company, Rosetta Stone,
is truly a global company. Tell me about your experience
internationally, what market access problem/challenges that you
face, the competitive markets that you are feeling, and how
that relates to what we are talking about here today.
Mr. Fulkerson. Thank you. Sir, right now we have offices in
four countries internationally and are considering expanding in
others. Unfortunately right now, some of the world's largest
language learning markets are countries that do have
notoriously high piracy rates and, in some cases, as we just
talked about, disrespect for intellectual property. And so even
though those are tremendously very large markets for us, the
risk and the burden of trying to enter those markets such as
China is one that--we would love to have been there already,
but those obstacles have kept us from going.
Mr. Chaffetz. But are you selling any product in China?
Mr. Fulkerson. We say we are huge in China but we don't
generate any revenue in China.
Mr. Chaffetz. Do you have anything to quantify the
pervasiveness of the problem in China?
Mr. Fulkerson. It is hard to quantify. We could certainly
send you photographs of Rosetta Stone-looking kiosks in
Shanghai that aren't run by Rosetta Stone, and it is not
Rosetta Stone----
Mr. Chaffetz. So how do you follow through on that to make
sure--I mean, you are a company. You got employees. You are
trying to do the right thing and somebody is taking your brand,
your product, selling it in China. What do you do? Who do you
call?
Mr. Fulkerson. It is a great question. In China, there is
very little that we can do. Working with U.S. Customs and ICE
here in the United States--and they have been very helpful in
helping us intercept pirated goods coming in.
Mr. Chaffetz. So what do they tell you when you say, hey,
look we got a problem in China? What do they say?
Mr. Fulkerson. I am on the technology side. I should get
someone else to answer the specific question of what kind of
responses we get. But my impression, my layman's impression, is
that they basically say there is not much they can do, but they
will petition the Chinese Government. They will send letters,
but my belief is that those are just ignored.
Mr. Chaffetz. Well, that would be interesting. I would love
to follow up how a company who is starting to be successful--
how they follow up with the enforcement side of things, not
just for the importation but what is happening in other
markets, China and others. It is not just China, but certainly
that is the one that you continue to hear time and time again.
We have just a few seconds. Dr. Smith, tell us just in the
briefest words--we always talk about getting more kids engaged
and interested in engineering. How do we do that?
Mr. Smith. I think you have to show them something
exciting. There are plenty of exciting activities at our
university. We have a big tour program. We bring students
through a lot. Motor sports, for example, is a big draw in
North Carolina, and a lot of students come through our motor
sports shop. I think you have to show them something exciting,
a real, tangible product.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
My time has expired.
We will now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Committee very much for
this hearing.
Let me just, across the board, ask Dr. Fulkerson, Dr.
Atala, Dr. Smith, how many jobs can this kind of technology
create in America. Just give me a wide range. And do you
consider this kind of technology or technology, period, sort of
the work generator of the 21st century?
Mr. Fulkerson. I think the easy answer is it is unbounded.
I think as we become more and more an information society and
we grow more and more information workers, all Americans at
some level are potentially engaged in information work. I think
we have specific numbers in my written testimony from the
Business Software Alliance of exactly how many jobs in which
type of industries. But I believe from a growth perspective,
technology has been a major driver of growth, obviously, in the
last 30 years, but whether that is just pure information,
computer technology, or any of the other----
Ms. Jackson Lee. But jobs could grow every year. You can
see jobs growing every year with technology inventions.
Mr. Fulkerson. Oh, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Dr. Atala?
Dr. Atala. The same. In the field of regenerative medicine,
basically you have an increasing number of technologies that
are being used in terms of experimentally, a large number of
companies which are currently formed for the field. And we do
expect--as I had mentioned earlier, the current global market
for this field is estimated to be in the vicinity of $118
billion just by 2013.
Ms. Jackson Lee. And you are an American-based company. So
you are generating $118 billion that would impact creation of
American jobs and investment in America. Is that correct?
Dr. Atala. Well, I am actually at the Wake Forest Institute
for Regenerative Medicine which is a nonprofit part of Wake
Forest University in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right. I am aware of that, but out of that
would come enormous amount of commercial or private sector jobs
or investment.
Dr. Atala. That is right. One of the major benefits is to
be able to keep these technologies here, keep the innovation
here in the U.S., manufacture the technologies here, and create
jobs here.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I want to hear more, but my
time is short.
Dr. Smith, how many jobs do you think out of this kind of
arena could one create in the 21st century?
Mr. Smith. Well, for the technologies that I showed, the
number of jobs that were directly created are at the moment
small. These are start-up companies. But because the
technologies that I showed are directed specifically at
productivity, the number of jobs that are created is quite
large.
There is a lot of talk about the manufacturing sector in
the United States having trouble competing internationally with
the wage difference. And I think that is the wrong question. I
think the right question is given that there is a wage
difference, how do you remain competitive, and I think the ways
that you remain competitive are you innovate, you make things
that other people can't make, you improve your productivity. If
you want to maintain a wage difference, you have to maintain a
productivity difference. I think if we get it right, what would
matter is proximity to market more than the cost of the labor.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We need to market what our best talents
are.
Let me ask my two questions so that you can be in the
middle of answering if my time runs out.
First of all, we all know as kids, when you heard a shriek
on the playground, it was somebody saying you are not playing
fair, or maybe when you heard a little rumble in the back yard
somebody was not playing fair. I abhor an uneven playing field.
I think it is just ludicrous.
So I need you to tell me with your greatest passion, even
though, Dr. Fulkerson, you said that is not your area, what
Congress can do to stop this piracy and this stealing of
intellectual property. Just give it to us from your gut.
Dr. Fulkerson, I just want to know can I learn Spanish,
French, and anything else. How long will it take me on the
Rosetta Stone? [Laughter.]
Ms. Jackson Lee. But my last point, Dr. Atala, if you could
tell me whether or not you have got any partnerships or are
working with any minority and women doctors, researchers, and
scientists and cultivating any small businesses from the
minority and women-owned business community.
But if you could quickly go on what Congress can do to stop
this.
Mr. Fulkerson. We obviously have to continue enforcement of
the folks who are actually doing the piracy. But I continue to
believe that the single biggest thing we can do is make it
harder to find the pirates.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Make it?
Mr. Fulkerson. Make it harder for consumers to find the
pirates. If a pawn shop was selling pirated goods, local police
will shut that down. If an international search engine is
making it easy to find pirated sites, there is no way to shut
that down. They will cooperate at times, but it is just too
easy for pirates to get into our living rooms, to get into our
laptops, and sell us stuff. I believe in a free Internet, but
there are things we need to do around trademark enforcement and
protection to make that harder.
Also, I would like to just add--I can get you the job
number. The Business Software Alliance, of which we are a
member--and we can provide you this information--estimates that
in the U.S. over the next 2 years, we will create 282,000 jobs
in information technology.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Excellent.
Dr. Atala?
Dr. Atala. Yes. As part of the institute, we are proud to
report that we have people that come with us from 23 different
countries and many nationalities and many different minority
groups. So that has been a good thing for us.
When we do the clinical trials actually, we have to abide
by all the regulations in terms of making sure that all
patients also participate in the clinical trials.
And when it comes to industry, of course, again we are not
connected at that level with industry as part of my role at the
institute, but when we do commercialize these technologies and
we do bring these technologies to a commercial venue, we
certainly make sure that all of the appropriate rules are
followed in that direction.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Dr. Smith? Stop piracy.
Mr. Smith. Stop piracy. This is difficult. I mean, I think
it is even difficult inside of the U.S. If you are a small
company and you believe that you are being infringed, it is
often difficult to prevail because you don't have the funds
that are required to last long enough in court. And I think
overseas this is even a more complicated problem.
In regard to your question about minorities, one of the
most successful start-ups spun out of UNC Charlotte by my
graduate student actually is a female-owned company.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Excellent.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank all of you.
Mr. Chaffetz. Thank you.
At this time, we are going to draw a conclusion to this
hearing. We appreciate all the time, effort, and resources that
you take to be here. We truly do appreciate your making time
for the Committee and offering your expertise. And at this
time, the Committee stands adjourned.
Oh, yes. I would make a note for the record that all
Members will have 5 legislative days to enter information into
the record, and we also extend that to you. If you have
additional comments or things that you would like to see
inserted into the record, we allow for 5 additional days.
And with that, I thank the witnesses and the Committee will
stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:48 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]


