- HEARING TO REVIEW CREDIT CONDITIONS IN RURAL AMERICA

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING TO REVIEW CREDIT CONDITIONS IN RURAL AMERICA

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON DEPARTMENT OPERATIONS, OVERSIGHT, AND CREDIT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

APRIL 14, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-12

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
66-249                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  PETER WELCH, Vermont
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          Northern Mariana Islands
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight, and Credit

JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska, Chairman

TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio, Ranking
STEVE KING, Iowa                     Minority Member
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
STEPHEN LEE FINCHER, Tennessee       JOE BACA, California

Brandon Lipps, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Fortenberry, Hon. Jeff, a Representative in Congress from
Nebraska, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Fudge, Hon. Marcia L., a Representative in Congress from Ohio,
opening statement..............................................     2

Witnesses

Dolcini, Val, Acting Administrator, Farm Service Agency, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.; accompanied by
Chris Beyerhelm, Deputy Administrator for Farm Loan Programs,
FSA, USDA......................................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Strom, Hon. Leland A., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Farm
Credit Administration, McLean, VA..............................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Henderson, Ph.D., Jason R., Vice President and Omaha Branch
Executive, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Omaha, NE......    21
Prepared statement...........................................    23
Gerber, Michael A., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (Farmer Mac),
Washington, D.C................................................    36
Prepared statement...........................................    38
Stark, Doug, President and Chief Executive Officer, Farm Credit
Services of America; on behalf of Farm Credit System...........    45
Prepared statement...........................................    46
Williams, Matthew H., Chairman and President, Gothenburg State
Bank; Vice Chairman, American Bankers Association, Gothenburg,
NE.............................................................    52
Prepared statement...........................................    53
Starline, Matthew, Owner, Starline Organics, LLC; Member, Ohio
Ecological Food and Farm Association, Athens, OH...............    58
Prepared statement...........................................    59

HEARING TO REVIEW CREDIT CONDITIONS IN RURAL AMERICA

----------

THURSDAY, APRIL 14, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Department Operations, Oversight,
and Credit,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 1301 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Jeff
Fortenberry [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Fortenberry, Johnson,
Crawford, Fudge, and McGovern.
Staff present: Patricia Barr, Tamara Hinton, John Konya,
Brandon Lipps, Josh Maxwell, Debbie Smith, Nona Darrell, Liz
Friedlander, Lisa Shelton, Anne Simmons, and Jamie Mitchell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JEFF FORTENBERRY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM NEBRASKA

The Chairman. The hearing of the Subcommittee on Department
Operations, Oversight, and Credit to review credit conditions
in rural America, will come to order. Thank you all for joining
us today. Before I give my opening statement, I would also like
to recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Fudge, from Cleveland,
Ohio. It is a pleasure to begin working with you. This is our
first hearing of the 112th Congress of the Subcommittee. And
thank you to our witnesses for coming today. We appreciate your
willingness to testify.
When this Committee last reviewed rural credit conditions
in June of 2009, crop prices were down. The Department of
Agriculture was predicting the average farm income would
decrease by 20 percent. Non-performing loans were on the rise
and credit conditions were generally tight that year. A short
year and a half later, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
reported that rural America was at the forefront of our
nation's economic recovery. Now, credit conditions in rural
America are generally good. Various factors include strong
demand, tight supplies, and low interest rates. These have
resulted in high prices and increased net farm income. The Farm
Credit Administration reports that the Farm Credit System
remains fundamentally sound, is well capitalized, and continues
to generate strong earnings.
However, the FCA reports that a few sectors of the ag
economy are experiencing problems that may result in portfolio
stress. The Farm Service Agency reported that its direct and
guaranteed loans have increased in 2009, 2010, and are
projected to increase in 2011. Both the FDIC and the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City have expressed concern over rising
farmland values, and the FCA reports that it is closely
monitoring this trend.
While the current agriculture economy and high farm prices
are resulting in overall good credit conditions, we must be
cautious moving forward. As we know, the agricultural economy
is highly cyclical. History teaches us that interest rates will
eventually go up and record-high prices will eventually come
down. We must ensure that good farm and agricultural credit
policies are in place to sustain an abundant supply of both
food and fiber.
I hope to hear more from you, our witnesses, on the current
credit conditions and how we can ensure the availability of
credit for America's farmers now, as well as into the future.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fortenberry follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jeff Fortenberry, a Representative in
Congress from Nebraska

I would like to welcome our witnesses and guests to today's
hearing.
When this Committee last reviewed rural credit conditions in June
of 2009, crop prices were down, the Department of Agriculture was
predicting that average farm income would decrease by 20 percent, non-
performing loans were on the rise and credit conditions were generally
tight. A short year and a half later the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City reported that rural America was at the forefront of our nation's
economic recovery.
Now, credit conditions in rural America are generally good. Various
factors including strong demand, tight supplies and low interest rates
have resulted in high prices and increased net farm income. The Farm
Credit Administration reports that the Farm Credit System remains
fundamentally sound, is well-capitalized, and continues to generate
strong earnings.
However, FCA reports that a few sectors of the ag economy are
experiencing problems that may result in portfolio stress. The Farm
Service Agency reported that its Direct and Guaranteed Loans have
increased in 2009, 2010, and are projected to increase in 2011. Both
the FDIC and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City have expressed
concern over rising farmland values, and the FCA reports that it is
closely monitoring this trend.
While the current agricultural economy and high farm prices are
resulting in overall good credit conditions, we must be cautious moving
forward. As we know, the agricultural economy is highly cyclical.
History teaches us that interest rates will eventually go up and record
high-prices will eventually come down. We must ensure that good farm
and agricultural credit policies are in place to sustain an abundant
supply of food and fiber.
I hope to hear more from our witnesses on current credit conditions
and how we can ensure availability of credit for America's farmers now
and in the future.

The Chairman. So with that I will turn to the Ranking
Member for her opening comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. MARCIA L. FUDGE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM OHIO

Ms. Fudge. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I certainly
look forward to working with you. Having had the opportunity to
get to know you a little bit over the last few months, I could
not have asked for a better Chairman. So I thank you. And I
thank you for holding this hearing to review the status of
credit in rural America.
As a new Member of the Committee, I am pleased to have the
opportunity to both listen and to ask questions of today's
expert witnesses. I understand that the purpose of this hearing
is to look at the credit conditions in rural America. As our
nation's economy continues to recover, now is an important time
for this Subcommittee to assess rural ag credit.
I represent the Cleveland area so there are not a lot of
farmers in my district. So my focus will be on the soundness of
the credit extended to farmers and how that credit affects the
larger economy and the food American's serve their families. I
am also interested in learning how ag lenders are keeping up
with some of the developments I see in our cities and suburban
areas.
There has been an increasing demand for locally produced
food and growth in neighborhood farmers' markets along with
other innovative ways to improve access to healthy and fresh
foods especially in food deserts.
Finally, I will have some questions about how lenders are
reaching out to small, beginning, and minority farmers. It
seems to me with initiatives like USDA's ``Know Your Farmer,
Know Your Food,'' there are opportunities for young and
ambitious entrepreneurs who have a good, wholesome product and
a good idea and a willingness to work hard. Are they being
served by lenders who have an understanding of these smaller
enterprises? Adequate credit is the lynchpin for successful
farming and ranching for operations of all sizes in all states
and all locales.
So again, welcome to our witnesses. I look forward to
hearing your testimony. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congresswoman. I would like to,
first of all, welcome Mr. Crawford to the Subcommittee, and any
opening statement you have will be submitted for the record.
I would also like to welcome our first panel of witnesses
to the table. Mr. Dolcini, who is the Acting Administrator of
the Farm Service Agency of the Department of Agriculture here
in Washington, he is accompanied by Mr. Chris Beyerhelm, the
Deputy Administrator for Farm Loan Programs, Farm Service
Agency of the Department of Agriculture here in D.C. I would
like to also recognize Mr. Leland Strom, the Chairman and CEO
of the Farm Credit Administration in McLean, Virginia; as well
as Dr. Jason Henderson, Vice President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City. Welcome, gentlemen.
Mr. Dolcini, you may proceed.

STATEMENT OF VAL DOLCINI, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR, FARM SERVICE
AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.; ACCOMPANIED BY CHRIS BEYERHELM,
DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR FOR FARM LOAN PROGRAMS, FSA, USDA

Mr. Dolcini. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Fudge,
Mr. Crawford. And thanks for the opportunity to discuss credit
conditions in rural America.
My name is Val Dolcini. I am the Acting Administrator of
the Farm Service Agency, and I am joined today by Chris
Beyerhelm, my Deputy Administrator for Farm Loan Programs. And
today, we will focus our remarks on the current state of farm
loan programs at FSA.
Let me begin with a brief overview of our farm loan
programs. Farmers and ranchers who were denied commercial
credit can turn to loan programs administered by FSA. And while
we have been known as the lender of last resort by some, I
think we have really become the lender of first opportunity to
many in rural America.
The Agency assists farmers through both direct and
guaranteed loans. Direct loans are made and serviced by FSA
employees who provide supervision to direct loan borrowers.
Direct loans are not intended to be a permanent source of
credit. Rather, they are intended to help borrowers transition
to commercial credit.
Guaranteed loans, on the other hand, are made and funded by
a commercial lender, and FSA guarantees up to 95 percent of the
loan principal and interest. Guaranteed lenders are then
accountable for loan servicing under this guarantee.
All FSA farm loan programs are discretionary programs
funded through annual appropriations and because the vast
majority of the loans are repaid, FSA loans carry a low cost
for the taxpayer. Last year, for example, $155 million in
appropriations supported over $5.2 billion in loans to about
36,000 borrowers. And as of March 31 of this year, $70.7
million in Fiscal Year 2011 appropriations had supported more
than $2.4 billion in lending.
As in recent years, demand for loans has remained quite
high, as the Chairman pointed out. While higher commodity
prices have been beneficial for some producers, input costs
such as fuel and fertilizer have remained high. And higher feed
costs for livestock and dairy producers have helped sustain the
demand for operating credit. As land prices continue to rise,
commercial lenders in many regions are continuing to maintain
relatively tight credit standards overall.
Term limits on our loans are also having an added effect on
loan availability. Federal statute presently limits borrowers
with guaranteed operating loans to 15 years of total
eligibility. This has been suspended in the past, but the
latest suspension expired on December 31 of last year, making
about 4,500 guaranteed loan borrowers ineligible for further
guaranteed loans as a result.
Given this high demand, we at FSA are always working to
improve the way we administer and service our loan portfolio.
And in Fiscal Year 2010, I am proud to report that the loss
rate in our Direct Loan Program fell to 1.2 percent, which was
the second-lowest level since 1986. The direct loan delinquency
rate stood at 5.6 percent in Fiscal Year 2010, its lowest point
in 2 decades, and the foreclosure rate in the FSA direct loan
portfolio overall stood at just \1/10\ of a percent last year.
While hoping to keep troubled loan numbers low, we were
also able to graduate more than 2,000 direct loan borrowers to
a guaranteed loan last year. And I am particularly proud of
that statistic because helping farmers build those
relationships with their local community banks is a key step in
establishing their future success in agriculture.
As I explained in greater detail in my written statement,
we are processing loans more quickly now than ever before. And
this improvement is largely due to modernized IT systems which
help our field office staff to deliver these programs more
efficiently. For example, business plans are now processed
through a web-based system which allows real-time access to
loan data, and these modernized systems allow us to manage loan
applications more quickly.
I would note that support in Congress for this critical
infrastructure improvement has made these great strides in
service possible, and I am grateful for your continued support.
Finally, Members, I would like speak briefly on the issue
of equal access to our loans. As you know, Secretary Vilsack
has been extremely clear that improper and inequitable
treatment of those that USDA and the Farm Service Agency serve
will not be tolerated. We have worked diligently to improve the
processing of civil rights complaints, requesting an external
analysis of program delivery by USDA service center agencies
where appropriate. And I would reiterate that I, along with all
the members of the FSA management team both here and across the
country--and we do have 2,248 service centers in all 50
states--remain fully committed to equal access and opportunity
for all the customers that FSA serves.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
allowing me to share this snapshot of FSA loan activities with
you. I am available and happy to answer any of your questions
now or in the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dolcini follows:]

Prepared Statement of Val Dolcini, Acting Administrator, Farm Service
Agency, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you to discuss credit conditions in rural
America, focusing on the current status and operations of the farm loan
programs at the Farm Service Agency (FSA).

Credit Conditions
The farm economy strengthened in 2010. However, farm income,
especially net farm income, is very unevenly distributed. Much of the
improvement in farm economic conditions is driven by higher commodity
prices. While higher prices have been beneficial for some crop
producers, they have also resulted in higher feed costs which are
squeezing profits among livestock and dairy producers.
A combination of higher commodity and energy prices is
significantly increasing the amount of capital required to finance
agricultural production. Crop-related expenses grew 77 percent between
2002 and 2008, and are expected to rise by 9.5 percent in 2011.
Livestock expenses increased by 64.4 percent between 2002 and 2008, and
are forecast to increase by 6.8 percent in 2011. These higher
production costs increase the demand for operating credit, increase
financial leverage, and strain liquidity.
Recent Federal Reserve Surveys indicate commercial lenders in most
regions are continuing to maintain stringent credit standards.
Concerned that a combination of factors may be pushing farmland values
quite high, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has issued
guidance to its examiners to scrutinize farm loans more rigorously,
particularly in financial institutions with a concentration of farm
lending. The combination of high feed and other input costs, increased
operating capital needs, and a continued high level of loan scrutiny by
lenders means some farmers are still being denied commercial credit.

FSA Farm Loan Programs
Family farmers who are denied commercial credit due to lender
standards, but are otherwise creditworthy, can turn to the farm loan
programs administered by FSA. The Agency assists farmers through direct
and guaranteed farm loans. Direct loans are made and serviced by FSA;
agency employees provide supervision and technical assistance to direct
loan borrowers. Direct loans are not intended to be a permanent source
of credit and borrowers agree to obtain commercial credit and refinance
their FSA debts when they are able to do so.
Guaranteed loans are made, funded and serviced by a commercial
lender. FSA guarantees up to 90 percent of the loan principal and
interest. FSA employees must evaluate and make a credit decision on all
guaranteed loans. Guaranteed lenders must retain at least the non-
guaranteed portion of the loan in their portfolio and are accountable
for loan servicing under the FSA guarantee.
Funding. FSA farm loan programs are discretionary programs funded
through annual appropriations. In accordance with the Federal Credit
Reform Act of 1991, appropriations for FSA farm loans are based on the
projected total cost of loans when they are made. Because the vast
majority of these loans are repaid, the programs operate at a
relatively low cost; Federal budget resources are significantly
leveraged through the loan programs. In Fiscal Year (FY) 2010, for
example, $155.3 million in appropriations supported $5.29 billion in
direct and guaranteed FSA loans.
Loan Demand. Activity in FSA's farm loan programs indicates that a
significant number of farmers continue to be unable to obtain
commercial credit under current conditions. Farm loan program demand is
usually a reflection of financial conditions in the farm economy: when
the over-all farm economy is strong, farm loan activity declines;
during times of financial stress in the farm economy, demand for FSA's
loans rises. This makes sense, since a basic requirement to qualify for
the loan programs is to be unable to meet the criteria for commercial
credit.
In early FY 2009, loan demand surged to levels that had not been
seen since the early 1980s. Demand for farm loan program assistance in
FY 2009 and FY 2010 reached its highest levels since FY 1985. Demand
has continued at, and in some programs increased above, those near-
record FY 2009 levels (Chart 1). Use of the guaranteed farm ownership
program in FY 2010 reached an all-time high. FY 2010 direct operating
and farm ownership obligations nearly doubled compared to FY 2008
levels. Application activity in FY 2011 reflects demand levels similar
to the higher levels of FY 2009 and FY 2010.
Over the past 2\1/2\ years, an unusually high number of direct
operating loan applications have been received from new customers.
Normally, about 20 percent of direct operating loan applications are
from farmers who do not have FSA loans. Since 2009, over 40 percent of
direct operating loan applications have been from farmers who are not
FSA borrowers. As of April 4, 2011, 43 percent of the direct operating
loans made in FY 2011 were to customers who did not have existing FSA
operating loans.

Performance and Portfolio Condition
Farm loan programs continue to emphasize the importance of
processing applications in a timely manner. Between FY 2001 and FY
2011, farm loan programs reduced its direct loan application processing
timeframes by 11.5 days (31 percent), and reduced guaranteed loan
processing timeframes by 2 days (10 percent). As of March 30, 2011, the
average time from application receipt to final decision for direct
loans was 25.9 days, and for guaranteed loans, 7.8 days. It is
remarkable that even though loan demand has surged, there has been no
deterioration in application processing time. This is a testament to
the dedication of FSA field staff and the effectiveness of the
Information Technology (IT) solutions farm loan programs has deployed.
The quality of our portfolio has also continued to improve, with
foreclosure and loss rates falling alongside an increase in borrower
``graduation'' to commercial loans.
Loss Rates. In FY 2010, losses in the direct loan program fell to
their second lowest level since 1986--just 1.2 percent (Chart 2).
Losses for FY 2010 in the guaranteed loan program were 0.6 percent,
(Chart 2).
Delinquency Rates. As with losses, the direct loan delinquency
rates have been at historic lows for the past 2 decades at 5.9 percent
for FY 2010 (Chart 3). This is the result of steady and dramatic
decreases, from a 23.8 percent delinquency rate in FY 1995. The
decrease was facilitated by expanded authority, since 1996, to offset
loan obligations with Federal payments, salaries and income tax refunds
to delinquent borrowers. In the guaranteed program, the FY 2011
delinquency rate was 1.69 percent, the second lowest since 1995 (Chart
3).
Foreclosures. Foreclosure rates continue to be very low in the
direct loan program. In 2010, FSA completed 64 foreclosures. This
represents less than \1/10\ of 1 percent of the agency's direct loan
caseload. The extremely low foreclosure rate is the result of use of
all available servicing tools and a structured review process to ensure
that all options to assist the borrower have been exhausted before a
foreclosure action is started.
Inventory Properties. Inventory farm properties--those that have
come into government ownership through voluntary conveyance or
foreclosure--are also at historic lows, with just 86 farms totaling
10,900 acres in FY 2010 (Chart 4). In 1995, FSA held nearly 1,800 farms
totaling 598,000 acres. Many of those inventory properties were sold to
established and beginning farmers, providing those individuals with
prime opportunities to expand or create new operations.
Graduation Rates. Federal law requires FSA to ``graduate'' its
borrowers to commercial credit when they have made sufficient progress
to be able to qualify for loans from other lenders. They are assisted
by the agency in refinancing their direct loans with FSA guaranteed
loans from commercial lenders. Some 2,221 direct loan borrowers were
able to graduate in FY 2010.

Equitable Treatment and Participation
Secretary Vilsack has been extremely clear that improper and
inequitable treatment of individuals the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) and FSA serve will not be tolerated. On April 21,
2009, the Secretary announced several actions in a comprehensive
approach to ensure fair and equitable treatment of USDA employees and
constituents. These actions included an initiation of several
improvements in processing civil rights complaints, requesting an
external analysis of program delivery by USDA service center agencies,
and 90 day suspension of FSA farm foreclosures, which has provided us
time to ensure that all producers have received their statutory
protections. I, and all the members of the FSA management team, remain
fully committed to equal access and opportunity for all those FSA
serves. I will closely monitor the operations of farm loan programs and
all other FSA programs to assure that our producers, program
applicants, and employees receive fair and equitable treatment. I want
to update you on a few key activities dealing with these important
issues.
Program participation. An examination of the composition of FSA's
loan portfolio indicates that FSA finances socially disadvantaged
farmers at a much higher rate than that groups' proportion of the farm
population (Chart 5). FSA has significantly increased the amount of
loan funds provided to socially disadvantaged applicants. Between 1995
and 2010, the FSA direct socially and disadvantaged caseload increased
from 3,260 to 14,840 borrowers. Between 1997 and 2010, the FSA
guaranteed socially disadvantaged caseload increased from 1,730 to
2,998 borrowers.
In the 2008 Farm Bill, Congress re-affirmed the focus for FSA
programs on beginning farmers and ranchers. FSA continues to strive to
reach more beginning farmers and ranchers and has increased the amount
of loan funds provided to beginning farmers and ranchers. The FSA
direct loan beginning farmer caseload increased from 3,474 in 1995 to
27,111 borrowers in 2010. Guaranteed caseloads for beginning farmers
and ranchers were first reported in 1997. The FSA guaranteed beginning
farmer caseload increased from 3,617 in 1997 to 9,477 borrowers in
2010.

IT Modernization
FSA has made significant strides in modernizing the IT systems used
in farm loan programs delivery and management. Performance in delivery
and operations this year illustrates the high level of performance and
functionality of farm loan programs IT systems. So far, in FY 2011, FSA
has processed nine percent more loan requests than in FY 2010. There
has been a steady increase in loan requests since FY 2009 when the
demand jumped 41 percent over the previous year; however, service
levels have not declined. Average processing times for direct and
guaranteed loan applications have been fairly steady. This is a tribute
to the dedication and diligence of farm loan programs field staff, but
without the modern IT systems they could not have maintained an
acceptable level of service. For example, business plans for FSA
borrowers are now processed through a web-based state of the art
system. This off-the-shelf IT solution provides access to ``real time''
data on our portfolio while sharing data among our automated systems.
This system also provides a reporting option. This system has allowed
our loan officers to conduct more extensive and meaningful financial
analysis of our borrower's farm businesses, reducing risk to the
government while enhancing the opportunities of our borrowers for
success and graduation to commercial lending. FSA loan officers now
order applicant credit reports from the three major reporting companies
through this system as well, which also expedites loan processing.
Farm loan programs has also implemented modern, web-based systems
to manage the loan application, approval and funding process. This
system provides real-time management data on application activity and
allows the Agency to better cope with funding problems and act quickly
when necessary. For example, when the Agency received supplemental
funding in the American Revitalization and Recovery Act, over 2,000
farmers were waiting for desperately needed direct operating loans to
pay 2009 planting and other farming expenses. When funds were made
available to FSA, the agency was able to process obligations overnight,
and funds began flowing into farmers' bank accounts only 3 days later.
I am proud to say that FSA was one of the first agencies in the
government to get stimulus funding flowing to those who desperately
needed it. The modern, web-based IT systems in place for farm loan
programs, such as the Direct Loan System (DLS) and the Program Funds
Control System (PFCS), were a key factor in our ability to provide such
timely service.
This past year we have completed the final phase of moving all
automated farm loan systems to the Web. With the completion of this
project, duplicate data collection is eliminated and farm loan services
are being delivered even more efficiently. Our employees are able to
conduct USDA business from any location where there is broadband, WiFi
or dial-up Internet access. This allows us to conduct business with
producers at locations and times convenient to them. Additionally, this
information is stored on a centralized server allowing employees to
quickly access portfolio information and provide real time management
reports. FLP no longer relies on antiquated operating systems for
program delivery.
In addition to the business plan and loan accounting systems, other
IT systems have been developed and implemented which also enhance the
efficiency of FSA employees. Agency appraisers have recently been
provided state of the art agricultural software that allows collateral
valuations to be done more expeditiously, which facilitates faster
access to capital for loan applicants. Automated Web-based systems have
been developed for program oversight, including Farm Loan Programs Risk
Assessment (FLPRA) & the District Director Oversight System (DDORS),
which help to ensure the integrity of FSA's farm loan programs.

Ongoing Challenges
FSA will continue to face challenges in the years to come. Some of
the most prominent are staffing constraints, term limits, and
maintaining program performance and success rates through these
difficult times.
Staffing Challenges. We project that approximately 35 percent of
FSA's current loan officers will be eligible to retire by the year 2012
and 45 percent can retire by 2014. This potential loss of experienced,
seasoned credit experts comes at exactly the wrong time considering the
increased workload from this year's influx of new borrowers; and
creates the potential for major staffing challenges in the next few
years.
FSA farm loan programs have an excellent employee recruitment and
training program which will be critical to maintaining our staffing
needs. On average, it requires about 2 years to fully train a loan
officer. The 2 year training window for new loan officers complicates a
somewhat cloudy staffing forecast.
FSA's portfolio and borrowers could be exposed to financial risk if
retirement attrition projections for loan officers are even marginally
accurate. A large percentage of FSA borrowers are either beginning
farmers or financially stressed borrowers who need financial
supervision. FSA loan officers provide this financial supervision which
requires a complete knowledge of FSA programs, finances, and
agriculture enterprises.
Term Limits. The statute presently limits a borrower to direct
operating loans in each of 7 years, with an additional one-time, 2 year
waiver on an individual case basis:

There are more than 4,200 FSA borrowers who can only receive
direct operating loan assistance one more year from the agency;
and

There are more than 6,900 FSA borrowers who can only receive
direct operating loan assistance 2 more years from the agency.

Without FSA direct loan assistance, they may not have access to the
capital necessary for them to conduct their farming operations. Under
the current credit environment, it is unlikely that many of these
borrowers reaching their term limits will be able to obtain
conventional financing.
The statute presently limits borrowers with guaranteed operating
loans to 15 years of eligibility, with receipt of a direct operating
loan also counting as a year of eligibility for guaranteed operating
loans. This provision has been suspended on several occasions. Most
recently, the 2008 Farm Bill extended the suspension through December
31, 2010. As of April 5, 2011, over 4,500 guaranteed loan borrowers do
not qualify for additional loan guarantees. At the end of FY 2010, an
additional 1,447 borrowers are projected to become ineligible for
guaranteed loans; at the end of 2012, 1,896 borrowers would become
ineligible under term limits.
These limits have come at a difficult time for many borrowers who
have been affected by the unpredictable, cyclical nature of agriculture
and its influence on farmers' businesses. There is a critical need to
maintain a strong agricultural credit safety net for our hardworking
farmers and ranchers. With thousands of family farmers across rural
America facing the tightest agricultural credit markets in 20 years,
USDA loan programs can mean the difference between surviving a tough
year and losing the family business.

Conclusions
Through modernization efforts, maintaining focus on program
objectives, and the hard work and dedication of FSA employees, FSA farm
loan programs has made great strides in improving program performance.
Loan failures and losses have declined which is a strong indication
that the program mission of helping farmers become successful is being
accomplished. At the same time, increased assistance to small,
beginning, and socially disadvantaged farmers, reflects remarkable
success as well.
However, we continue to face challenges. Government resources are
increasingly limited and the agriculture production landscape is
changing. We are experiencing a unique set of conditions in the credit
and banking sectors, and to a large extent, in agriculture. These
changes pose significant barriers and challenges to the groups that FSA
farm loan programs are intended to assist. These issues create major
challenges for the agency as well, since the success of the program
depends on those whom the programs are intended to serve. To keep pace
with these changes, we will continue efforts to modernize our delivery
systems, and to refine and adjust program requirements and operations
to maximize the opportunities for our nation's small, beginning, and
socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers.
Because of our rural delivery system and experienced loan officers,
the FSA farm loan programs staff is well positioned to continue
providing high quality delivery of existing programs and new
initiatives to assist small, beginning, and socially disadvantaged
family farmers. We look forward to working with this Subcommittee to
address the challenges we face in accomplishing this worthwhile mission
to strengthen family farmers and rural America.
Thank you for allowing me to share our Department of Agriculture
perspective as you address this important issue. I am available to
answer your questions now or at any time in the future.
Chart 1
Total All Loans
Comparison of Obligations
(in Billion Dollars)

Thank you, Mr. Dolcini. Mr. Strom, please proceed.STATEMENT OF HON.

LELAND A. STROM, CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, FARM CREDIT
ADMINISTRATION, McLEAN, VA

Mr. Strom. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Chairman Fortenberry, Ranking
Member Fudge, Members of the Subcommittee, I am Leland Strom, Chairman
and Chief Executive Officer of the Farm Credit Administration. On
behalf of my colleagues on the FCA Board, Kenneth Spearman and Jill
Long Thompson and the dedicated men and women at FCA, I am pleased to
participate in this important hearing today.
FCA is an independent arms-length agency responsible for examining
and regulating the banks, associations, and related entities in the
Farm Credit System, including the Federal Agricultural Mortgage
Corporation, or Farmer Mac.
I am pleased to report that the overall condition and performance
of the System remains safe and sound and continues to meet its
Congressionally-directed mission. The System continues to have
acceptable credit quality and is well capitalized. We have increased
supervisory oversight and dedicated additional resources at a number of
institutions that are experiencing stress. These institutions represent
less than four percent of the System assets, and while they may not
pose a systemic risk, they are important to the farmers and ranchers
they serve and the fabric of the System.
Farmer Mac has made strides in rebuilding its capital position
since 2008 when it experienced difficulties with non-program investment
losses. It continues to provide an important outlet for financial
institutions to better manage their risk and increase liquidity and
funding to rural America through several business solutions.
During the economic downturn, the Farm Credit System maintained its
presence in the agricultural marketplace by providing competitively-
priced loan products to creditworthy farmers, ranchers, and
agricultural cooperatives. In fact, the System did much during the past
year to help producers and rural America. For example, recently in the
7 days following the March 31 crop report, a System institution loaned
almost $2 billion to farmers and grain elevators to meet their
financing needs, primarily to cover the margin calls due to the crop
reports' bullish impact on corn prices.
Farm income is expected to remain strong in 2011. Grains, soybeans,
and cotton largely account for the increase. High grain prices,
however, will present challenges for the livestock sector and
potentially the ethanol industry. Although grain producers are doing
well at this time, their input costs are rising rapidly. Consequently,
crop farmers could face declining profit margins if grain prices
retreat from current levels. Therefore, we must remain vigilant and
respond quickly to changes in the risk environment.
High grain prices combined with extremely low interest rates are
also propelling farmland values to record highs in parts of the
Midwest. The associations of the Farm Credit System are the largest
source of farm mortgages in the U.S. with a market share estimated by
USDA at about 43 percent. The average Farm Credit association has over
55 percent of its loan portfolio in farmland mortgages.
We at the agency have been taking a proactive approach to
addressing the rising farmland values issue. Recently, we hosted a
regulator roundtable that was attended by FDIC, the Comptroller of the
Currency, the Federal Reserve Board, and Federal Reserve banks. We plan
to continue to work together to identify risks we see for the future
and what further actions may be needed regarding our regulated
entities.
At FCA we have emphasized appropriate and sound agricultural real
estate underwriting standards in our policy guidance and examination
activity in these volatile times.
The System focuses on lending to young, beginning, and small
farmers and ranchers by offering them specially-designed programs and
services. In 2010, the System's loans to YBS producers continue to show
solid gains, indicating Farm Credit System institutions are staying
focused on this very special mission responsibility.
The Farm Credit Act established specific consumer protections for
System borrowers. For example, the Act requires Farm Credit System
institutions to review and consider restructuring a distressed
agricultural loan before initiating foreclosure. These borrower rights
requirements have served the System and its borrower-owners well for
the past 25 years.
In closing, as agriculture and rural America contend with the
challenges of these uncertain times, we are mindful that the System was
designed to be a dependable lender to agricultural and rural
communities in both good times and bad. FCA remains committed to
ensuring that the System can fulfill its mandate to both current and
future generations of farmers and ranchers and the rural areas in which
they live.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my statement and I will happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Strom follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Leland A. Strom, Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer, Farm Credit Administration, McLean, VA

Introduction
Chairman Fortenberry, Ranking Member Fudge, Members of the
Subcommittee, I am Leland A. Strom, Chairman and Chief Executive
Officer of the Farm Credit Administration (FCA or Agency). On behalf of
my colleagues on the FCA Board, Kenneth Spearman of Florida, Jill Long
Thompson of Indiana, and all the dedicated men and women of the Agency,
I am pleased to participate in this important hearing today.
FCA is an independent agency responsible for examining and
regulating the banks, associations, and related entities in the Farm
Credit System (FCS or System), including the Federal Agricultural
Mortgage Corporation (Farmer Mac). The FCS is a nationwide network of
borrower-owned financial institutions that provide credit to farmers,
ranchers, residents of rural communities, agricultural and rural
utility cooperatives, and other eligible borrowers.

FCA Mission
As directed by Congress, FCA's mission is to ensure a safe, sound,
and dependable source of credit and related services for agriculture
and rural America. The Agency accomplishes its mission in two important
ways. First, FCA protects the safety and soundness of the FCS by
examining and supervising all FCS institutions, including Farmer Mac,
and ensures that the institutions comply with applicable laws and
regulations. Our examinations and oversight strategies focus on an
institution's financial condition and any material existing or
potential risk, as well as on the ability of its board and management
to direct its operations. We also evaluate each institution's
compliance with laws and regulations to ensure that it serves all
eligible borrowers, including young, beginning, and small farmers and
ranchers. If a System institution violates a law or regulation or
operates in an unsafe or unsound manner, we use our supervisory and
enforcement authorities to take appropriate corrective action.
Second, FCA develops policies and regulations that govern how
System institutions conduct their business and interact with customers.
FCA's policy and regulation development focuses on protecting System
safety and soundness; implementing the Farm Credit Act; providing
minimum requirements for lending, related services, investments,
capital, and mission; and ensuring adequate financial disclosure and
governance. The policy development program includes approval of
corporate charter changes, System debt issuance, and other financial
and operational matters.
Through the oversight and leadership of the House and Senate
Agriculture Committees, many important reforms were made to the Farm
Credit Administration and the FCS as a result of the agricultural
credit crisis of the 1980s. This included restructuring FCA as an
independent arm's length regulator with formal enforcement powers,
providing borrower rights to System borrowers with distressed loans,
and establishing the Farm Credit Insurance Fund (Insurance Fund) to
protect System investors.
Over the ensuing 2 decades, the Farm Credit System, which FCA
regulates, has restored its financial health and the trust of its
borrowers. With its authority as an arm's length regulator, FCA has
been able to ensure that System institutions adhered to safety and
soundness standards. The Insurance Fund also helped by restoring
investor confidence.
Both the System and FCA learned much during the crisis of the
1980s, and those lessons helped build a much stronger Farm Credit
System, as well as a stronger regulator. As the arm's length regulator
of the FCS, the Agency will continue to focus on ensuring that the
System remains safe and sound by promulgating regulations, providing
appropriate guidance, and maintaining strong and proactive examination
and supervisory programs. With the dynamics and risks in the
agricultural and financial sectors today, FCA recognizes that FCS
institutions must have the appropriate culture, governance, policies,
procedures, and management controls to effectively identify and manage
risks. Today the System is a dependable provider of credit to
agriculture and rural America as intended by Congress.

Farm Credit System Mission
The FCS is a government-sponsored enterprise (GSE) created by
Congress in 1916 to provide American agriculture with a dependable
source of credit. It is a nationwide network of cooperatively organized
banks and associations that are owned and controlled by their
borrowers, serving all 50 states and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
The System provides credit and other services to agricultural producers
and farmer-owned agricultural and aquatic cooperatives. It also makes
loans for agricultural processing and marketing activities, rural
housing, farm-related businesses, rural utilities, and foreign and
domestic companies involved in international agricultural trade. In
addition, the System provides funding and discounting service to
certain ``other financing institutions'' and forms partnerships with
commercial banks to provide credit to agriculture and rural America
through participations and syndications.
As required by law, System borrowers own stock or participation
certificates in System institutions. The FCS had nearly 880,000 loans
and approximately 488,000 stockholders in 2010. Approximately 85
percent of the stockholders were farmers or cooperatives with voting
stock. The remaining 15 percent were nonvoting stockholders, including
rural homeowners and other financing institutions that borrow from the
System. The U.S. Department of Agriculture's latest data show that the
System's market share of farm debt was 40 percent, second only to the
44 percent share held by commercial banks.
One of FCA's oversight roles is to ensure that the System, with its
mission devoted to agriculture and rural America, maintains its
presence in the agricultural marketplace to provide competitive and
dependable credit for all eligible and creditworthy farmers, ranchers,
and agricultural cooperatives. In fact, the System has maintained its
mission service during the difficult markets of the past 3 years to
help producers and rural America. When commodity prices soared in early
2008, System institutions stepped forward to meet the critical
financing needs of the grain elevator industry. They met increased
demands for financing machinery and higher input costs for producers.
The FCS also helped Midwest borrowers affected by floods and worked
with livestock producers, especially dairy and hog producers, as they
made difficult decisions during stressful market conditions. The System
also provided funding for critical infrastructure projects in rural
America through innovative bond financing, such as a critical-care
facility in St. James, Minnesota, and similar needed community
facilities in the Midwest, Southeast, and Northwest. Overall the System
continued to have access to funds and was able to increase its lending
to agriculture and rural America during a financial crisis and severe
recession.

Condition of the FCS
Farm income is expected to be very strong in 2011. The U.S.
Department of Agriculture forecasts $98.6 billion in farm net cash
income--the highest since 1974, after adjusting for inflation. The high
prices that grain, soybean, and cotton farmers will receive for their
products will largely account for this increase. High feed costs,
however, will present challenges for livestock producers. Already tight
supplies of corn and soybeans in the United States could lead to
significantly higher feed costs in 2011 and 2012 if growing conditions
are unfavorable. High grain prices combined with extremely low interest
rates are also propelling farmland values to record highs in parts of
the Midwest.
We are carefully watching factors such as higher interest rates
that could cause a reversal in the factors that have contributed to a
strong farm economy and land values. We are also watching carefully how
higher oil prices may influence the global economy and undermine the
demand for farm products. Although grain producers are doing well at
this time, their input costs are rising rapidly. For example, fuel and
fertilizer prices, which account for about \1/3\ of the non-land costs
of a Central Illinois corn farm, have increased 22 percent and 31
percent, respectively, since August 2010. Consequently, crop farmers
could face declining profit margins if grain prices retreat from
current levels.
The System remained fundamentally safe and sound in 2010 and is
well positioned to withstand the continuing challenges affecting the
general economy and agriculture. Total capital increased to $33.3
billion at December 31, 2010, up from $30.0 billion a year earlier. In
addition, more than 81 percent of total capital is in the form of
earned surplus, the most stable form of capital. The ratio of total
capital to total assets increased to 14.5 percent at year-end 2010,
compared with 13.9 percent the year before, as strong earnings allowed
the System to continue to grow its capital base.
Loan growth picked up in 2010, especially in the second half of the
year when commodity prices increased sharply. In total, loans grew by
6.4 percent in 2010 compared with 2.1 percent in 2009. The greatest
contributors to the System's loan growth last year were loans to
cooperatives and real estate mortgage loans, as they increased $5.7
billion and $2.7 billion, respectively. Credit has been available to
eligible creditworthy borrowers. Outstanding loans to producers of most
major commodities increased in 2010 compared with the prior year.
However, loans outstanding did decline in 2010 for forestry, poultry
and eggs, hogs, and biofuels industries that have struggled recently.
Nonperforming loans decreased modestly to $3.4 billion as of
December 31, 2010, and represented 10.2 percent of total capital at the
end of 2010, down from 11.8 percent at the end of 2009. Two of the most
troubled industries in 2009, hogs and ethanol, experienced a
substantial improvement in 2010 because of much stronger prices for
their products. Other sectors that have had difficulties over the past
few years, such as cattle, dairy, and forestry, recorded relatively
small changes in their nonaccrual rates in 2010. Dairy improved
slightly, while cattle and forestry registered somewhat higher
nonaccrual rates. Although credit quality is satisfactory overall, the
volatility in commodity prices and weaknesses in the general economy
have increased risks to some agricultural operators, creating the
potential for future declines in asset quality.
The System reported significantly higher earnings in 2010, with a
combined net income of $3.5 billion, up 22.6 percent from 2009. Return
on assets remained favorable at 1.60 percent. System institutions, as
cooperatives, distributed 29 percent of their earnings in patronage to
their borrower-owners in 2010.
Further strengthening the System's financial condition is the
Insurance Fund, which holds more than $3.2 billion. Administered by the
Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation (Insurance Corporation), this
fund protects investors in System-wide consolidated debt obligations.
The System's access to capital markets returned to normal during
2010, which helped the System further augment its solid overall
financial strength, serve its mission, and maintain the Insurance Fund.
As a GSE with solid financial performance, the System benefited from
monetary policy actions that helped to foster historically low domestic
interest rate levels. Tepid investor demand for longer-term System-wide
debt securities in 2009 improved appreciably in 2010, particularly for
those with maturities of more than 5 years. While the System expects to
have continued reliable access to the debt capital markets to support
its credit mission in 2011, it has also taken steps to enhance the
liquidity of its investment portfolio to provide flexibility in the
event of restricted market access. The System's overall liquidity
position equaled 173 days at December 31, 2010, well in excess of the
90 day regulatory minimum.

Rising Farmland Values
We are in an optimistic period for U.S. agriculture, as rising
world and domestic demand for commodities has been coupled with very
low interest rates. Not surprisingly, profitability and expectations
for further growth in returns are being bid into the value of U.S.
farmland. Farmland values rose in 2010, especially in the latter half
of the year, with much of the Midwest showing strong double-digit
annual gains. While data for this past winter are incomplete, anecdotal
evidence suggests that farmland values continued to rise this past
winter, especially in the major corn and soybean producing regions. The
importance of farmland values to the agricultural economy and to
agricultural credit markets cannot be overstated, as farmland accounts
for the overwhelming majority of the $2 trillion in farm equity that
USDA is projecting for the end of this year.
History has shown that substantial downward adjustments to the
value of farmland can occur. The severe correction in the 1980s
reshaped farming and agricultural lending alike. We studied the land
markets of both periods, and while there are some similarities, there
are also some important differences. The most significant difference is
that the level of debt or leverage used to purchase farmland today is
much less than it was in the 1980s. Nonetheless, FCA is closely
monitoring the situation because FCS associations are the largest
supplier of farm mortgages in the United States, with a market share
estimated by USDA of about 43 percent.
Although the current economy generally supports today's average
land prices, some factors, such as higher interest rates, geopolitical
developments that could undermine global demand for farm products, and
an unexpected decline in grain prices because of a global supply
response, could lead to a sharp drop in the value of farm real estate.
Indeed, farm commodity markets have become more volatile in the past 5
years. The volatility is no more evident than in corn, the single
biggest U.S. crop. Just since last summer the spot price of corn has
more than doubled in value, helping to drive the latest surge in
cropland prices.
To address the risks associated with rising farmland values, FCA
has issued guidance on collateral risks to FCS lenders through a series
of Informational Memoranda. FCS institutions are improving underwriting
standards, implementing appraisal guidelines, and capping the amount
per acre they will lend on the basis of sustainable agricultural value
analysis. They are also improving efforts to identify portfolio risk
through land value studies and the stress testing of land value
changes.
To further address the issue of rising farmland values, FCA
recently organized a meeting with the other Federal financial
regulators to discuss concerns and observations regarding agricultural
land values and associated risks to loan collateral. Our intent also
was to foster a broad-based interchange on the appropriate regulator
response to these risks and to develop a productive working
relationship among banking regulators. We plan to hold additional
meetings to continue our focus on topics important to agriculture.

Examination Programs for FCS Banks and Associations
The Agency's highest priority is to maintain appropriate risk-based
oversight and examination programs to ensure the safety and soundness
of FCS institutions. Given the increasing complexity and risk in the
System and human capital challenges at FCA, we have undertaken a number
of initiatives to improve operations, increase examination
effectiveness, and enhance staff expertise in key examination areas.
The Agency bases its examination and supervision strategies on
institution size, existing and prospective risk exposure, and the scope
and nature of each institution's business model. FCA also performs
nationally focused examinations of specific issues and operational
areas to monitor the condition and operations of the System as a whole.
On a national level, we actively monitor risks that may affect groups
of System institutions or the entire System, including risks from the
agricultural, financial, and economic environment. There are several
key risk areas on which the Agency is focusing in 2011. They include
loan portfolio management; large, complex, and shared assets;
collateral risk management; and compensation programs and corporate
governance.
The frequency and depth of examination activities vary based on
risk, but each institution receives a summary of examination activities
and a report on its overall condition at least every 18 months. FCS
institutions are required to have effective loan underwriting and loan
administration processes to maintain adequate asset-liability
management capabilities, and to establish high standards for governance
and transparent disclosures for shareholder oversight. Because of the
recent increased volatility in the agricultural and credit sectors, FCA
has increased its on-site examination presence. Also, FCA is closely
watching rapidly rising real estate values in certain sections of the
country to ensure that FCS lending practices remain prudent.
In certain cases, FCA will use its enforcement powers to effect
changes in the institution's policies and practices to correct unsafe
or unsound conditions or violations of law or regulations. The Agency
uses the Financial Institution Rating System (FIRS) as a key method to
assess the safety and soundness of each FCS institution (see chart).
The FIRS provides a general framework for evaluating significant
financial, asset quality, and management factors to assign component
and composite ratings. FIRS ratings range from one for a sound
institution to five for an institution that is likely to fail. Overall,
the System remains financially strong and adequately capitalized. The
FCS does not pose material risk to investors in FCS debt, the Insurance
Corporation, or to FCS institution stockholders.
Although the System's condition and performance remain satisfactory
overall, a number of FCS institutions are experiencing stress and now
require special supervision and enforcement actions. These actions
reflect the weaknesses in the nation's economy and credit markets, a
rapidly changing risk environment in certain agricultural segments,
and, in certain cases, management's ineffectiveness in responding to
these risks. We have increased supervisory oversight at a number of
institutions and dedicated additional resources in particular to those
14 institutions rated three or worse. Although these 14 institutions
represent less than four percent of System assets and do not
meaningfully impact the System's consolidated performance, they require
significantly greater Agency resources to oversee. Currently, seven FCS
institutions are under formal enforcement action, but no FCS
institutions are in conservatorship or receivership.
The chart below includes only the five System banks and their
affiliated direct-lender associations. The figures in the bars reflect
the number of institutions by FIRS rating.
Farm Credit System FIRS Composite Ratings

Regulatory Activities
Congress has given the FCA Board statutory authority to establish
policy, prescribe regulations, and issue other guidance to ensure that
FCS institutions comply with the law and operate in a safe and sound
manner. The Agency is committed to developing balanced, flexible, and
legally sound regulations.
Some of the Agency's current regulatory and policy projects include
the following:

Revising regulations to implement the requirements of the
Dodd-Frank Act with respect to imposing margin requirements on
non-cleared derivatives transactions and removing references to
credit ratings.

Revising regulations to ensure that FCS funding and
liquidity requirements are appropriate and to ensure that the
discounts applied to investments reflect their marketability.

Revising regulations to require that each FCS institution's
business plan includes strategies and actions to serve all
creditworthy and eligible persons in the institution's
territory. In addition, the regulation will encourage serving
nontraditional customers, such as women and minorities, who
often operate within local food systems by producing organic or
specialty crops on small farms. The regulation will also seek
to achieve diversity and inclusion in the workforce of System
institutions.

Enhancing our risk-based capital adequacy framework to more
closely align it with that of other Federal banking agencies
and the Basel Accord. We published an advance notice of
proposed rulemaking to solicit comments on amending FCA's
regulations to replace the current core and total surplus
capital standards with a ``Tier 1/Tier 2'' capital framework.

Revising lending- and leasing-limit regulations to ensure
that FCS institutions maintain effective policies to measure
and manage exposure to single counterparties, industries, and
market segments, and to large complex loans.

Revising regulations to allow System institutions to
purchase eligible agricultural loans from the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation.

Revising regulations to enhance System disclosures of senior
officer compensation and supplemental benefit programs. We
published an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to solicit
comments on ways to clarify and enhance rules related to the
disclosure of senior officer compensation, and the
responsibilities and authorities of System institution
compensation and audit committees.

Strengthening investment-management regulations to ensure
that prudent practices are in place for the safe and sound
management of FCS investment portfolios.

Corporate Activities
While the number of FCS institutions has declined over the years as
a result of mergers, their complexity has increased, which has placed
greater demands on both examination staff resources and expertise.
Generally, these mergers have resulted in larger, more cost-efficient,
and better-capitalized institutions with a broad, diversified asset
base, both by geography and commodity. Thus far in FY 2011, two mergers
of associations have become effective. In addition, two banks, U.S.
AgBank, FCB, and CoBank, ACB, have submitted a plan of merger for FCA
Board consideration. As of January 1, 2011, the System had 84 direct-
lender associations, five banks, five service corporations, and two
special-purpose entities.

Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
Congress established Farmer Mac in 1988 to provide secondary market
arrangements for agricultural mortgage and rural home loans. Farmer Mac
creates and guarantees securities and other secondary market products
that are backed by mortgages on farms and rural homes, including
certain USDA guaranteed loans. The 2008 Farm Bill expanded Farmer Mac's
program authorities by allowing it to purchase and guarantee securities
backed by eligible rural utility loans made by cooperative lenders.
Through a separate office required by statute (Office of Secondary
Market Oversight), the Agency examines, regulates, and monitors Farmer
Mac's operations.
Farmer Mac is a separate GSE devoted to agriculture and rural
America. By statute, in extraordinary circumstances Farmer Mac may
issue obligations to the U.S. Treasury Department, not to exceed $1.5
billion, to fulfill the guarantee obligations of Farmer Mac Guaranteed
Securities. The Insurance Fund does not back Farmer Mac's securities,
and the System is not liable for any Farmer Mac obligations.
From Farmer Mac's creation, Congress included strong statutory
underwriting, security appraisal, and repayment standards for qualified
loans, with Farmer Mac's activities regulated and supervised by FCA. In
addition to its statutory minimum requirements, Farmer Mac was required
to develop sound underwriting standards for loans to qualify for its
programs. To date, these standards and regulations have prevented any
investor credit losses in Farmer Mac securities. However, Farmer Mac
was impacted by the spillover of the economic stress and recession
stemming from the 2008 financial crisis. Losses on certain investments
required Farmer Mac to raise additional capital during the fall of
2008, and management changes were made by its board of directors.
Farmer Mac continues to restructure its balance sheet and further
strengthen its operations and risk-bearing capacity to focus on
fulfilling its mission.
Notably, in January 2010, Farmer Mac raised $250 million in capital
from a private offering of shares of noncumulative perpetual preferred
stock of Farmer Mac II LLC, an operating subsidiary in which Farmer Mac
owns all of the common equity. The new preferred stock has a lower net
effective cost than the retired capital and has increased its capacity
to purchase and guarantee qualified loans and to provide liquidity to
rural markets. As of December 31, 2010, Farmer Mac's core capital
totaled $460.6 million, which exceeded its statutory requirement of
$301.0. As a result, capital surplus grew to $159.6 million, up from
$120.2 million as of December 31, 2009. The total portfolio of loans,
guarantees, and commitments grew 14 percent to $12.2 billion.
Farmer Mac's program-business portfolio shows continued stress in
certain subsectors but remains manageable. Stress in the ethanol
industry, as well as certain crop and permanent planting segments,
contributed to an increase in the nonperforming loan rate to 1.90
percent at December 31, 2010, compared with 1.41 percent at December
31, 2009. Loans more than 90 days delinquent increased from 1.13
percent at December 31, 2009, to 1.63 percent at December 31, 2010.
Farmer Mac continues to enjoy reliable access to the debt capital
markets to support its mission of providing financing and liquidity to
agriculture and rural markets. Over the past 2 years, Farmer Mac has
taken significant measures to increase the quality and liquidity of its
$1.76 billion investment portfolio in order to improve its financial
flexibility in the event of a financial or market disruption.

Working With Young, Beginning, and Small Borrowers
System institutions are required to develop programs and make
special efforts to serve young, beginning, and small (YBS) farmers and
ranchers. In 2010, lending by the System to YBS producers continued to
show gains in loan dollars outstanding. Nevertheless, YBS results as a
percentage of total loans have either dipped or remained relatively
flat over the past several years. However, the System's YBS dollar
results are noteworthy because institutions have managed to expand loan
volume in spite of generally downward demographic trends for these
groups of farmers.
FCS institutions may use a variety of tools to fulfill their
commitment to YBS lending, including lower rates or fees for YBS
borrowers, differential underwriting standards, USDA guarantees, and
special training programs and other financial services. Many
associations have revised their YBS policies and procedures in the past
3 years. The changes are in response to guidance issued in our August
2007 FCA Bookletter, which allowed for more flexibility in lending to
YBS borrowers and encouraged use of credit enhancements so YBS
borrowers could qualify for credit. The changes are an indication that
FCA's oversight activities are accomplishing the goal of helping
institutions' management and boards stay focused on this important
mission area.

Working With Financially Stressed Borrowers
Agriculture involves significant inherent risks and volatility
because of many factors, including adverse weather, changes in
government programs, international trade issues, fluctuations in
commodity prices, and crop and livestock diseases. The significant
risks in agriculture can sometimes make it difficult for borrowers to
repay loans. The System, under provisions of the Farm Credit Act of
1971, as amended (Act), provides borrowers certain rights when they
apply for loans and when they have difficulty repaying loans. For
example, the Act requires FCS institutions to consider restructuring a
distressed agricultural loan before initiating foreclosure. It also
provides borrowers an opportunity to seek review of certain credit and
restructuring decisions. If a borrower's loan goes through foreclosure,
the Act and implementing regulations provide qualifying borrowers the
opportunity to buy back their property at the appraised fair market
value or to make an offer to buy the property back at less than this
value. These rights are unique when compared with other financial
institutions that operate under Federal law.
FCA enforces the borrower rights provisions of the Farm Credit Act
and examines institutions to make sure that they are complying with
these provisions. It also receives and reviews complaints from
borrowers regarding their rights as borrowers. Through these efforts,
FCA ensures compliance with the law and helps FCS institutions continue
to provide sound and constructive credit and related services to
eligible farmers and ranchers. In 2009 and 2011, FCA issued Frequently
Asked Questions (FAQs) to clarify its borrower rights regulations.
These FAQs help guide System institutions and their borrowers through
many of the situations encountered.

Conclusion
We at FCA remain vigilant in our efforts to ensure that the Farm
Credit System and Farmer Mac remain financially sound and focused on
serving agriculture and rural America. While we are proud of our record
and accomplishments, I assure you that the Agency will continue its
commitment to excellence, effectiveness, and cost efficiency and will
remain focused on our mission of ensuring a safe, sound, and dependable
source of credit for agriculture and rural America. This concludes my
statement. On behalf of my colleagues on the FCA Board and at the
Agency, I thank you for the opportunity to share this information.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Strom. Dr. Henderson?

STATEMENT OF JASON R. HENDERSON, Ph.D., VICE
PRESIDENT AND OMAHA BRANCH EXECUTIVE, FEDERAL
RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY, OMAHA, NE

Dr. Henderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Jason Henderson. I am Vice President
and economist with the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. In
this capacity, I lead several Federal Reserve initiatives that
track economic conditions in the farm economy, including the
Agricultural Finance Databook, which summarizes trends in
national farm lending and the Agricultural Credit Survey for
our seven states in the 10th Federal Reserve District. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss some of our findings
regarding national agricultural credit conditions and farmland
values.
In 2009, the recession and fragile financial markets cut
farm incomes and raised concerns about credit availability for
agricultural borrowers. Since then, a stronger global economy
has spurred booming farm incomes. Surging crop prices are
boosting profits for crop producers, and many livestock
operations are still able to maintain some level of
profitability even in the face of high feed costs. With a
resurgent farm economy, agricultural loan demand is shifting.
The most dramatic shift has emerged from the decline in
farm operating loans. With strong cash flows at the end of last
year, farmers paid off operating loans and many prepaid a large
portion of their input costs. Commercial bankers across the
nation reported higher loan repayment rates with operating loan
volumes falling sharply in the first quarter of 2011.
In contrast, commercial banks increased lending to
livestock producers. With higher costs straining livestock
profits, loan demand from livestock enterprises increased. And
even in the face of tighter credit standards and rising
delinquency rates, commercial banks expanded loan volumes for
livestock last year.
In addition, loan volumes for farm machinery and equipment
have risen sharply. Larger profits prompted many producers to
expand their capital investments and business contacts reported
brisk farm machinery sales. In the first quarter of 2011, farm
loans for machinery and equipment surged 72 percent above year-
ago levels at commercial banks.
Finally, farm real estate loan volumes rose solidly with
booming cropland values. According to Federal Reserve and
university surveys, cropland values in many midwestern states
have soared more than 20 percent over the past year. The
Northern and Southern Plains also enjoyed stronger farmland
value gains as robust energy markets lifted land lease revenues
for oil exploration. By the end of 2010, farm real estate loan
volumes at commercial banks and Farm Credit associations rose
solidly, and our industry contacts noted that life insurance
companies, vendor creditors, and non-farm investors remained
active in agricultural markets.
Going forward, lenders appear to be in position to meet the
credit needs of farmers. Agricultural bankers report having
ample funds for farm loans and continue to lend at historically
low interest rates. Bankers are beginning to ease collateral
requirements on farm loans after stronger repayment rates
trimmed delinquencies on farm loans. And with healthier loan
portfolios, agricultural banks are enjoying stronger earnings
than their peers, which should underpin lending activity.
Still, questions surrounding the availability of credit and
collateral requirements persist. The most pressing concerns and
stringent requirements have likely emerged for livestock
producers struggling with profitability, and for smaller farm
operations owned by young and beginning farmers with less
equity. Our research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
indicates that these operations are more likely to struggle
with debt repayment and be denied credit.
As a result, the sustainability of farm profits and land
values pose the greatest risk to agricultural credit
conditions. Agriculture is a boom-and-bust industry. While
another year of hearty profits are expected, these profits
could be fleeting. For example, USDA projects average annual
corn prices to fall below $4.25 per bushel by 2013 and remain
below these levels through 2020, cutting net returns above
variable costs by 30 percent. In addition, profit margins for
other major field crops are projected to decline. Shrinking
returns could threaten booming cropland values, and if
capitalization rates rise to their historical averages, land
values could fall by as much as \1/3\, eroding the financial
health of the farm sector.
In the face of volatile markets and uncertain profits, low
leverage ratios and larger levels of working capital are often
the best risk management strategies for farmers. Most measures
of financial leverage remain at historical lows, but it is
still an open question whether farmers have learned these
lessons from past farm crises and will resist the temptation of
excessive borrowing at low interest rates.
In sum, near-term prospects for U.S. agriculture remain
bright. Delinquency rates have eased and, while tight, credit
standards for agricultural loans are beginning to loosen. With
lofty incomes, many farmers invested in machinery, equipment,
and farm real estate, while others paid down debts to weather
any unexpected storms building on the horizon. While volatile
commodity markets and rising production costs are threats to
future farm profits, credit is still available.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me here today, and I will be happy to respond to any
questions at the appropriate time or in the future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Henderson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jason R. Henderson, Ph.D., Vice President and
Omaha Branch Executive, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Omaha, NE

Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is
Jason Henderson. I am Vice President and Economist with the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City. In this capacity, I lead several Federal
Reserve initiatives that track economic conditions in the farm economy,
including the Agricultural Finance Databook, which summarizes trends in
national farm lending and the Survey of Agricultural Credit Conditions
for our seven states in the Tenth Federal Reserve District. I
appreciate the opportunity to discuss some of our findings regarding
national agricultural credit conditions and farmland values.

Agricultural Credit Conditions
In 2009, the recession and fragile financial markets cut farm
incomes and raised concerns about credit availability for agricultural
borrowers. Since then, a stronger global economy has spurred booming
farm incomes. Surging crop prices are boosting profits for crop
producers and many livestock operations are still able to maintain some
level of profitability even in the face of high feed costs. With a
resurgent farm economy, agricultural loan demand is shifting.
The most dramatic shift has emerged from the decline in farm
operating loans. With strong cash flows at the end of 2010, farmers,
especially crop producers, paid off operating loans. In addition, many
pre-paid a large portion of their input costs at the end of last year,
curtailing loan demand. Based on Federal Reserve surveys, commercial
bankers across the nation reported higher loan repayment rates and
fewer extensions and renewals for operating loans, with loan volumes
falling more than 22 percent below year ago levels in the first quarter
of 2011.
In contrast, commercial banks expanded lending to livestock
producers. With higher costs for feed and feeder cattle straining
livestock profits, loan demand from livestock enterprises increased.
Even in the face of tighter credit standards and rising delinquency
rates, commercial banks expanded loan volumes for livestock
approximately 15 percent last year. In the first quarter of 2011,
commercial bank lending for livestock held near last year's elevated
levels.
In addition, loan volumes for farm machinery and equipment have
risen sharply. Larger profits prompted many crop producers to expand
their capital investments and business contacts reported brisk sales of
tractors, combines, trucks, pivot-irrigation systems, grain bins, and
other farm equipment. For example, according to the Association of
Equipment Manufacturers, four-wheel drive tractor sales jumped roughly
30 percent in 2010. In the first quarter of 2011, commercial bankers
reported that loan volumes for farm machinery and equipment surged 72
percent above year ago levels.
Finally, farm real estate loan volumes rose solidly with booming
cropland values. According to Federal Reserve and university surveys,
cropland values in many Midwestern states have soared more than 20
percent over the past year. The northern and southern Plains also
enjoyed stronger farmland value gains as robust energy markets lifted
land lease revenues for oil exploration. By the end of 2010, farm real
estate loan volumes at commercial banks and Farm Credit associations
rose solidly, and industry contacts noted that life insurance
companies, vendor creditors, and non-farm investors remained active in
agricultural markets.

The Outlook for Agricultural Lending
Going forward, agricultural lenders appear to be in position to
meet the credit needs of farmers. Agricultural bankers report having
ample funds for farm loans and continue to lend to farmers at
historically low interest rates. Bankers are beginning to ease
collateral requirements on farm loans after stronger repayment rates
trimmed delinquencies on farm loans. With healthier loan portfolios,
agricultural banks are enjoying stronger earnings than their banking
peers, which should further underpin future lending activity.
Still, questions surrounding the availability of credit and
collateral requirements persist. The most pressing concerns and
stringent requirements have likely emerged for livestock producers
struggling with profitability and for smaller farm operations owned by
young and beginning farmers with less equity. Our research at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City indicates that these operations are
more likely to struggle with debt repayment and be denied credit.
As a result, the sustainability of farm profits and agricultural
land values pose the greatest risk to agricultural credit conditions.
Agriculture is a boom and bust industry. While many crop producers
expect another year of hearty profits, these profits could be fleeting.
For example, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture's long-
term projections, average annual corn prices could fall to $4.10 per
bushel by 2013 and remain less than $4.25 per bushel through 2020,
cutting net returns above variable costs by 30 percent. Profit margins
for other major field crops are also projected to decline. Shrinking
returns could threaten booming cropland values, and if capitalization
rates return to their historical averages, cropland values could fall
by as much as a third, eroding the financial health of the farm sector.
In the face of volatile markets and uncertain profits, low leverage
ratios and larger levels of working capital are often the best risk
management strategies for farmers. Most measures of financial leverage
remain at historical lows, but it is still an open question whether
farmers have learned these lessons from past farm crises and will
resist the temptation of borrowing at low interest rates.
In sum, near-term prospects for U.S. agriculture remain bright.
Delinquency rates have eased and, while tight, credit standards for
agricultural loans are beginning to loosen. With lofty incomes, many
farmers invested in machinery, equipment and farm real estate, while
others paid down debts to weather any unexpected storms building on the
horizon. While volatile commodity markets and rising production costs
are threats to future farm profits, credit is still available.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting me today, and I will be happy
to respond to any questions at the appropriate time.

Attachment

Agricultural Finance Databook

Cropland Values Climb and Agricultural Finances Strengthen

By Jason Henderson and Maria Akers

April 2011

Agricultural finance conditions strengthened amid soaring farmland
values, booming farm incomes and rising commodity prices. Strong farm
incomes, especially in grain producing regions, drove cropland values
as much as 20 percent above year-ago levels. Robust farm and non-farm
investor demand and skyrocketing land prices enticed some landowners to
list farms for sale. Robust energy markets also placed upward pressure
on farmland values in the northern Plains where land lease revenues for
oil exploration surged. Farmland value gains, however, were more modest
in the southern Plains as drought conditions intensified. Rising
farmland values and brisk sales raised farm real estate loan volumes at
commercial banks moderately at year-end.
With stronger loan portfolios, agricultural banks ended the year
with their best performance since the start of the financial crisis.
Farm loan delinquencies fell as more farmers paid off loans at the end
of 2010. Bankers also reported fewer loan renewals or extensions,
potentially foreshadowing future declines in noncurrent loan volumes.
The return on assets and equity at agricultural banks marched higher
during the year, while the returns at other small banks held steady.
Moreover, in a year when over 150 commercial banks failed, fewer than
ten were agricultural banks.
Strong farm incomes transformed non-real estate loan portfolios at
commercial banks. Rising incomes curbed demand for short-term
production loans but fueled capital investment that lifted
intermediate-term loan volumes for machinery and equipment. The volume
of loans for operating expenses waned at the first of the year as both
crop and livestock producers used current incomes to pay for operating
expenses. In contrast, farm machinery and equipment loan volumes rose
sharply with a rebound in capital spending. With softer non-real estate
loan demand, more bankers reported a rise in funds available for farm
loans. Collateral requirements generally held steady and interest rates
continued to trend down.

Section A
Resurgent capital spending on farm machinery and equipment shifted
lending activity toward intermediate-term loans. With rising incomes,
farmers sharply increased their capital spending levels, in turn
boosting intermediate-term loan volumes on farm machinery and equipment
(Chart 1). In fact, farm machinery and equipment loan volumes jumped 73
percent above year ago levels in the first quarter of 2011. These loans
were extended for slightly shorter terms compared to last year but at
much lower effective interest rates that averaged 4.4 percent (Chart
2).
In contrast, rising farm incomes trimmed operating loan demand as
farmers used cash to pay for operating expenses. The volume of
operating loans plunged 22 percent below year ago levels in the first
quarter. Bankers reported weak loan demand and strong pre-payment of
operating expenses. Strong winter storms during the February survey
period and the atypical timing of the survey may have exacerbated the
declines in loan originations in first quarter 2011. Operating loan
maturities were about 2 months longer than average at 11 months, and
the average effective interest rate edged up to 5.3 from a fourth
quarter low.
After rising substantially the last half of 2010, the volume of
feeder and other livestock loans at commercial banks posted modest
declines. In the first quarter, the volume of feeder livestock loans
fell nine percent below year-ago levels, even though rising feeder
cattle prices pushed average loan amounts higher. The average maturity
for feeder livestock loans fell to just under 8 months, and the average
effective interest rate held around five percent.
Small and mid-size commercial banks were more affected by shrinking
non-real estate loan volumes than large commercial banks. The size of
farm loan portfolios at banks with $25 million or less in farm loans
contracted 12 percent year-over-year, while the size of farm loan
portfolios at banks with more than $25 million in farm loans held
steady. At the same time, the composition of farm loan portfolios
shifted away from smaller loans towards larger loans over $100,000.

Section B
Agricultural banks closed 2010 with their strongest financial
performance in 2 years. The average rate of return on equity at
agricultural banks jumped to 8.4 percent in the fourth quarter,
compared to 1.1 percent at other small banks (Chart 3). Moreover, the
rate of return on assets at agricultural banks strengthened in the
fourth quarter to 0.9 percent, in contrast to 0.1 percent at other
small banks. In addition, the percentage of agricultural banks with
negative income as a share of average equity fell by more than a third.
After rising during most of 2010, average capital ratios at both
agricultural banks and other small banks edged down in the fourth
quarter but remained near year-ago levels.
Non-real estate loan performance strengthened in the fourth
quarter. The volume of outstanding non-real estate farm loans at all
commercial banks ended the year slightly below 2009 levels. Delinquent
non-real estate loans have trended down since early 2010, comprising
just 2.0 percent of outstanding farm production loans in the fourth
quarter (Chart 4). Also, the volume of non-real estate loans 30 to 90
days past due dropped to its lowest level since 2008. With declining
delinquency rates, fourth quarter net charge-offs fell more than 25
percent below year-ago levels.
Loan performance measures for real estate loans improved at year-
end. Farm real estate loan volumes at all commercial banks settled 2.0
percent above year-ago levels. After rising steadily during the past 3
years, the share of nonperforming farm real estate loans eased slightly
in the fourth quarter to 2.7 percent. In addition, the volume of real
estate loans 30 to 90 days past due leveled off, which could signal
further declines in delinquency rates. Net charge-off amounts grew in
the fourth quarter but they accounted for about the same percentage of
outstanding farm real estate loans as last year.

Section C
Rising farm incomes propelled farmland values higher at the end of
2010. Large year-over-year farmland value gains were seen across the
Corn Belt and into the northern Plains where energy production is
booming. In fact, North Dakota enjoyed the strongest annual increase in
farmland values largely due to land lease revenues from expanded oil
production (Map 1). Crop producing states such as Indiana, Illinois,
Iowa, Nebraska, and Kansas reported another round of robust farmland
price increases in the fourth quarter. Cropland values, however,
increased more modestly in the southern Plains as drought conditions
threatened crop yields and limited cattle grazing. Even with slightly
more farms for sale at the end of the year, strong demand from farmers
and nonfarm investors kept bidding brisk and values elevated. Bankers
in the Chicago District expected growth in farm real estate loan
volumes relative to last year. Many Federal Reserve survey respondents
anticipated that farm incomes and farmland values would rise further in
the coming months.
Overall demand for farm loans stalled in the fourth quarter with
less borrowing for production expenses and an upswing in loans for
capital purchases. Several districts noted a decline in operating loan
demand as many farmers used income to pre-pay for crop inputs. In
addition, bankers in the Chicago, Dallas, and Richmond Districts
reported fewer feeder cattle and dairy loans in the fourth quarter.
Still, a majority of bankers expected operating loan volumes would
rebound prior to spring planting. Federal Reserve surveys also noted a
rush of machinery and equipment loans at the close of 2010 as farmers
upgraded equipment and took advantage of new tax depreciation rules.
Farm credit conditions strengthened further as farmers paid off
loans in earnest at year-end. According to Federal Reserve surveys,
loan repayment rates at agricultural banks continued to climb and were
markedly higher in the Chicago, Minneapolis, and Kansas City Districts.
Moreover, loan renewals and extensions fell in all districts but
Richmond. Most bankers, but particularly those in the Chicago and
Kansas City Districts, noted ample funds were available for loans, and
very few loans were referred to non-bank credit agencies. Collateral
requirements generally held steady or eased slightly. Interest rates
trended down for both real estate and non-real estate loans.

Chart 1: Loan Volume by Purpose of Loan

Chart 2: Average Effective Interest Rates on Farm Loans

Chart 3: Rate of Return on Assets

Chart 4: Nonperforming Loan Volumes

Map 1: Good-Quality (Non-irrigated) Cropland Values
(Percent change Fourth Quarter 2009 to Fourth Quarter 2010)

The Chairman. Thank you, Dr. Henderson and gentlemen, for
your testimony. I will begin questioning. Each Member will have
approximately 5 minutes.
Mr. Dolcini, you had stated that loans have increased in
2010 over 2009 and are expecting a further increase this year.
We have heard testimony today that the farm sector is in
generally good condition and credit is readily available. So
can you explain these increases, as well as the fact are they
limited to certain credit sectors that are under stress now?
Mr. Dolcini. Thanks for the question, Mr. Chairman. I think
that what we have seen at FSA, and I consider our farm loan
programs to be as an important part of the safety net as our
Farm Programs, sort of the other side of the house, but there
are still haves and have-nots in American agriculture. And
while there are certainly some sectors of the overall ag
economy that are doing quite well, and I think they have been
cited in the testimony you have heard this morning. There are
others that are not: poultry, hogs, dairy certainly. I come
from California where the dairy industry has been hit really
hard over the last couple of years.
What we also have really tried to do in light of direction
from the 2008 Farm Bill, and this Secretary and President Obama
for that matter, is to bring more beginning farmers into our
overall portfolio. And we have seen dramatic increases in the
numbers of those folks in the last couple of years, too. So
that accounts for a part of the growth that we have seen. And
they have, in our experience, a tough time getting loans
commercially. I think you will hear from a beginning farmer
later this morning. But that has been an important part of
where we have seen our portfolio grow.
The Chairman. So what percent of the growth is due to these
livestock sectors that are under certain stress as well as
beginning farmers?
Mr. Dolcini. Chris, can you address that?
Mr. Beyerhelm. Yes, I wouldn't be able to give you an exact
percentage, but I know that currently in 2011 and in 2010, 40
percent of our loans made during those years were for new
customers we hadn't done business with before. When you analyze
those, at least half of those are from cattle producers. So
just intuitively, what our takeaway from that is is that people
are needing credit from the livestock industry and then also,
as Mr. Dolcini said, beginning farmers that have not had access
to credit previously.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Dolcini. We would be happy to provide you a breakdown
of that.
The Chairman. I think that would be helpful. Thank you very
much.
One further question. There have been a few requests to
Members of this Committee to either suspend or extend term
limits on guaranteed loans. Can you give us some insight from
the Agency's perspective on why producers are not graduating
from the program at 15 years?
Mr. Beyerhelm. Thank you for that question. What our
analysis is is that most of the farmers we work with--and
ranchers--are in business for 40 to 50 years. And during that
40 or 50 year period, the odds that some sort of weather
condition or financial condition or personal condition that
changes their ability to obtain credit from the commercial
lending sector is most likely to happen. And you would think
that 15 years would be enough, but if you live in certain parts
of the country, farmers and ranchers have experienced numerous
disasters, numerous setbacks, made some financial progress and
then they are set back. So in some cases, 15 years is not
enough in order to prepare them to get commercial credit
without the assistance of a guaranteed loan.
The Chairman. But the point of the program is to move
people off of it after 15 years?
Mr. Beyerhelm. Yes, and that is correct. I think the data
is good as far as the number of people that are moving off of
the System.
The Chairman. That would actually be a helpful statistic as
well if you could provide that. Thank you very much.
I will turn to Mr. Strom now. In your written testimony,
Mr. Strom, you discussed that the System is financing
infrastructure projects through innovative bond financing, I
assume that is part of the rural community investment pilot
program. You have actually proposed expanding this Pilot
Program in 2008. Can you comment on the status of this
potential new rule?
Mr. Strom. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman.
The status of that rule is is that this Pilot Program began
in 2005. In spring of 2008 we put out a proposed rule on this.
We received numerous comment letters on that rule. We continue
to look at and investigate the status of this program.
Obviously, we are looking at how it can benefit areas of rural
America with these targeted types of investments. It is
currently on our regulatory agenda to go to a final rule, with
yet an undetermined date. But we, again, continue to look at
this very closely, again, trying to determine exactly the
benefit that this can serve for rural America.
The Chairman. Do you have just your perspective on why this
particular mission change of the organization is under
consideration?
Mr. Strom. Well, the Farm Credit Act of 1971 gives this
type of investment authority to the System. I think, initially,
it was viewed that this would be good for farmers and ranchers
and the communities that they live in. Investments held under
these Pilot Program authorities are segregated in five
categories. There is rural housing mortgage securities, rural
development, debt securities--which include community
facilities, rural business, rural lenders. There is credit link
to agricultural notes, agribusiness investments and equity
investments.
I think in the overall look at this, again, with looking at
how the authority of this can apply to these types of
investments and, again, we received over 10,000 comment letters
on this so there was a lot of comment regarding these. We just
want to ensure that if this goes forward that it is done in a
way that is targeted toward helping rural communities through
infrastructure process, through either investments in the
community facilities like critical care units or assisted
living facilities. But again, the 1971 Act does give authority
for these investment types. And I would be happy to provide you
further information on that authority.
The Chairman. That would be helpful. Thank you, Mr. Strom.
Mr. Strom. Thank you.
The Chairman. I will turn now to our Ranking Member, Ms.
Fudge.
Ms. Fudge. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As you know, there are many conflicting events and meetings
going on at this time, so I would like to yield to my colleague
Mr. McGovern to ask his questions first.
Mr. McGovern. I appreciate that and apologize that I have
to leave early.
But Mr. Dolcini, I am from New England and farmers in New
England are typically smaller family-owned farms and tend to
produce specialty crops or dairy. And I guess can you discuss
some of the credit issues specific to smaller farmers and the
ways that your Agency reaches out to them and can provide
assistance? And what are you doing to continue to extend farm
credit to dairy farmers that held on during the 2009 crisis?
Mr. Dolcini. Sure. I will take that one first.
The Dairy Industry Advisory Commission, which the Secretary
convened last year, recently came up with its report. I think
it listed 17 different recommendations. We are looking at that
at USDA to determine how we can best fit those recommendations
into the loan programs that we provide currently, or may want
to provide in the future to the dairy industry. I think that we
are working with Congress on that issue.
The beginning farmer statistics, Mr. McGovern, are
particularly impressive when you look back to 1995 when we only
had about 3,500 folks who we consider beginning farmers in our
portfolio. That number is now about 27,000. And that has come
as a result of a lot of aggressive outreach in all of the 50
states, including New England, to identify small farmers in
particular, SDA borrowers, African Americans, women, Hispanic,
Asian farmers, and really focus on new and different types of
agriculture.
As I mentioned earlier, I come from a state that grows 400
different crops and has a very diverse farmer base. And we have
worked with Hmong farmers, for example, in the Central Valley
who might farm on an acre or less and still grow 20 or 30
crops. And there are plenty of examples like that scattered
around New England and the rest of the country, too. So, what
we are doing in the states and what we are doing here in D.C.
to push initiatives like that out are really making a big
difference and a positive one.
Mr. McGovern. I appreciate that. One final question.
In your written testimony you begin by saying that farm
economy strengthened in 2010. However, farm income, especially
net farm income is very unevenly distributed. Can you expand on
that a little bit and who are the winners and who are the
losers?
Mr. Dolcini. Well, as I mentioned in my remarks and I will
defer to Mr. Beyerhelm for a deeper drill-down on the stats,
but you know, there are haves and have-nots. And what we have
seen in the dairy industry, as you mentioned----
Mr. McGovern. Right.
Mr. Dolcini.--poultry, hogs, some beginning farmers who
have had trouble accessing commercial credit and are now coming
into our programs are folks who are on the have-not side of the
ledger. Large commodity program crops, the grain crops of the
Midwest, are the folks who are enjoying historically higher
prices. Rice is included in that as well. So it is kind of a
regional breakdown depending on where you are. People who have
accessed USDA programs historically and successfully are those
that I think are enjoying the benefits of these high prices
nowadays.
Mr. McGovern. Thank you. Do you have anything to add?
Mr. Beyerhelm. I think Mr. Dolcini covered it.
Mr. McGovern. Okay. I appreciate it very much. Thank you.
The Chairman. Do you want to use the balance of your time?
Ms. Fudge. No, actually, after you I will go.
Mr. Crawford [presiding.] Okay. I am pinch-hitting for the
Chairman. I am Congressman Crawford from Arkansas and I have
just a couple of quick questions for you, Mr. Dolcini.
My district in Arkansas is home to large-scale rice
production. Some of my constituents have come to me with
complaints about the FSA Facility Loan Program. Beginning rice
farmers and those having to replace their equipment have been
asked to put up more collateral in order to secure loans for
grain bins. The FSA is asking these farmers to leverage their
land instead of their equipment when loans exceed a specific
amount. Has credit become tighter for these types of loans as a
result of insufficient resources and overall market conditions?
Or has there been an increased amount of risk associated with
lending to grain farmers?
Mr. Dolcini. That is a good question, Mr. Crawford, and I
appreciate the opportunity to get back with you with something
I might leave out. But I would say that the Facility Storage
Loan Program is a relatively new one. We are still trying to
figure out, in some cases, the best ways to make it accessible
to rice farmers like your constituents or others around the
country. Cold storage is another area of application for that
loan program. Obviously, we want good collateral for the loans
that we make and whether it is land or machinery, or other
things, I would like the opportunity to work with your staff to
drill down a little further on that.
Your Congressional district has about 26 USDA service
centers, so I know we play an important part of the local
economies in your CD and would like to come and visit with you
and your staff to talk about these things in greater detail.
Mr. Crawford. That sounds great. I would welcome that. Let
me move on to something else.
Are all the loans set aside for beginning and socially
disadvantaged producers being used? Is the demand for these
funds consistent with those set aside or are we preventing
funds from getting to producers who could use the funds?
Mr. Dolcini. They are not all being used. You know, we have
expanded that portfolio--as I mentioned to Mr. McGovern--quite
dramatically, but there are still funds for socially
disadvantaged and beginning farmers that go unused.
Chris, can you add to that?
Mr. Beyerhelm. We maximize the use of those targets, but at
certain times in the year, the targets do come off. So by the
end of the year we are able to then move money to perhaps areas
where loans are unfunded so at the end of the year we are able
to make sure that we have utilized all of the funds that have
been allotted.
Mr. Dolcini. Our authorities are somewhat flexible in that
regard so it is helpful to us.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Finally, after going through the CR
that we will be voting on later today, I learned the FSA Ag
Credit Insurance Fund will be cut by $433 million and the Farm
Assistance Fund by $44 million. Is the FSA capitalized enough
to absorb this kind of funding reduction and would it cause the
FSA to change lending standards or create a backlog for
potential borrowers?
Mr. Dolcini. Well, sir, we have had a backlog for some
months now as we have gone from one CR to another, as you
probably know. We have been pretty aggressive in trying to
focus funds that do come up in the CRs towards the operating
loans. It is obviously spring-planting season and we want to be
able to get those monies out into the countryside. We are still
evaluating the continuing resolution that you will be
considering later today, and we will have a more concrete
answer early next week when we see those numbers. I think that
we will be able to sustain our current activities around the
nation.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you. I want to thank the members of the
panel. And unfortunately, due to a scheduling conflict, we are
going to have to stand in recess briefly. And as soon as we can
resume, we will get back with you. So we will stand in recess.
Thank you.
[Recess].
Mr. Johnson [presiding.] I will now recall the Committee to
order. This meeting of the Subcommittee will reconvene. I am
Congressman Johnson and I am here in Mr. Fortenberry's required
absence. And again, I welcome the first panel and I would call
on Congresswoman Fudge for questions for this panel.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me begin with Mr. Strom. You mentioned in your
testimony that the biggest loan growth in 2010 was to
cooperatives and real estate mortgage loans. Is it possible to
find out if this growth was in concentrated geographic areas?
For example, did most of this growth happen in the West or the
South or North? Could you respond, please?
Mr. Strom. Ranking Member Fudge, the System's loan growth
in 2010 would have equated to about $10 billion in loan growth.
And, as you look at and analyze that, there are a couple of
strong contributing factors: one, the rising values of land in
the upper Midwest, especially where grain prices and the
concentration of grain production or corn, soybeans, wheat, and
because there has been strong income returns for farmers and
ranchers in those areas last year and with higher prices now,
that is obviously a contributing factor. So you saw increased
loan growth somewhat in real estate mortgages there.
I would say another strong contributing factor, though, to
loan growth or that $10 billion in the System was probably
driven by the rise in commodity prices because, again, the Farm
Credit System in financing those cooperatives, many of those
cooperatives are local grain elevators that are located across,
again, the Midwest predominantly who enter into contractual
arrangements with farmers and producers to contract grain
prices. They lay off their risk by the use of hedging tools,
which the Commodity Futures Trading Commission regulates. But
as those farmers establish those positions and those prices
move up, there is many times margin call requirements that have
to be fulfilled. And as I mentioned in my opening statement, we
saw just in the 7 days after the last Planting Intentions
report and stocks report, demand for almost $2 billion. So if
you look at last year when you had rising prices in the last
half of last year, I am sure a good portion of that went to
those types of margining requirements also.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much.
Dr. Henderson, you mentioned that bankers are beginning to
ease collateral requirements. Is that only for lending
institutions ``best customers,'' or are you seeing it for
smaller producers as well where commodity prices are going up
or going down?
Dr. Henderson. Well, what we are hearing in terms of
collateral requirements starting to ease is across the board as
long as the borrower has a projected out income stream on
returns and will be able to repay the loans. So we are seeing
across the board for small, medium, and large, but it really
depends upon what is their repayment capacity and their ability
to repay that loan.
Ms. Fudge. And when you say repayment capacity, tell me
exactly what you are talking about.
Dr. Henderson. In terms of incomes and expectations, your
business plan, what is your projected profitability for your
institution?
Ms. Fudge. Is there a standard you have or do you just look
at every instance separately?
Dr. Henderson. Every borrower is on an individual basis
because a lot of it depends upon an income, the projections in
there, but it also depends upon the management capabilities of
the borrower in themselves and how they run their business. A
lot of times if you look at community banks, they do some
relationship-based lending. And so a lot of times that might
not be done on strict hard core numbers, but at the same point
in time, they understand that there is a relationship there,
they are building a business for future growth as well and so
they do make some loans on that basis.
Ms. Fudge. Okay. Thank you. And this is to any member of
the panel. Any of you, if you could just respond if you are
aware of any individual banks in the System that may be doing
things to facilitate direct marketing of foods, like
encouraging producers to establish infrastructure like farmers'
markets. Obviously, that is a big thing where I come from. So
any member of the panel is welcome or more than one.
Mr. Strom. Let me just first respond. The Farm Credit
System and its Young Beginning Small Farmer Program emphasizes
it. It is a mission of the System to serve all eligible
borrowers, creditworthy farmers and ranchers, even those that
are producing on small plots for local food systems. We are
currently under a project looking closely at that issue to make
sure that those emerging markets and local food systems are
being adequately served.
Mr. Dolcini. I will take a crack at that, too,
Congresswoman. You know, you didn't ask it directly but we do
make loans in urban areas actually if there is a tie to
agriculture. So for example, some of the loans that the
California operation has made while I was out there involved
small apiaries, for example, or rooftop gardens or things. If
there is a nexus between agriculture, we are not confined,
unlike some other USDA agencies, to simply rural areas. We can
make those loans. And in many cases it starts out with youth
loans and then they graduate into our Direct or Guaranteed
Program. There was a couple of sisters in Fresno County that
were raising pigs and they started out with a $5,000 youth loan
and today they are borrowers at a much higher level. So we have
really tried to develop those relationships.
On the farmers' market side, you mentioned, ``Know Your
Farmer, Know Your Food.'' We are really seeing around the
country a much greater emphasis on locally grown, and customers
and consumers who want to have relationships with their farmers
and ranchers, who want to know where their food was produced.
In my state again--I keep going back to my regional bias--
we have 300 active farmers' markets there. USDA has provided
support to a number of them through various grant programs. And
we have provided support to a number of participants through
our loan program. So we are active on that front.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much.
Mr. Johnson. Well, if there are no other questions and
there is just Congresswoman Fudge and I at this point, we will
dismiss the first panel and we appreciate your testimony and
appreciate your time.
And if I could ask the second panel to come to the table.
Briefly introduce yourselves and we will be more than happy to
hear fairly brief comments. Thank you again.
As the gentlemen are assembling, let me take the liberty,
then, of introducing each of them. We have Mr. Michael Gerber,
President and Chief Executive Officer, Federal Agricultural
Mortgage Corporation here in D.C.; and Doug Stark, President
and Chief Executive Office, Farm Credit Services of America on
behalf of the Farm Credit System; Matthew Williams, Chairman
and President, Gothenburg State Bank on behalf of the ABA in
Gothenburg, Nebraska; and Matt Starline, Starline Organics,
Athens, Ohio.
So if you want to proceed in the order I introduced you, we
would be more than happy to hear from you. Thanks.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL A. GERBER, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, FEDERAL AGRICULTURAL MORTGAGE CORPORATION (FARMER
MAC), WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Gerber. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Fudge, and Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Michael
Gerber and I am the President and CEO of the Federal
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, also known as Farmer Mac. I
greatly appreciate the opportunity to testify here today before
you. Let me tell you a little bit about Farmer Mac and then
give you a snapshot of credit conditions as we see them today
in rural America.
Farmer Mac provides a secondary market for agricultural
real estate loans, rural utilities loans, and certain loans
guaranteed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. We support
primary lenders represented by those seated next to me, as well
as others by purchasing or guaranteeing the farm loans they
originate. In doing so, we help ensure lending capacity and
liquidity for those rural lenders and provide a source of
funding for long-term credit at stable interest rates to rural
America's communities, including farmers, ranchers, and other
rural electric cooperatives.
Since 1996, Farmer Mac has provided over $26 billion in
credit to rural America. Currently, our portfolio stands at
$12.2 billion of loans, guarantees, and commitments with loans
in all 50 states. You may be interested to know that 65 percent
of our portfolio of loans comes from family farms and 61
percent of the loans by number meet the USDA definition of
small farms.
In 2008, Congress expanded our charter to purchase and
guarantee loans made by cooperative lenders to the nation's
rural utility cooperatives. We took that authorization very
seriously and are proud to say that we have provided over $5
billion of funding to that industry.
Since our creation in 1988, we have maintained rigorous
underwriting standards. Our commitment to these standards has
enabled us to maintain a low delinquency rate and minimal
charge-offs. In addition, as you know, we are regulated for
safety and soundness by the Farm Credit Administration and also
subject to regulation by the Securities and Exchange
Commission. We cannot consider as qualified for our program a
loan with a loan-to-value ratio in excess of 80 percent, and
today our actual weighted average loan-to-value ratio for our
farm mortgage portfolio is 55 percent.
The financial crisis of 2008 was a challenging time for
financial institutions and Farmer Mac was not immune. Yet we
continued to provide lending programs to rural lenders even
during those challenging times. Farmer Mac's losses during that
period were not in our lending portfolio but rather our
liquidity investments, which are required under regulation.
When the difficulties arose, it was our partners, the Farm
Credit System, the National Rural Utilities Cooperative Finance
Corporation, and the commercial banks which provided the
necessary capital to allow us time to resolve our issues. We
took no taxpayer dollars or government support during that time
and--with an additional capital raise in January of 2010--paid
our partners back in full, including interest. Since that time,
we have grown our capital to well above the required minimum
level and continue our efforts to grow that capital base.
Today, the ag economy is stable. While commodity prices on
products such as grains and cotton have resulted in strong cash
flow for those producers, commodities tied to the general
economy have experienced some challenges. All ag producers,
however, today face substantial increases in prices for farm
inputs. Manufactured input costs such as petroleum and
fertilizer are forecast to increase by almost 11 percent in
2011 while input costs such as feed are forecast to increase by
about six percent. These increases will add risk to the cash
flow for farm operations and may result in additional need for
operating lines of credit.
Farmland has also increased in price over recent years in
many parts of the country. This is largely due to generally
favorable fundamental economic factors such as increasing
demand for ag products, strong commodity prices, and low
interest rates. Demand for farm loans remains steady. Volatile
commodity prices, high input costs, and a slowly recovering
economy will continue to impact the borrowing needs of
producers.
As a result of these conditions, we have seen solid growth
at Farmer Mac. As banks, Farm Credit institutions, and rural
utility lenders all work together to meet the demands of their
customers, our healthy financial position and mission focus
allow us to support rural America today and in an even bigger
way in the future. Thank you again for this opportunity and we
look forward to working with you in the future. And I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gerber follows:]

Prepared Statement of Michael A. Gerber, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (Farmer Mac),
Washington, D.C.

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today to testify on behalf of the Federal
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation known as Farmer Mac. My name is
Michael Gerber and I am the President and Chief Executive Officer of
Farmer Mac, headquartered here in Washington, D.C.
Farmer Mac provides a secondary market for agricultural real estate
and rural utilities loans and certain loans guaranteed by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture. This secondary market increases the
availability of long-term credit at stable interest rates to America's
rural communities, including farmers, ranchers and other rural
residents, and rural utilities, and provides those borrowers with the
benefits of capital markets pricing and product innovation. Farmer Mac
is a stockholder-owned, federally chartered instrumentality of the
United States and part of the Farm Credit System.
Farmer Mac was created by Congress in the aftermath of the
agricultural credit crisis of the 1980s, when land values fell as
interest rates rose sharply, credit policies tightened and there was a
wave of farm foreclosures. Farmer Mac interacts with all categories of
rural lenders (including banks, Farm Credit System institutions,
insurance companies, and cooperative rural utilities lenders)
throughout the country helping to ensure liquidity and lending capacity
for lenders to rural America, every day. We serve as a bridge between
institutional investment pools of capital and Main Street rural
America.

Farmer Mac Programs
Farmer Mac accomplishes its Congressional mission of providing
liquidity and lending capacity to rural lenders by:

purchasing eligible loans directly from lenders;

providing advances against eligible loans;

guaranteeing securities representing interests in, or
obligations secured by, pools of eligible loans; and

providing credit enhancements that enable lenders to meet
their customers' growing credit needs, transfer risk and
improve their capital position.

Farmer Mac conducts these activities through three programs--Farmer
Mac I, Farmer Mac II and Rural Utilities, offering loan products
designed to increase the liquidity of agricultural real estate mortgage
and other eligible loans and the lending capacity of financial
institutions that originate them. As of December 31, 2010, the total
outstanding volume in all of Farmer Mac's programs was $12.2 billion.
Under the Farmer Mac I program, Farmer Mac purchases or commits to
purchase eligible agricultural mortgage loans or securities backed by
eligible loans. Loans must meet credit underwriting, collateral
valuation, documentation and other standards specified by Farmer Mac.
Small farms account for 61% of Farmer Mac guarantees and commitments
and the average outstanding loan balance for Farmer Mac I loans is
$305,000.
Under the Farmer Mac II program, Farmer Mac's wholly-owned
subsidiary purchases the portions of loans guaranteed by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture under the Consolidated Farm and Rural
Development Act of 1972, as amended. Eligible USDA-guaranteed loans
include Farm Service Agency Guaranteed Farm Ownership and Term
Operating Loans and Rural Development Business and Industry and
Community Facility Guaranteed Loans.
In the Farm Bill of 2008, Congress expanded Farmer Mac's charter to
authorize the Corporation to purchase, and to guarantee securities
backed by, loans made by cooperative lenders to borrowers who have
received or are eligible to receive loans under the Rural
Electrification Act of 1936. These loans are for the financing of
electrification and telecommunications systems in rural areas. This
expansion has been very successful, with Farmer Mac working with
eligible rural utilities lenders to provide significant funding to
date, with nearly $2.6 billion outstanding as of December 31, 2010.
Farmer Mac has worked diligently to develop this line of business and
the consumer owners of the nation's rural electric cooperatives have
benefited from it.

Figure 1
Outstanding Loans and Guarantees

Farmer Mac funds its purchases of Farmer Mac Guaranteed Securities
and eligible loans primarily by issuing debt obligations of various
maturities in the capital markets. Farmer Mac's regular debt issuance
and non-program investment assets support its access to the capital
markets. As lenders seek Farmer Mac's products and services, favorable
loan terms ultimately depend on Farmer Mac's access to the capital
markets. Ultimately, this access to the capital market at favorable
rates means that rural borrowers can borrow at better rates which
reduces their costs and improves the chances of their success.

Strong Statute and Oversight
When Congress created Farmer Mac in response to the needs arising
from problems in the agricultural credit delivery system in the 1980s,
the legislators added requirements for a strong and independent
regulator. Unlike the other existing secondary market GSEs at the time,
under the initial 1987 legislation (Title VIII of the Farm Credit Act
of 1971 as amended), Farmer Mac was to be regulated by an independent
regulator, the Farm Credit Administration, for safety and soundness. In
1991, Congress required Farmer Mac to be regulated by a separate office
(Office of Secondary Market Oversight) within the Farm Credit
Administration. The statute creating Farmer Mac expressly required that
qualified loans meet minimum credit and appraisal standards that are
representative of sound loans to profitable farm businesses. Farmer
Mac's statutory charter requires offerings of Farmer Mac Guaranteed
Securities to be registered under the Securities Act of 1933 unless an
exemption for an offering is available. This provision leads to the
requirement that Farmer Mac comply with the periodic reporting
requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, including
quarterly reports on the financial status of the Corporation and more
frequent reports when there are significant developments. These
registration and reporting requirements also put Farmer Mac under the
regulatory authority of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
As required by its statutory charter, Farmer Mac has established
underwriting, appraisal, and repayment standards for eligible loans
taking into account the nature, risk profile, and other differences
between different categories of qualified loans. These standards for
agricultural real estate mortgage loans under the Farmer Mac I program
at a minimum are intended to:

provide that no loan with a loan to value ratio (``LTV'') in
excess of 80 percent be eligible (as of December 31, 2010 the
weighted average original LTV for Farmer Mac I loans was 55%);

require each borrower to demonstrate sufficient cash-flow to
provide adequate debt service on the loan; and

protect the integrity of the appraisal process with respect
to any loan.

Farmer Mac is required to set aside in a segregated account a
portion of the fees it receives from its guarantee activities. This
segregated account must be exhausted before Farmer Mac may issue debt
obligations to the U.S. Treasury against the $1.5 billion that it is
statutorily authorized to borrow in order to fulfill its guarantee
obligations. That borrowing authority is not intended to be a routine
funding source and has never been used.

Maintenance of Regulatory Capital Levels
The Farm Credit Act established capital requirements for Farmer
Mac. Farmer Mac must comply with the higher of the minimum capital and
the risk-based capital requirement. Over the past 2 years, Farmer Mac
substantially improved its capital position to support the additional
business demands in the agricultural production and rural utilities
sectors. The chart below illustrates the growth in the level of excess
capital, from $13.5 million at year end 2008 to $159.6 million at year
end 2010.

Figure 2
Capital Levels

Current Credit Conditions
The current economic environment is a generally stable one for the
agricultural sector as a whole. The grains sector, for example, has
seen commodity prices approach all-time highs, which has resulted in
strong cash flows for these producers. Commodities such as timber and
nursery/greenhouses have experienced some challenges tied to the
general economy and most notably the dairy and meat complex have seen
volatile prices for their commodities and cash flow challenges as a
result of higher feed costs.
All agricultural producers are facing substantial increases in the
prices for farm inputs, as illustrated in the chart below. These
increases will add risk to the cash flow for operations and may result
in additional credit needs for operating lines. Manufactured inputs
costs (such as petroleum and fertilizer) are forecast to increase by
almost 11% in 2011, while farm origin input costs (such as feed) are
forecast by about 6%. These cost increases for agricultural producers
are significantly higher than overall inflation in the economy, as
consensus forecasts for CPI inflation during 2011 are currently around
2.7%.

Figure 3
Agricultural Input Costs

Farmland has also experienced substantial increases in price over
recent years. The chart below shows the average value per acre for U.S.
cropland, which has been remarkably resilient despite the impacts of
the recent recession. This is largely due to generally favorable
fundamental economic factors such as increasing demand for agricultural
products, strong prices for agricultural commodities, low leverage in
the agricultural sector, and low interest rates.

Figure 4
U.S. Average Cropland Value

The combination of the above mentioned factors combined with many
financial institutions desiring to improve their balance sheets has
resulted in an increase in demand for Farmer Mac products. Lenders
continue to seek to offer their customers long-term interest rates at
historically low levels, fund larger real estate loans, and manage
borrower exposure levels. Farmer Mac has seen its outstanding loans and
guarantees expand, and the numbers of new financial institutions, most
of which are small rural lenders, applying to become approved Farmer
Mac participants grew by 217 from 2008 to 2010. This has resulted in
significant growth in our cash window products as new loan submissions
have increased substantially over the past 2 years. Net volume of
loans, guarantees and commitments grew in excess of 14% in 2010. The
chart below shows producer-level loan submissions to Farmer Mac, and
does not include portfolios securing Farmer Mac advances to lenders or
portfolios credit enhancements to lenders.

Figure 5
Famer Mac Agricultural Production Loan Purchase Submissions

Commodity/Geographic Diversity
It is Farmer Mac's policy to diversify its portfolio of loans held
and loans underlying Farmer Mac I products, both geographically and by
agricultural commodity/product. Farmer Mac directs its marketing
efforts toward agricultural lenders throughout the nation to achieve
commodity/product and geographic diversification in its exposure to
credit risk. Farmer Mac evaluates its credit exposure in particular
geographic regions and commodities/products, adjusted for the credit
quality of the loans in those particular geographic regions or
commodity/product groups relative to the total principal amount of all
outstanding loans held and loans underlying Farmer Mac I products.

Figure 6
Agricultural Production Commodity Distribution

We thank you for the opportunity to present Farmer Mac to you
today. We look forward to working with Members of Congress and our
partners to do even more to fulfill our mission of bringing liquidity
and the benefits of the secondary market to rural America.

The Chairman [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Gerber. First, let
me apologize and thank you all for your patience, especially
the Ranking Member. I do not have the supernatural gift of bi-
location and absolutely had to be at another hearing where my
own bill was considered by the Committee, which got a little
bit entangled, but good news, it did pass. So we will proceed
on now with Mr. Doug Stark. Go ahead, Mr. Stark.

STATEMENT OF DOUG STARK, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, FARM CREDIT SERVICES OF AMERICA, OMAHA, NE;
ON BEHALF OF FARM CREDIT SYSTEM

Mr. Stark. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Fudge. I
appreciate the opportunity today to testify before the
Committee on behalf of the Farm Credit System. I am Doug Stark,
President and CEO of Farm Credit Services of America out of
Omaha, Nebraska.
As Mr. Strom reported earlier, the Farm Credit System
remains financially strong. We ended the year 2010 with $175
billion loan portfolio with a growth rate of about 6.4 percent
overall for the System. As mentioned as well, the System's
capital position has increased as well to almost 15 percent of
total assets, or more than double the regulatory minimum.
The institution I lead, Farm Credit Services of America is
owned by more than 85,000 farmers that borrow from us in the
States of Iowa, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wyoming. Our
customers appreciate being part of a cooperatively owned
financial institution. Last year, we distributed $110 million
in cash patronage to them and over the last several years,
since 2004, have distributed $425 million of our earnings back
to our customer-owners. Overall, the Farm Credit System
distributed $733 million of cash patronage back to its
customers last year.
The cash grain industry represents almost half of our
portfolio at 46 percent. While the industry is experiencing
record commodity prices and strong profitability, we are seeing
increasing risk in this segment. Volatility is at record
levels. Commodity prices alone are double what they were 1 year
ago.
Farm inputs, as you heard already today, have increased
considerably as well. Landlords are demanding more cash rent.
The cost of seed, fertilizer, and fuel have all increased, and
this drives the need for more capital to operate these farms.
Complicating matters further, grain producers in and of
themselves are finding the need to capitalize almost 3 years of
production. First of all, they have to finance the carryover of
their inventory from last year while they market it. They also
are financing the ongoing investment in the crop being planted,
and not too far down the road here, they will be asked to step
up and make commitments and prepay such things as fertilizer,
seed, and chemicals for the coming year. We estimate that the
capital requirements for a typical Midwest corn producer are
nearly four times what they were just a mere few years ago in
2005.
As these credit needs for farmers have increased, lenders
have also had to continue to build capital so they can keep up
with the increased loan demand and maintain capital levels
necessary for a safe and sound financial institution. At Farm
Credit Services of America, last year our loan volume increased
13 percent, approximately $2 billion. This required us to build
nearly $300 million in retained earnings to capitalize our
institution so that we could safely meet the increasing needs
of our farmers and ranchers in our local area.
As you have heard, of great interest at local coffee shops
and increasingly from the media as well are the recent price
increases in agricultural real estate. The most notable
increases have been in the upper Midwest, the major grain-
producing areas of the country. The System continues to finance
land transaction in these volatile times by remaining focused
on sound underwriting and by making credit decisions based on
the repayment capacity of the individual borrower. Because we
hold all our loans on our own balance sheet, we have a strong
interest in seeing that our customers are successful.
Given the volatility and risk present in agricultural real
estate values, we have also implemented various adjustments to
underwriting processes to reduce the risk on new real estate
loans. These actions include such things as setting lower loan-
to-value limits, establishing maximum per-acre limits, stress-
testing a borrower's repayment capacity, shortening loan terms,
or cross-collateralizing loans with property that has limited
debt encumbrance. The most important thing we continue to do,
though, is making our credit decisions based on the repayment
capacity of the borrower, not just on collateral values.
Another aspect that I wanted to make sure that we talked
about was the programs we have in place for three special
categories of borrowers: those that are young, those that are
just beginning in farming, and those that are small farmers.
Last year, the Farm Credit System made $7.3 billion in loans to
young farmers and $10.3 billion to beginning farmers. Our loan
officers work hard in understanding agricultural operation that
these new farmers engage in, whether they are traditional farms
or they are sustainable local food-related operations that
involve value-added processing. We recognize that we must reach
out to those who are innovators in farm enterprise as they move
from being niche operators to tomorrow's Main Street
businesses.
In conclusion, the Farm Credit System is financially
strong. It is economically vital and serving its mission for
agriculture and rural America well. We make credit available to
all segments of agriculture, including commercial producers, as
well as young, beginning, and small farmers. We pay insurance
premiums to protect our investors, pay the full cost of our
regulator, and have no taxpayer backstop.
Mr. Chairman, thanks for the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of the System. I look forward to any questions that
you or the Committee Members may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stark follows:]

Prepared Statement of Doug Stark, President and Chief Executive
Officer, Farm Credit Services of America, Omaha, NE; on Behalf of Farm
Credit System

Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on behalf of the Farm Credit System. My
name is Doug Stark, and I am President and CEO of Farm Credit Services
of America. Farm Credit Services of America is a part of the nationwide
Farm Credit System. My remarks today will provide some background on
the Farm Credit System, comments on current credit conditions, discuss
our response to increasing land values, and summarize what Farm Credit
is doing to meet the credit needs of agriculture in the geographic area
served by my institution.

Background on the Farm Credit System
Established in 1916, the Farm Credit System is a unique set of 89
private institutions, including five funding banks (four Farm Credit
Banks and one Agricultural Credit Bank) and direct-lending
associations, all of which are cooperatively owned by the farmers,
ranchers, agricultural cooperatives, rural utilities and others in
rural America that borrow from them. Farm Credit institutions are
chartered by the Federal Government to provide credit and other related
financial services to our owners and others consistent with the
eligibility criteria set out in the Farm Credit Act.
Farm Credit Services of America is one of these 89 Farm Credit
cooperatives. We are owned by more than 85,000 farmers that borrow from
us in the states of Iowa, Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wyoming. As
President and CEO, I report to a 16 member Board of Directors that
consists of thirteen farmers elected by the members of the cooperative
and three appointed directors. Two appointed directors are selected for
their financial experience and the board has selected a third to ensure
we had a young farmer represented on the board. In Farm Credit,
employees are not allowed to serve as directors of our lending
institutions.
There are 84 independently operated Farm Credit associations like
Farm Credit Services of America serving agriculture throughout the
United States and Puerto Rico. Every Farm Credit association is
organized as a cooperative that is owned and governed by its farmer-
members. The Board of Directors of each institution is responsible for
establishing the institution's capitalization plan consistent with
Federal regulations and for ensuring that management makes available
loan products and financially related services appropriate to the
unique needs of agriculture in the area that the institution serves.
Each Farm Credit association obtains funds for their lending
programs from one of the five wholesale Farm Credit banks. At Farm
Credit Services of America, we get our funding from AgriBank Farm
Credit Bank (headquartered in St. Paul, MN), which is cooperatively
owned by 17 local associations. The five System banks own the Federal
Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation (located in Jersey City, NJ),
which, as agent for the banks, markets to the investing public the
System-wide debt securities that are used to fund the operations of all
Farm Credit System institutions. Unlike commercial banks, Farm Credit
institutions do not have access to insured deposits that are guaranteed
by the FDIC and backed by the U.S. Treasury as a source of funding for
our operations.

Regulatory Oversight by the Farm Credit Administration
All Farm Credit institutions are regulated by the Farm Credit
Administration (FCA), which was created by Congress and is subject to
oversight by both House and Senate Agriculture Committees. The Farm
Credit Administration is an arm's-length, independent safety and
soundness regulator. FCA's three board members are nominated by the
President and confirmed by the Senate. The FCA has all of the oversight
and enforcement powers that every other Federal financial regulatory
institution has to ensure that Farm Credit institutions operate in a
safe and sound manner.
The Farm Credit System's mission, ownership structure and
authorizing legislation is unique among financial institutions. For
farmers, ranchers and the cooperatives that they rely on, it is
critically important that Farm Credit's safety and soundness regulator
understands our unique mission and what it takes to be successful in
accomplishing that mission. Changing our regulatory oversight would
threaten our ability to accomplish the mission set out for us by this
Committee in the Farm Credit Act.

Fulfilling Farm Credit's Mission of Serving Agriculture and Rural
America
All Farm Credit System institutions are focused on accomplishing
the mission established for us by Congress: to serve agriculture and
rural America. We take our Congressional charge seriously, and
continuously review our performance to ensure that we are doing so
efficiently and effectively. Our cooperative structure and governance
is designed specifically to ensure that our lending and financially
related service activities are driven by the needs of our farmer-
members and to ensure that there is a reliable and competitive credit
source available to agriculture that farmers own and control. Our
practice is to engage our customers in a consultative lending
relationship, using our accumulated expertise and knowledge of
agriculture and finance to craft long term lending relationships that
are often delivered across the farmer's kitchen table.
We understand that farming isn't a short-term investment for our
member-borrowers. Our cooperative structure allows us to work with our
farmer-owners with an approach that is not focused on achieving
quarterly returns to impress investing stockholders. We know that when
we work with our customer-owners to help them achieve success in their
business, our business will succeed as well. Farm Credit's lending
relationship with our member-borrowers is based on constructive credit
over the long haul--we make loans, retain loans, and service loans. We
do not enter and exit agricultural lending as farm profitability waxes
and wanes. Our lending philosophy is to be conservative in good times
so that we can be courageous in tough times.

Distributing Profits to Farmers Through Patronage
Our commitment to our farmer-members' business success is
demonstrated further by the fact that we share our profits directly
through patronage dividends with the farmers that borrow from us. Each
year, the Farm Credit Services of America board of directors makes a
determination based on our profitability and financial strength as to
what portion of our net earnings will be returned directly to the
farmer-members that own our institution.
Since 2004, Farm Credit Services of America has distributed over
$425 million dollars in earnings as patronage dividends to the member-
borrowers of our cooperative. This ``rural stimulus'' has allowed our
customer-owners to re-invest in their own operations and to support
their rural communities through local spending. We are proud to be able
to directly and indirectly support all of these communities, regardless
of size. In the past 5 years, the Farm Credit System in total has
returned some $3.3 billion in cash and allocated an additional $1.2
billion in equities to our customer-owners. That is money that stays in
agriculture and rural America and helps Farm Credit's customers be
successful.

Farm Credit's Financial Strength
The Farm Credit System remains very strong financially. The
System's combined net income was $3.5 billion for 2010, 23% higher than
2009. Nationwide, Farm Credit ended 2010 with a loan portfolio of about
$175 billion which was 6.4% larger than where we had ended 2009. Farm
Credit's financial performance has allowed growth in combined capital
to $33.3 billion as of year-end 2010. This represents the reserves
available in the event of losses.
The Farm Credit System's debt securities are insured by the Farm
Credit System Insurance Corporation (FCSIC). Farm Credit institutions
pay annual premiums of up to 20 basis points to assure that the FCSIC
Insurance Fund is maintained at the secure base amount of 2% of
outstanding System debt. The Insurance Fund held $3.031 billion as of
year-end 2010. There is no Federal backstop for the Insurance Fund.

Current Conditions in Agriculture
As you are well aware, starting in 2008 financial and credit
markets were disrupted severely due to failures in the home mortgage
sector. Despite this disruption, the Farm Credit System successfully
continued to meet the credit demands of our customers. At Farm Credit
Services of America, we continued to see increased demand for credit
and I am pleased how we have been able to respond. With the strength of
current commodity prices it is very important that we continue our
prudent approach to making credit available. Our experience tells us
that the extraordinary period of farm profitability we now enjoy will
inevitably be replaced by a period of thinner margins.
Let me give you some highlights regarding what we are seeing in
Farm Credit Services of America's territory when it comes to the local
farm economy, credit conditions, and how Farm Credit Services of
America is responding to these unique circumstances.
The cash grain industry represents 46 percent of our portfolio.
While the industry is experiencing record commodity prices and strong
profitability, we are seeing the risk increasing in this segment.
Volatility is at record levels--commodity prices alone are double what
they were 1 year ago. Not everyone benefits from these increases,
particularly livestock producers.
Farm input costs have continued to increase. Landlords are
demanding more for cash rent, while seed, fertilizer and, of course,
fuel also have increased notably. This has driven a considerable
increase in the need for capital to operate these farms. In many
situations, grain producers are finding that they need to capitalize
and fund portions of 3 years of production: they must finance their
investment in the carryover of last year's crop while it is being
marketed; they have the ongoing investment in the present crop being
planted and grown; and even before this year's crop has matured or been
harvested, they are expected to make commitments and prepay such things
as seed, fertilizer, and chemicals for the coming year. To effectively
market their crops, many farmers also set up marketing loans to fund
margin calls to cover their marketing program positions. We have
estimated that the capital requirements for a typical Midwest corn
producer to be nearly four times what it was in 2005.
To be successful in these volatile times farmers need profitability
so that they can increase their equity stake in their own operations.
But as the credit needs of these farmers has continued to increase,
lenders have had to continue to build capital so that they can keep up
with increased loan demand while maintaining appropriate capital
levels. At Farm Credit Services of America, our 2010 loan volume
increased by 13 percent, or approximately $2 billion. This increase
required us to build nearly $300 million in retained earnings to
capitalize our institution so that we could safely meet the increased
borrowing needs of farmers and ranchers. We have seen that some local
financial institutions had neither the financial capacity nor the
experienced personnel to deal with this rapidly changing and volatile
environment. This becomes apparent when we see an increase in loan
requests from producers whose need for credit has outgrown their local
lender's financial capacity, or who are in need of an immediate loan
because volatile prices lead to calls for immediate increased margins
in their hedge accounts.
Of great interest at local coffee shops, increasingly from the
media, and from financial regulators are the recent price increases in
agricultural real estate. The most notable increases have been in the
upper Midwest--the major grain producing areas of the country. While
there are many reasons for increased farmland values including low
interest rates and higher commodity prices, the volatility in
agricultural commodity prices and in land values has heightened the
caution with which Farm Credit System institutions approach the
marketplace. The System continues to finance land transactions in these
volatile times by remaining focused on sound underwriting and making
credit decisions based on the repayment capacity of the individual
borrower. Because we hold virtually all of our loans on our own balance
sheet, we have a strong interest in seeing that our customers are
successful and prudent in their own risk-taking, including the purchase
and financing of farm real estate.
Given the volatility and risk in the present agricultural real
estate values, most Farm Credit System institutions have implemented
adjustments to their underwriting processes to reduce the risk on new
real estate loans. Some of these actions have included setting lower
loan to value limits, establishing maximum loan per acre limits,
strengthening loan analysis by stress testing a borrower's repayment
capacity, shortening loan terms, or cross-collateralizing loans with
property that has limited debt encumbrance. Appraisals are also
completed by certified and licensed appraisers who are totally
independent of the credit decision process. These adjustments result in
terms that are significantly more conservative than allowed by law and
regulation, designed to maintain safety and soundness.
Another way Farm Credit Services of America was able to extend to
our customers our institutional sense of prudent risk-taking was
through our Loan Conversion program. Most people don't expect their
lender to contact them about reducing the rate of interest on their
loan. This past year, more than 15,000 of our farm and ranch customers
have benefited from the lowering of their long term fixed interest
rate. These actions resulted in savings to customers of $44 million in
the first year alone. The conversion of longer term, fixed rate loans
to lower cost, fixed rates resulted not just in immediate savings to
the borrower, but continued interest savings for the life of the
converted loans. We know that our long-standing focus on what's best
for our customers has improved the financial strength of both the
borrowers and our Farm Credit cooperative.
The balance of our portfolio is to various segments in the
livestock industry, most notably cattle, followed by swine, and then
dairy. These industries have, for the most part, been adversely
impacted by an increase in feed prices since 2008. For a good share of
2008 and 2009, we saw losses to producers in these segments, especially
swine and dairy. Because of our focus on agriculture, we have in place
a skilled lending staff that is backed by our strong capital position.
This dual strength allowed us to restructure loan terms and repayment
plans for a significant portion of the producers in these agricultural
operations that feed grains.

A Commitment to Serving Young, Beginning and Small Farmers
Every Farm Credit association has programs in place targeted
specifically at meeting the needs of three special categories of
borrowers--those that are young, those that are just beginning in
farming, and those that are small farmers. Our mission to serve the
needs of young, beginning, and small farmers leads us to identify,
understand, and finance the farm operations that these new
agriculturalists engage in, including such operations as organic,
sustainable, local food-related, direct-to-retail, or other emerging
business models in addition to traditional agricultural operations. We
recognize that we must reach out to those who are innovators in farm
enterprises in order to follow today's niche operation as it becomes
tomorrow's mainstream business.
Farm Credit Services of America has an exceptional commitment to
our Young, Beginning, and Small farmer program that starts in our board
room. Several years ago, our board took the unusual step of creating an
appointed board member position to be filled by an outstanding young
farmer so that we would include the voice of the next generation in all
of the board's deliberations.
Farm Credit Services of America's Young, Beginning, and Small
farmer program has many facets to serve the unique needs of borrowers
in our area. Our program offers lower interest rates, while maintaining
our credit standards. In fact, as of year-end, 2010, nearly 17% of our
loan portfolio consists of loans to young and beginning borrowers in
our territory. In addition, we are dedicated to training and education
programs for young, beginning, and small farmers in our territory
through our own classes, seminars, and institutes as well as supporting
such programs provided by others. This is part of our commitment to
training future farmers the good credit habits and skills that will
help make them successful business people in the future.
Nationwide, the Farm Credit System's dedication to our mission is
demonstrated by the aggregate amount of new loans made in the year 2010
to Young, Beginning, and Small farmers by all Farm Credit associations.
New loans in 2010 to young farmers totaled $7.3 billion, in the same
period new loans to beginning farmers added up to $10.3 billion, and to
small farmers was $13.1 billion. It is important to note that farmers
may be included in multiple categories since they are included in each
category for which they meet the defined characteristic; Young--35 or
younger; Beginning--10 years or fewer of farming experience; Small--
less than $250,000 in annual gross farm sales.
When it comes to serving the needs of small farmers, the Farm
Credit System stands out. Recently, the American Bankers Association
released its report on ``farm bank'' performance in 2010. They
indicated that the 1,552 banks that met their definition of a ``farm
bank'' had some $33.9 billion in credit outstanding in small farm loans
(those with an original loan size of less than or equal to $500,000).
In comparison, the 84 associations of the Farm Credit System had
slightly more than $143.7 billion of similar sized loans outstanding at
the end of 2010.

USDA Programs Help Farm Credit Serve Agriculture
Additionally, at Farm Credit Services of America we often make use
of USDA's Farm Service Agency (FSA) loan guarantees to support our
lending, particularly to young and beginning farmers and ranchers. We
are pleased that our experience and excellent credit management
practices have allowed us to be recognized as an FSA preferred lender.
The guarantees available through FSA are an important tool that
allows us to serve higher risk credits that might not otherwise meet
our underwriting standards. The Farm Credit Act requires that we focus
our resources on meeting the needs of credit worthy borrowers. These
FSA guarantees, along with our Board's acute focus on serving young and
beginning farmers and ranchers has allowed to create a special program
we call AgStart, which assists young producers who cannot meet normal
underwriting standards. In this special program we are now serving
1,340 young producers that fit into this category.
Another very important USDA program which benefits our farmer-
members is the Risk Management Agency's (RMA) crop insurance program.
Producers need protection against weather related disasters and price
volatility and today's crop insurance represents a terrific risk
mitigation tool for them. As a lender we believe strongly that crop
insurance is essential for producers but also is essential for lenders
to help protect our investments in loans. At Farm Credit Services of
America we are an active participant in the crop insurance program.
Last year, we paid out over $124 million in claims. I can't emphasize
enough how important crop insurance is as the primary risk management
tool that allows our member-borrowers to make the huge investments
required to plant and grow annual crops.

Serving the Vital Needs of Rural Communities and Global Markets
Lending to companies that serve the needs of rural communities in
the energy, communications, and water industries is a growing part of
Farm Credit's overall business. Customers in these industries include
rural electric generation and transmission cooperatives, electric
distribution cooperatives, independent power producers, rural local
exchange carriers, wireless provides, cable television system, and
water and waste water companies. Farm Credit loans to these customers
increased to $15 billion at the end of 2010 from $14.6 billion at the
end of 2009.
Much of the loan growth to these customers came as the broader debt
capital markets contracted as part of the overall financial market
crisis. The Farm Credit System, primarily through CoBank (the one Farm
Credit bank that operates as an Agricultural Credit Bank) has increased
its lending to these customers ensuring that a continued flow of
competitively priced credit is available to them. The System's ability
to expand financing to these customers has been critical as many of
them, electric co-ops especially, have been forced to modernize
facilities and expand operations as demand for electricity has boomed
across rural areas.
Similarly, as global credit markets contracted, demand for credit
around the world to purchase U.S. agricultural export products
increased. Loans made by CoBank to facilitate the export of U.S. farm
products increased from $2.1 billion at the end of 2007 to $4 billion
at year end 2010.

Impact of Financial Market Disruptions
Because the Farm Credit System relies on our access to the
financial markets for the funds we need to make credit available to our
borrowers, a disruption in the efficient operation of those markets can
adversely impact agriculture. We witnessed firsthand how disruptions in
the nation's financial markets can directly impact not only our cost of
funds but also the term of the funds that are available.
During the recent crisis, commercial banks were extended a direct
Federal guarantee on their debt issuance and access to Federal capital
support. The housing GSEs gained enhanced support from the Treasury to
facilitate their access to the debt markets. In the case of Farm
Credit, we have no such guarantee, we were provided no access to
capital support, we have no explicit borrowing line with the Treasury,
and no Federal backstop for the Farm Credit System Insurance Fund.
Despite the fact that we have had no assistance from the government
throughout these times of extreme stress in the financial markets, we
are very proud to report to you that we have not had to deny a single
farmer, cooperative or other eligible borrower access to credit because
we could not access the nation's money markets. This is testament to
the financial strength that the System has carefully built up during
good times through cautious lending and the accumulation of appropriate
capital reserves.
Trust has been built with our investors, who know that the Farm
Credit System has never failed to meet its obligations. They are secure
in the knowledge that System management and directors are intent on
preserving this fine organization to ensure that farmers will continue
to own and govern their credit source through their cooperative in the
future. However, Farm Credit's operational prudence notwithstanding,
the financial market turmoil demonstrated to us that our ability to
access the necessary funding to meet our mission to agriculture and
rural America may be at risk if circumstances beyond our control
disrupt our market access.

Conclusion
The Farm Credit System is financially stable, economically vital,
and serving its mission for agriculture and rural America well. We
continue to make credit available to all segments of agriculture
including commercial producers as well as young, beginning and small
farmers. There are no Federal dollars invested in the Farm Credit
System. We even pay for the expense of being regulated by the Federal
Government through an assessment on all Farm Credit System
institutions.
As a network of agricultural and rural lending cooperatives owned
by the farmers, cooperatives, and rural utilities that borrow from us,
we have the built in oversight mechanism that our farmer-owners hold
our feet to the fire to keep service quality high. We understand that
Farm Credit's success depends on our customers' success. To continue
serving our mission, we must have continued, effective access across
all terms to the national debt markets and an independent, arm's-length
regulator that comprehends the unique requirements of agriculture.
I am testifying to you as a leader of a nationwide lending
institution in a climate of high farm profitability and increasing
farmland values. But it should not surprise you that I am reporting on
our prudence in lending practices, credit management, and service to
our mission. The Agriculture Committee understands why the Farm Credit
System exists, and our continued success is due in part to the fact
that this Committee had the foresight to change our structure more than
20 years ago while strengthening our regulatory oversight to ensure our
safety and soundness.
We are proud of our commitment to rural America. We have maintained
our focus and continually work to meet our mission. We are aware that
all of agriculture will inevitably face challenging economic times that
may test the resolve of many. We urge that you assure adequate
guaranteed loan programs through USDA FSA and Rural Development, along
with the funding resources and flexibility for a strong crop insurance
program.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for the opportunity to testify today
on behalf of Farm Credit Services of America Farm Credit and the Farm
Credit System. I will be pleased to respond to your questions.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Stark, for your testimony. Mr.
Williams?

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW H. WILLIAMS, CHAIRMAN AND PRESIDENT,
GOTHENBURG STATE BANK; VICE CHAIRMAN, AMERICAN BANKERS
ASSOCIATION, GOTHENBURG, NE

Mr. Williams. Chairman Fortenberry, Ranking Member Fudge,
and Members of the Subcommittee, I am Matt Williams, President
of the Gothenburg State Bank in Gothenburg, Nebraska, a family-
owned bank, and I am a fourth-generation banker. I also serve
as the Vice Chairman of the American Bankers Association.
More farmers and ranchers borrow money from banks than any
other source. Over 5,700 banks, nearly 75 percent of all the
banks in the United States, reported ag loans on their books at
the end of 2010 with a total outstanding portfolio of $127
billion. Since the financial crisis, the banking industry has
stepped up and increased farm and ranch lending from year end
2007 to year end 2010 by over $13 billion.
In the past 6 months, we have heard a great deal about the
increase in farmland prices. Is this the next asset bubble?
Recently, I was invited to speak on behalf of bankers at an
FDIC symposium on this issue. In most of Nebraska, ag land
prices have increased. Agriculture has done well with farmers
responding to market conditions by increasing their land
holdings. As a result, land that has gone on the market has
generated significant interest and prices have risen
accordingly. Demand for credit, though, to finance these
purchases has been relatively flat. In fact, many of the sales
are paid for with cash.
For over 40 years, the banking industry and the USDA have
worked together to provide access to credit to more than 55,000
farmers and ranchers who borrow money from banks through the
Guaranteed Farm Programs offered through the USDA's Farm
Service Agency. As you have heard today, Congress inserted term
limits into these programs that prohibit farmers and ranchers
after a period of years. While the goal of term limits is
understandable, term limits hurt those farmers and ranchers who
can least afford a financial setback. For this reason, the
American Bankers Association has endorsed H.R. 1422, introduced
by Representative Leonard Boswell. We urge you to pass H.R.
1422.
Credit is certainly available to agriculture. In fact, the
lending market is very competitive. I compete with many
financial service providers for loans. Over the years, farm
credit is one of our major competitors. I face this taxpayer-
backed tax-advantaged Federal Farm Credit System on a daily
basis. Today, farm credit is a large and complex financial
service business with $229 billion in assets. It earned $3.495
billion in 2010 and it enjoyed a combined local, state, and
Federal tax rate in 2010 of just 5.9 percent. Farm Credit is a
GSE and it presents the same kind of potential liability to the
American taxpayer as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Congress will
soon reform the housing GSEs. I urge this Committee to take a
look at the Farm Credit System also when you are reviewing
GSEs.
I would also like to bring to your attention the Investment
Bond Pilot Program, a program offered and created by the Farm
Credit Administration, the regulator of the Farm Credit System.
To finance a project under this program, an FCS lender helps a
borrower issue a bond and Farm Credit purchases this bond as an
investment. In this way, Farm Credit is able to characterize
otherwise prohibited commercial lending activity as an
investment instead of a loan. This pilot program has been
running nationwide since 2005. A nationwide program that allows
entities to access Farm Credit funding that are prohibited from
borrowing is a regulatory overreach and should be stopped.
In conclusion, let me emphasize two things. We know our
farmers and banks have an adequate supply of credit available
for these farmers. Based on how we finance ag land and how Farm
Credit, by the way, finances ag land, a decrease in farmland
values will not cause a significant decrease in loan quality.
We would ask you to please not allow excess regulation such
as Dodd-Frank, unfair competition, reduce our ability to
continue serving the agriculture needs of our communities and
our country. Thank you for this opportunity to address the
Subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]

Prepared Statement of Matthew H. Williams, Chairman and President,
Gothenburg State Bank; Vice Chairman, American Bankers Association,
Gothenburg, NE

Chairman Fortenberry, Ranking Member Fudge, and Members of the
Subcommittee, my name is Matt Williams, and I am the Chairman and
President of Gothenburg State Bank in Gothenburg, Nebraska. My great
grandfather founded the bank in 1902 and our family has operated it
since then. My grandfather served as President of the bank and my
father followed him in the job. Since it was founded, Gothenburg State
Bank and my family have survived many economic catastrophes including
the farm crisis of the 1920s, the Great Depression, the farm crisis of
the 1980s, and the Great Recession of 2008/2009. We plan to continue to
serve the citizens of central Nebraska for the next 100 years or more.
Our bank's tag line is ``Still Pioneering'' and it is a core value of
our company. Today, Gothenburg State Bank has two office locations,
assets of $115 million, and employs 27 people. Our loans total nearly
$80 million with about 75% of our portfolio connected to agriculture in
a direct or indirect way.
I also serve as the Vice Chairman of the American Bankers
Association (ABA), and I appreciate the opportunity to present the
views of the ABA on credit conditions in rural America. The ABA
represents banks of all sizes and charters and is the voice of the
nation's $13 trillion banking industry and its two million employees.
ABA is uniquely qualified to comment on agricultural credit issues as
banks have provided credit to agriculture since the founding of our
country. Over 5,700 banks--nearly 75% of all banks--reported
agricultural loans on their books at year end 2010 with a total
outstanding portfolio of over $127 billion. More farmers and ranchers
receive credit from the banking industry than from any other source. In
addition to our commitment to farmers and ranchers, thousands of farm
dependent businesses--food processors, retailers, transportation
companies, storage facilities, manufacturers, etc.--receive financing
from the banking industry as well.
The topic of today's hearing is extremely important and timely. Our
nation is facing difficult economic conditions which are affecting all
businesses, including banks. The core business of banking is lending.
That is what banks do. Banks will continue to be the source of
financial strength in their communities by meeting the financial needs
of farms, businesses and individuals. Banks in every state in the
country are actively looking for good farm and ranch loans. Since the
financial crisis, the banking industry stepped up and increased their
share of farm and ranch lending from year end 2007 to year end 2010 by
over $13 billion. During the same period farmers and ranchers have
reduced their total indebtedness by nearly $6 billion.

The Impact of Dodd-Frank on the Banking Industry
Our communities and our country cannot reach their full potential
without the presence of a local bank--a bank that understands the
financial and credit needs of its citizens, farmers, businesses, and
government. I am concerned that this model may be in jeopardy given the
massive weight of new rules and regulations that will result from the
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010
(Dodd-Frank). The vast majority of banks in our country had nothing to
do with the events that led to the financial crisis and are as much
victims of the devastation as the rest of the economy. While most banks
are far removed from Wall Street and banks on Main Street are the ones
that are paying the price for the mess that others created.
Banks work every day to make credit and financial services
available to their customers. Those efforts, however, are made more
difficult by regulatory costs and second-guessing by bank examiners.
Combined with hundreds of new regulations expected from the Dodd-Frank
Act, these pressures are slowly but surely strangling our traditional
community banks, handicapping our ability to meet the credit needs of
our communities.
Managing this mountain of regulation will be a significant
challenge for a bank of any size. The median-sized bank has only 37
employees--for them, and for banks like mine that have even fewer
employees, this burden will be overwhelming. Historically, the cost of
regulatory compliance as a share of operating expenses is 2\1/2\ times
greater for small banks than for large banks. Moreover, it creates more
pressure to hire additional compliance staff, not front line customer
service staff. It means more money spent on outside lawyers to manage
the risk of compliance errors and greater risk of litigation. It means
more money to hire consulting firms to assist with the implementation
of all of the changes, and more money hiring outside auditors to make
sure there are no compliance errors. It means more risk of regulatory
scrutiny, which can include penalties and fines. All of these
expenditures take away precious resources that could be better used
serving the bank's community.
The consequences of these new burdens from the government are real.
New regulatory pressures will have a negative impact on the number of
banks that survive in our country. Costs are rising, access to
additional capital is limited, and revenue sources have been severely
cut. It means that fewer loans will get made. It means a weaker
economy. It means slower job growth. With regulatory over-reaction, new
laws, and uncertainty about government's role in the day-to-day
business of banking, meeting the financial needs of our local community
seems to have become secondary, and yet our success in Gothenburg
demands that we focus on our customers and our community.

The Impact of Dodd-Frank on Agricultural Credit
The increased regulatory burden brought about by the passage of
Dodd-Frank that I have spoken about will impact agricultural credit.
Dodd-Frank will require that we supply the regulators with additional
data about our lending activities to farmers and ranchers. Dodd-Frank
may require us to justify the ``suitability'' of the credit products we
make available to our farm and ranch customers.
Of particular concern is the additional regulatory and compliance
burden expected once the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection (CFPB)
becomes fully operational. This new bureaucracy--expected to hire over
1,200 new staff--will certainly impose new obligations on community
banks--banks that had nothing to do with the financial crisis and
already have a long history of serving farmers, ranchers and all
consumers fairly in a competitive environment.
Small banks like mine are not exempt from the CFPB. All banks--
large and small--will be required to comply with rules and regulations
set by the CFPB, including rules that identify what the CFPB considers
to be ``unfair, deceptive, or abusive.'' Moreover, the CFPB can require
community banks to submit whatever information it decides it ``needs.''
There are also many other new regulatory burdens flowing from the Dodd-
Frank Act empowerment of the CFPB which will add considerable
compliance costs to every bank's bottom line. Increased compliance
costs increase the cost of borrowing money for our customers; this will
not help us revive our local and national economy.
In response to what we know lies ahead, ABA and our members have
been telling farmers and ranchers that they have to improve their
business practices including their marketing plans, their capital
expenditure planning, and their risk management practices to name a
few. Overall, many producers have responded positively to these
messages, and they have stepped up their game to meet the challenges of
this period. Proven cash flow, and being able to demonstrate the
ability to repay a loan, continues to be a bedrock principle of
agricultural lending by banks. If a producer cannot show adequate
repayment ability, it will be hard to obtain credit. Again, the
regulators have made it very clear to the bankers that they expect
bankers to stick to the basics and that demand is being followed by the
bankers I know.

Agricultural Real Estate Values Have Increased Due to Farm Prosperity,
Not Leveraged Speculation
In the past 6 months we have all heard and read a great deal about
the increase in farmland prices. The question most asked by the press,
and increasingly the banking regulators is, ``Are we looking at another
bubble?'' A little more than a month ago the FDIC held a symposium on
this issue. In early December the FDIC issued guidance ( the Office of
the Comptroller of the Currency issued similar guidance to all western
banks) to all FDIC insured banks warning them about the dangers of
asset bubbles and also warning agricultural banks--those banks with a
concentration in agricultural lending--like mine, to consider the
dangers of credit concentration. We appreciate the guidance of the
regulatory community.
I was the only banker invited to share my views at the FDIC
Symposium. While it is clear in some areas of the country--including
most of Nebraska--farmland prices have escalated, there is no evidence
that this is being fueled by credit. Farmers are responding to market
signals, and those signals are extremely positive. Farmers and ranchers
have accumulated cash thanks to a healthy agricultural economy, and
they have a positive outlook. As a result of these factors, what land
that has gone on the market (in my area, very few parcels have come up
for sale) has generated intense interest, and as a result, prices have
risen. At the same time, demand for credit to finance these new land
acquisitions has been relatively flat. A recent survey of bankers in
three Federal Reserve Districts supports this point. In all three
districts, the overwhelming majority of bankers reported that farm and
ranch loan demand in the third quarter of 2010 was essentially the same
as it was in the third quarter of 2009. In the districts that reported
an increase in demand, the increase was very modest. This data
strengthens my belief that the increase in farmland sales values that
we have seen over the past few years has largely been the result of
farmer prosperity, not excessive lending.
I made it clear to the participants at the FDIC Symposium last
month that managing agricultural loan risk is what we do at Gothenburg
State Bank, and what bankers at banks all over the country do. To give
you a sense of our posture towards farm real estate lending, please
consider some of the standards at our bank:

We have very conservative underwriting standards for real
estate lending and these have not changed for a decade or more.

Repayment-ability is the primary driver of our
underwriting--if the request does not cash flow, we do not do
it--regardless of the collateral position of the customer.

We only lend a maximum of 60% of the appraised value of the
land (loan-to-value).

In our current farmland loan portfolio, our average loan-to-
value is about 40%

Even though land values have increased to $5,000 per acre in
our service area, we use $3,500 per acre for credit analysis
purposes when calculating net worth position, debt to assets,
and other key ratios.

Technology is available that allows us to stress test our
farm loan portfolio to see what would happen if real estate
values dropped by as much as 40%.

I cannot overstate the value of the technology that my bank
and that most banks have invested in that allows us to do
credit analysis and run ``what if'' scenarios almost
instantaneously. In our bank exercise, a 40% drop in real
estate values did reduce the balance sheet net worth of our
customers, but it had very little or no effect on the quality
of our loan portfolio. Our bank's risk to the FDIC insurance
fund would not change.

I believe the concerns about what is happening in farmland values
are overstated at this time. Our farm and ranch customers, and the farm
and ranch customers of many other banks, have enormous skin in the game
in their operations. Many are paying cash for real estate. Leverage
levels are at or near a historic low--a recent paper published by the
Kansas City Federal Reserve indicates that only 30% of all farmers and
ranchers had any debt in 2008 (the most recent data available).
Prosperity is driving the demand for farmland and retained earnings are
providing the cash to purchase it.

Recommendation to Congress to Help Farmers and Ranchers Access Credit
from Banks and Other Private Sector Lenders
I have spoken at length about the prosperity that many farmers and
ranchers have enjoyed over the past 10 years. However, for many
reasons, that prosperity has not benefited all sectors of the
agricultural economy. For over forty years the banking industry and the
USDA have worked cooperatively to provide access to credit to those
farmers and ranchers who have some deficiency in their operation that
makes them ineligible for bank credit. Many of these farmers and
ranchers who borrow are young and are still acquiring the asset base
they need to be able to qualify for bank loans. Most of these farmers
operate small farms because the average loan is $187,000 which is not a
large farm loan given the capital that modern agriculture demands.
Despite the challenges these young and small farmers and ranchers face,
they are conscientious customers who handle their credit obligations
very well.
I am referring to the farmers and ranchers who borrow money from
banks through the guaranteed farm loan programs offered by the USDA's
Farm Service Agency (FSA). Since it is a credit guaranty, banks like
mine underwrite and fund the loan and the USDA provides the bank with a
guaranty against loss on the loan. At the end of FY10, over 55,000
farmers and ranchers accessed credit through this program. Banks are
not the only participants as Farm Credit System lenders, credit unions,
state agricultural credit programs, and others have worked with USDA to
provide credit to these farmers and ranchers.
The program has been a resounding success. Each year a limited
appropriation is leveraged into a significant program that, in many
cases, is the only way these farmers and ranchers can access credit. At
the end of FY10, the portfolio of guaranteed farm and ranch loans
exceeded $10 billion, or about 4% of the total agricultural credit
market. Even though these customers have some financial statement or
operating deficiency, they are very conscientious borrowers. FY10 year-
end loan delinquencies were 1.69% and losses in the program in FY10
were .581% of outstanding loans. From a delinquency and loan loss
perspective, this is a very sound portfolio of loans.
In the early 1990s, Congress inserted ``term limits'' into the
program that only allowed farmers and ranchers a limited period of
eligibility for the program. While the goal of term limits was
understandable, it has created uncertainty for many farmers and
ranchers. I should also note that I do not know of any comparable
eligibility limitation in other Federal loan guaranty programs. Given
the volatile nature of the agricultural economy, the practical
application of FSA term limits has caused hardship to those farmers and
ranchers who can least weather a financial setback.
For this reason, the American Bankers Association (and many farm
organizations) has endorsed H.R. 1422 introduced by Representative
Leonard Boswell, and cosponsored by Representative Bruce Braley,
Representative G.K. Butterfield, Representative Tom Latham, and
Representative David Loebsack. Congressman Boswell's bill would extend
the deadline on FSA guaranteed loan term limits to December 2013. We
urge this Committee to support and pass H.R. 1422.

The Banking Industry is Concerned About the Risk a Government Sponsored
Enterprise Creates in the Rural Economy
I mentioned earlier in my testimony that the market for
agricultural credit is very competitive. I compete with several other
banks in my service area, finance companies from all of the major farm
equipment manufacturers, several international banks, credit unions,
life insurance companies, and finance companies owned by seed and other
supply companies to name a few. However, the most troublesome
competitor I face is the taxpayer-backed and tax-advantaged Federal
Farm Credit System (FCS). The FCS was chartered by Congress in 1916 as
a borrower-owned cooperative farm lender at a time when banks did not
have the legal authority to make farm real estate loans. Over the
ensuing 95 years the FCS has received numerous charter enhancements,
and it continues to pursue increased authorities from Congress and from
its regulator.
Today the FCS is a large and complex financial services business
with $229 billion in assets. It is profitable--it earned $3.495 billion
in net income in 2010. It is tax-advantaged and enjoyed a combined
local, state, and Federal tax rate in 2010 of 5.9%. In spite of their
size, profitability, and tax advantages the Farm Credit System presents
the same kind of potential liability to the American taxpayer as Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac. As a Government Sponsored Enterprise (GSE) like
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the American taxpayer is the ultimate back
stop should the Farm Credit System develop financial problems. The
potential liability that GSEs pose to taxpayers became very real in
2008 when the Federal Government seized Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. An
earlier near collapse of the Federal Farm Credit System in the late
1980s as a result of their irresponsible farm lending foreshadowed what
taxpayers would confront more than twenty years later with the housing
GSEs. Congress will take up the question about what to do with the
housing GSEs in an effort to restructure home mortgage finance in the
United States. I urge this Committee to include the Federal Farm Credit
System in those discussions as there is no difference between the risk
the housing GSEs pose to our economy and the risk the Farm Credit
System poses to our rural economy.
As an example of the risk the Farm Credit System poses to the rural
economy, I would like to bring to your attention the investment bond
pilot program, a program created by the Farm Credit Administration
(FCA), the regulator of the Farm Credit System. Under the ``pilot''
program FCS institutions are authorized to finance almost any kind of
commercial and municipal activity in rural America. Often called
``mission-related investments'', ``Rural Investment Bonds'', or
``Agriculture and Rural Community (ARC) bonds'', this program allows
FCS to finance ``independent or assisted living facilities, waste water
or water treatment facilities, rural business facilities, rural
drainage district projects, fire station facilities or major equipment
purchases, municipal, township or county facilities, health care
facilities such as outpatient surgery centers, physician and dental
facilities, multi-family housing, community buildings, processing or
manufacturing facilities, hotel/convention facilities, industrial
development parks, agribusiness facilities or major equipment
purchases'' (Source: Badgerland Financial website March, 2011.
Badgerland Financial is an FCS lender based in Wisconsin).
To finance a project under this program, an FCS lender helps the
borrower issue a ``bond'' which is then purchased by FCS as an
``investment''. In this way, FCS is able to characterize otherwise
prohibited commercial lending activity as an investment instead of a
loan. The pilot program has been running since 2005. The Farm Credit
Administration has been considering a proposed rule to expand and
permanently authorize the program for several years. Thousands of
bankers and others wrote comment letters opposing the program, and yet
the FCA continues to allow the pilot project to operate, and to
continue to acquire assets.
The pilot program and proposed rule allows unrestricted commercial
financing that redirects the FCS away from its mission to serve family
farmers and ranchers. Hotels, dental clinics, and other financing
projects already undertaken have moved the FCS directly into commercial
finance. The FCS was specifically chartered by Congress to leverage its
special GSE privileges in support of farmers, ranchers, and farmer-
owned cooperatives, not commercial businesses. The diversion of the
capital owned by farmers and ranchers into commercial projects that
have no direct connection to the farmer-owners of the FCS puts farmer-
owned capital in jeopardy. Interestingly, since these are
``investments'' the bond issuers (the borrowers) are not eligible to
participate in the benefits of cooperative ownership so they do not
receive patronage dividends. Congress should be additionally concerned
that the FCS is quickly devolving into a two tiered system of
``owners'' who share the benefits of cooperative ownership, and those
who do not receive any benefits.
If Congress intended the FCS to finance hotels, dental clinics, and
general manufacturing, it would have provided that authority to the
FCS. The FCA's attempt to broadly reinterpret the investment portion of
the statute as a way to expand lending oversteps its authority and
undermines the express intent of Congress. It is a gross example of
regulatory over-reach. A pilot project by definition is conducted in a
limited area for a limited time. FCA has allowed the ``Investments in
Rural America'' pilot program to operate since 2005. A nationwide
program operating indefinitely is clearly not a pilot program and
should be terminated.
We urge this Committee to stop the Farm Credit System's investment
bond pilot project.

The Banking Industry is Well Positioned to Meet Their Customer's Needs
For the past decade, U.S. agriculture has enjoyed one of the
longest periods of financial prosperity in history. Financially,
American agriculture has never been stronger. In 2010, many American
farmers and ranchers enjoyed their most profitable year ever, and USDA
projects that 2011 will exceed 2010. The balance sheet for U.S.
agriculture at the end of 2010 (according to USDA) is the strongest it
has ever been with a debt to asset ratio of less than ten percent. USDA
projected that at year end 2010 farm and ranch net worth was in excess
of $2 trillion. This unprecedented high net worth is due in part to a
robust increase in farm asset values (mainly farm real estate), but is
equally due to solid earned net worth as farmers used their excess cash
profits to retire debt and to acquire additional equipment and
additional land. As a result, farmers and ranchers today have the
capacity to tap their equity should there be a significant decline in
farm profitability resulting in diminished cash flows. While no farmer
or rancher wants to take on additional debt, the strength of the U.S.
farm and ranch balance sheet gives producers options to do so if the
need arises.
When the agricultural economy collapsed in the middle 1980s, the
banking industry worked with farmers and ranchers to restructure their
businesses and to rebuild the agricultural economy. Since that time
banks have provided the majority of agricultural credit to farmers and
ranchers. While other lenders shrank their portfolios of agricultural
loans or exited the business altogether, banks expanded agricultural
lending, just as they did following the economic crisis of 2008/2009.
Bankers saw opportunity where others did not.
In 1902 my great grandfather saw great possibilities in Gothenburg,
Nebraska. We are still pioneering in Gothenburg. Do not allow the
opportunities for banks like mine working with our farm, ranch and
rural customers to become overshadowed by excessive regulation and
unfair competition from government backed entities.
Thank you for the opportunity to express the views of the American
Bankers Association. I would be happy to answer any questions that you
may have.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Williams. We appreciate your
testimony. Mr. Starline?

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW STARLINE, OWNER, STARLINE ORGANICS, LLC;
MEMBER, OHIO ECOLOGICAL FOOD AND FARM ASSOCIATION, ATHENS, OH

Mr. Starline. First, I would like to thank the Subcommittee
for giving me the opportunity to testify this morning. My name
is Matthew Starline, and I am a beginning farmer from Athens,
Ohio. My farm is a 50 acre diversified farm located in the
foothills of Appalachia. We grow a variety of vegetables,
fruits, mushrooms, herbs, and grains, also employing the full
circle of farming with lamb, pork, and beef. I am a member of
the Ohio Ecological Food and Farming Association. I am a 100
percent full-time farmer, roughly half the age of the average
farmer.
All of our products are consumed 20 miles from our farm.
The local residents of the community are enthusiastic about
eating our fresh, local, and organic produce. Our products are
available at many locally-minded restaurants and food stores,
as well as the Athens Farmers' Market and onsite sales. We make
every attempt that we can to provide food for anyone,
regardless of economic status. We participate in the Farmers'
Market Electronic Benefits Transfer assistance program, and we
also accept WIC and Senior Farmers' Market Nutritional Program.
I think my story is a model for the opportunities in
today's agriculture. Farming as a career choice is one of the
most difficult occupations to enter. Limited access to land and
markets, high input costs, and a lack of sufficient support
networks are major barriers for entry into agriculture. Despite
these hurdles, people want to farm and see great opportunities
in agriculture. The local movement and the growth in organics
are a few of the trends that have more and more individuals and
families interested in farming.
Access to credit is crucial in all types of new and
beginning farmers, including small-scale and more locally-
oriented farms like mine. Finding credit is difficult for
beginning farmers as a whole, and particularly difficult for
farmers like me because most lenders are learning on a curve on
both sides. For the farmer, we must learn how to present a
business plan that makes sense to the lender, and the lender to
quickly merge with the local food sector.
I am currently about $300,000 in debt, primarily from
buying land, even though land and equipment--even though land
is relatively cheap in my area, my expenses are relatively low
when compared to someone who starts out with more of the
average size as a conventional farm. Mortgage payments have
opened my eyes for the need of year-round sales. My energy is
now focused through season extension programs through NRCS, as
well as my own needs.
We have plans to add a certified kitchen, as well as cold
storage unit for our products. I am pleased to say that all my
bills are being paid on time. The greatest hill to climb for a
new beginning farmer is the initial start-up cost. It is hard
for someone with very few assets to secure a loan for
agricultural land. It is crucial to retain the Farm Service
Agency Direct Loan Programs as a lender for those who cannot
find credit elsewhere.
FSA lending creates new farming opportunities and helps
regenerate American agriculture. I believe Congress was correct
in the last four farm bills directing a majority of direct real
estate loans to beginning farmers as well as a substantial
amount of direct operating loans. These loans help slow down
the aging of American agriculture. I hope Congress will
continue to ensure a strong target for beginner farmers and the
robust funding overall for direct and guaranteed loans. The
future of the next generation of farmers depends on it.
I had to move fast on my loan. Land on the market does not
wait for a loan to become available. Many beginning farmers
have lost out on farmland because FSA was temporarily out of
funds and delays in the Congressional appropriations process.
Currently, I am working with FSA on the cold storage unit for
storing my vegetable products. My local FSA agent was very
concerned about funding issues on whether or not it would be
budgeted and I would be able to obtain my loan.
I plea for this Committee to remember that beginning
farmers do not have the luxury of waiting for the budget
process to close on a deal to buy land. Either loans are
available or they are not. If we are serious about growing a
new generation of farmers and reversing the aging of American
agriculture, we need to be serious about ensuring a healthy FSA
loan budget. Thank you for the time and I would be happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Starline follows:]

Prepared Statement of Matthew Starline, Owner, Starline Organics, LLC;
Member, Ohio Ecological Food and Farm Association, Athens, OH

Thank you for the opportunity to testify this morning. I am Matt
Starline, a beginning farmer from the Athens, Ohio area. Starline
Organics is a 50 acre diversified farm located in the Appalachian
foothills of southeast Ohio. We grow a variety of vegetables,
mushrooms, herbs, and grains, plus lamb, pork and beef.
I am also here today as a member of the Ohio Ecological Food and
Farming Association (OEFFA). Formed in 1979, OEFFA is a grassroots
coalition of nearly 3,000 farmers, backyard gardeners, consumers,
retailers, educators, researchers, and others who share a desire to
build a healthy food system that brings prosperity to family farmers,
helps preserve farmland, offers food security for all Ohioans, and
creates economic opportunities for our rural communities. OEFFA
developed and began operating an organic certification program in 1981,
and is currently one of the largest USDA-accredited certifying agents,
last year certifying over 600 organic farms and processors. OEFFA
provides education, advocacy, and grassroots organizing to promote
local and organic food systems, helping farmers and consumers reconnect
and together build a sustainable food system, one meal at a time.
I farm the foothills of Appalachia. That means that you are lucky
if you have flat land. My plateau is rich in history reminding me of
how we are merely stewards of the land. My land was host to many
generations of farmers including American Indians. When I first started
my small business, vegetables were my main focus. Now with more diverse
land base, I have ventured into livestock as well as grains.
Our farming practices are centered on sustainability. We utilize a
natural gas well to heat our greenhouses as well as our home. Spring
water provides the largest input for our water system. We look at our
soil as our largest investment as well as our most important living
ecosystem. We are always looking at innovative ways of how to turn our
waste into a usable positive product, such as plant excess being fed to
pigs rather than turning it into compost. Our animals are rotationally
grazed. We are moving towards a multi-species grazing method to
decrease the use of chemical dewormers for sheep. Currently we have
three separate Environmental Quality Incentive Program contracts:
construction of a high tunnel, an irrigation system connecting springs
and wells to supply the garden, and the Organic Initiative with an
emphasis on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) for organic systems. We
are also applying for an agriculture easement as a long term insurance
policy for moneys we receive. This is a state program placing permanent
agricultural easement on the land.
I am a child of Appalachia. I grow food to feed the Athens, Ohio
community 20 minutes from my farm. My farm is certified organic in an
impoverished region of Ohio. I find the local residents in my community
are enthusiastic about eating our fresh, local, and organic produce.
Our products are available at many locally-minded restaurants and food
stores, as well as at the Athens Farmers' Market and on-site.
We attempt to make our farm products available to everyone
regardless of economic status. Our business took in \1/60\ of the Ohio
statewide Farmers' Market Electronic Benefits Transfer (EBT) assistance
program, in conjunction with the Athens Farmers' Market taking in
$34,000 for the year. We also accept Woman, Infants and Children (WIC)
and Senior Farmers' Market Nutritional Program (SFMNP) coupons. A local
nonprofit, Community Food Initiatives (CFI), has a ``Donation Station''
where farmers can donate excess product to be distributed to over 40
different places of need. Being a beginning small business, I
understand that donating has no instant monetary gain. However in the
long run I feel I am trading for promotional advertising.
I am the son of a farmer who signed all of his farmland into the
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). My earliest memories are riding
with my dad in his old Gleaner combine, hypnotized by the crops until I
would fall asleep only to be awoken by the jolt of hitting a hole. I am
a 100% full-time farmer, which means I am part-time mechanic, educator,
scientist, researcher, advocate, plumber, carpenter, gas well operator,
landowner, delivery driver, record keeper, veterinarian, sales
representative, and community member. I am roughly half the age of the
average farmer. I moved from a conventional background to growing
organic. My wife came from a non-farming background and is now an
operating owner. Most of my equipment is significantly older than I am,
but it works as hard as I do.
I think my story is indicative of the opportunities in today's
agriculture. Farming as a career choice is one of the most difficult
occupations to enter. Limited access to land and markets, high input
costs, and a lack of sufficient support networks are major barriers to
entry into agriculture. Yet, despite these hurdles people want to farm
or ranch and see great opportunities in agriculture. The burgeoning
local food movement and the growth in organics are just a couple of the
trends that have more and more individuals and families interested in
farming.
If more institutions sourced locally there would be a large spike
in the demand for fruits and vegetables. For instance, Ohio University
takes up much of Athens. The demand is there, and from a public health
perspective the need is there, but we desperately need more farmers to
supply local foods and meet rising demand. I understand that every town
does not have an institution like OU, but there are elementary schools
and high schools where volume can be created. In Ohio, farm to school
programs are breaking ground. We have an excellent model in Granville
High School in Granville, Ohio that is now being applied elsewhere.
Access to credit is obviously critical for all types of new and
beginning farmers, including smaller-scale and more locally-oriented
farms like mine. Finding credit is difficult for beginning farmers as a
whole, and particularly difficult for farmers like me because most
lenders are not as familiar with what we do, how we market, and what
our price structures are. There is a learning curve on both sides--for
the farmer to learn how to present a business plan that makes sense to
the lender, and for the lender to learn what this quickly emerging
local food sector is all about. I am pleased to say that my local FSA
agent views vegetable farming as the best opportunity for beginning
farmers in my area and has been willing to work with me. From what I
hear at farmer meetings, others have not been so lucky.
I am $300,000 in debt, primarily from buying land, even though land
is relatively cheap in my area and my expenses are relatively low when
compared with someone who would start out the average size more
conventional farm. Mortgage payments opened my eyes to the need for
year round sales. Now my energy is focused on season extension
structures for produce. We have plans to add a certified kitchen for
value added products, storage bins for grains, and a grain processing
facility. I am pleased to say that all our bills are being paid on
time.
The greatest hill to climb for a new beginning farmer is the
initial start-up cost. It is hard for someone with few assets to secure
a loan for agricultural land. It is critical therefore to retain the
Farm Service Agency direct loan programs. As the lender for those who
cannot find credit elsewhere other than resorting to credit cards, FSA
creates new farming opportunities and helps regenerate American
agriculture. I believe Congress was correct in the last four farm bills
to target a majority of FSA direct real estate loans to beginning
farmers as well as a substantial amount of direct operating loans.
These loans in a very real sense help slow down the aging of American
agriculture, and it is my hope that Congress will continue to ensure
strong targeting to beginners and robust funding overall for both
direct and guaranteed loans. The future for the next generation of
farmers, like the ones before it, depends on it.
My father-in-law was the first to show me a print out for the FSA
loans for beginning farmers. I qualified for the FSA beginning farmer
loans, however, like many others, I had to move fast to secure my farm.
Land on the market does not sit around waiting for loan funds to become
available. Many beginning farmers have lost out on farmland because FSA
was temporarily out of funds due in part to delays in the Congressional
appropriations process. It would be great if Congress and the
Administration could find a way to allow FSA to make loans in these
situations. The loan programs need to reflect the reality of the land
market if new and beginning farmers are going to have a realistic
chance of competing.
Currently, I am working with FSA on a loan for construction of a
cold storage unit for our products. We are also looking to build a
certified kitchen above the cold storage unit, although that is not a
part of the loan. This will enable me to prolong the storage life of
our vegetables and herbs after harvest and further improve our
profitability. This will also allow for more time to harvest and will
allow us to harvest more overall. The kitchen will also pave the way to
selling more value-added products, meeting strong consumer demand while
again improving our profitability. These are the kind of activities
that I hope FSA, Farm Credit, and commercial lenders will look at more
seriously in the future. The market for local food is real and
expanding, and the new farmers who are serving this market need to know
that credit will be available to help us respond to the demand for farm
fresh food.
We need a national strategy and commitment to support beginning
farmer and ranchers entering agriculture. With an aging farm
population, the time is now to nurture new agriculture start-ups. A new
farms policy, especially in the local food sector, is a jobs creator, a
sound investment that can provide long-term societal benefits and
contribute to the revitalization of our rural as well as urban
communities.
In that light, I was disappointed to hear that the continuing
resolution for the rest of Fiscal Year 2011 contains a very substantial
27 percent cut in direct farm ownership loan funding. This is like
throwing away the seed corn for the future of our farming system.
Thankfully the reduction in direct operating loans was a more modest
five percent. I would urge this Subcommittee to work diligently with
your colleagues on the Agriculture Appropriations Subcommittee to
secure adequate loan program levels for Fiscal Year 2012.
The 2008 Farm Bill targets 75 percent of direct ownership loans and
50 percent of direct operating loans to beginning farmers. In FY 2009,
the FSA made or guaranteed about $4.5 billion in loans to 34,210
farmers, including over 20,000 farmers receiving direct operating
loans. From this total, about 14,500 beginning farmers received loans
totaling $1.5 billion. Nearly half of all direct operating loans and
over 70 percent of direct ownership loans went to beginning farmers,
just shy of the farm bill targets of 50 and 75 percent, respectively.
Reflecting credit difficulties during the recession, FSA lending in
FY 2010 increased to $5.3 billion servicing 36,440 borrowers. Perhaps
as a result of the additional influx of more established farmers
requiring FSA assistance during the downturn, the agency's performance
on beginning farmer lending declined a bit. Total loans to beginners
dipped under 14,000 though loan volume remained constant at about $1.5
billion. The percentage of beginning farmer loans to total loans
dropped, however, to 60 percent for direct ownership and 45 percent for
direct operating.
For the first half of Fiscal Year 2011, FSA has needed to
concentrate on funding the direct operating loan program to help get
farmers into the field for this growing season. As a result, direct
farm ownership lending has suffered. Total direct farm ownership loan
volume is down considerably, and the beginning farmer participation
rate remains stuck at 60 percent of the total, the same as for Fiscal
Year 2010. Both of these situations will hopefully turn around in the
last half of the fiscal year as the full year's funding is made
available, though obviously the 27 percent cut in funding will have a
very real and negative impact.
Despite the pain it causes beginning farmers who were not able to
secure farmland in the absence of loan availability, FSA is to be
commended for concentrating on operating loans in the past months given
how close we are to planting time. These are the very unfortunate but
necessary trade-offs that have to be made when Congress is so late in
appropriating funds. Compounding the problem is the Administration's
decision that during repeated short-term Continuing Resolutions FSA can
only spend a pro rata share of total loan funds under the pretense that
lending remains constant week to week over the course of a year. Of
course, as we all know, operating credit in particular is front loaded
into the first half of the fiscal year to correspond with the planting
season. I would encourage this Subcommittee to help relieve this
nonsensical situation by working for a policy that keeps lending rates
consistent with normal lending volumes for a given portion of the year
during these unfortunate long delays in appropriations.
While performance on meeting the beginning farmer targets for
direct loans has been admirable, the picture on guaranteed loans is
less positive. Congress has targeted 40 percent of guaranteed ownership
and operating loans to beginning farmers, but the actual rates in
recent years have been less than 20 percent. The relative lack of
responsiveness of the commercial sector to concentrating more resources
on beginning farmers through the guaranteed program would be a
worthwhile subject for this oversight panel to pursue.
The Down Payment Loan program for first-time land acquisition by
beginning and minority farmers took a big upturn since passage of the
2008 Farm Bill. The farm bill lowered the interest rate and the
beginning farmer down payment amount and also increased the value of
land which could be financed, all of which combined to get the program
more fully utilized. This creates a win-win-win situation, with the
agency able to stretch its limited resources further, the commercial
lender starting off with a beginning farmer customer earlier in the
process, and the beginning farmer having greater equity in the
operation.
The 2008 Farm Bill improvements paid off immediately. The Down
Payment program financed 1,100 beginning farmers with a total of $147
million in real estate loans in 2008 and 2009, compared to the nearly
3,000 beginning farmers assisted with $131 million in loans in the
previous 14 years of the program's existence combined. An additional
1,225 down payment loans were made in Fiscal Year 2010 on a loan volume
of $170 million, bringing the total for the first 3 years under the new
farm bill to 2,325 farms and a loan volume of over $300 million. I am
glad to say that Ohio is in the top ten states using the program.
Congress did the right thing in improving the program in 2008 and
should continue on the same path in the new farm bill.
I will close my remarks with a note of alarm about the existing
levels of backlog for FSA loans. According to FSA, as of last Friday
there was a backlog of 503 approved applications from non-beginning
farmers worth $91.5 million and 590 approved applications from
beginning farmers worth $115 million waiting for direct farm ownership
funding. Applications waiting for direct farm ownership funding from
socially disadvantaged or minority farmers totaled 195 worth $34
million. The backlog for direct operating loans was also substantial.
Nearly 850 beginning farmers were waiting on loans approved for $56
million and an additional 486 farmers were waiting on loans approved
for $34 million. Hopefully many of these loans will move forward
quickly after the final Fiscal Year 2011 appropriations bill is signed
into law.
I leave you with a plea to remember that beginning farmers do not
have the luxury of waiting on the vagaries of the budget process to
close a deal to buy land. Either loan funds are available when the land
is available or not. If we are serious about growing a new generation
of farmers and reversing the aging of American agriculture, we need to
be serious about ensuring a healthy FSA loan budget.
With respect to the farm bill, I applaud the many positive advances
made in the 2008 bill for beginning farmers, including the Down Payment
program, the Beginning Farmer and Rancher Development Program, and the
targeting of conservation funds, among others. I encourage this
Subcommittee to explore the positive outcomes generated by these farm
bill gains and to redouble your efforts on beginning farmer issues in
the 2012 bill.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I will be happy to
try to answer any questions you might have.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Starline. Let me just start
right there with you. I am curious if you could expound upon
your background a little bit? What motivated you to enter
agriculture in a time in which the average age of the farmer in
Nebraska, and throughout most of the country, is approaching 58
years old, you are clearly not there? And I am curious as to
how you came to enter into this entrepreneurial desire? Is this
a part of your own family background? Did you study
agriculture? If you could just briefly expound upon that?
Mr. Starline. Yes. Through different generations, my family
has been farming land in Ohio. Growing up with it was the best
aspect for me, when I was 17 I had an opportunity with OSU
extension growing green bell peppers in order to wean farmers
off tobacco basis. As I went to school, I was able to work on
an organic vegetable farm and I saw how strong my community was
in support of the local food system, and I felt that as a
viable business for my area.
The Chairman. Well, congratulations on your decision and
what you do is important for the country and we appreciate your
willingness to take this risk and come before the Committee
today to explain your perspectives.
Let me turn quickly to Mr. Gerber. I think it would be
helpful for everyone for you to explain the substantive
differences between Farmer Mac as a government-sponsored
enterprise and other government-sponsored enterprises such as
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which have experienced deep
structural difficulty and caused severe exposure to the
taxpayer?
Mr. Gerber. Sure. Thank you for the question. A number of
differences exist between the model at Farmer Mac and the model
of the other GSEs you named. First of all, Farmer Mac reports
to this Committee, the Agriculture Committee, which is focused
on rural America, focused on the issues and needs there, and
understanding the uniqueness of that marketplace.
Second, we have a strong regulator in the Farm Credit
Administration, an independent regulator that reports to you
and that is active in assuring that we are doing things on a
safe-and-sound basis. I think in addition our model is a
different one because these loans that we do real estate
mortgage agricultural loans and rural utility loans are
business loans rather than strictly consumer loans. As well,
our underwriting standards are critical to the success. Our
focus, because they are business loans, is not to focus as much
on, or only on, the collateral and its value if there were
default, but also the borrower's capacity to repay the loans
and the understanding of the business behind those loans. That
makes a significant difference as we think about the
differences and the problems that the other GSEs experienced.
Farmer Mac did not experience similar problems even with
the challenges of 2008--our portfolio remained strong. We have
not seen significant losses through the cycles and the
challenges of agriculture over the last 20 years.
The Chairman. Thank you. Quickly, let me turn to Mr. Stark.
You had indicated in your testimony that the System continues
to finance land transactions by remaining focused on sound
underwriting and making credit decisions based upon the
repayment capacity--and I think that is an important work--of
the individual borrower. Is this true throughout the System?
Mr. Stark. Yes, it is true throughout the System. We have
had several meetings over the course of the last few months
focusing specifically on the actions that institutions in the
Farm Credit System are taking with respect to financing real
estate; and unanimously they have all made sure that they are
focused clearly on sound underwriting practices and even using
more longer-term averages for prices of corn, not the current
price. We all know that that is going to fluctuate and will
likely be lower, as we have heard in testimony this morning. So
we are using conservative prices, conservative yields, and
long-term projections to make those assumptions.
The Chairman. Does this Committee need to help ensure that
this is the case?
Mr. Stark. I think that the System is adequately overseen
by the Farm Credit Administration. They are in our association
right now looking at loan underwriting and they give the
reports back to the Agency on a timely basis.
The Chairman. Thank you. We may have to come back to
another round. But right quick, Mr. Williams, thank you for
your testimony. You stated that you support ending the term
limits for FSA Lending Programs, the guaranteed operating loans
that limit borrowers to assistance for 15 years. Congress has
suspended this on several occasions, but that means that
borrowers could potentially go up to 20 years on a guaranteed
operating loan. So how does that encourage a borrower to
graduate and move to commercial credit?
Mr. Williams. I think it is important that we recognize
that graduation can happen, but as you have heard earlier
today, there are certainly cycles. We had a board meeting at
our bank yesterday and I brought this up with some of our ag
lenders, and we have several customers coming through the late
1970s and the early 1980s that struggled and showed some
weakness. We began using the Guaranteed Loan Program on them in
the late 1980s and early 1990s and they were in that program
for, in one case, 10 years, in another case, about 12 years
during that period of time and then they graduated and have
been out of the program. But if there was a weakness shown and
it was needed to come back into the program with those two
borrowers, the time clock has already ticked a major portion of
their term limit. So it would be difficult to potentially bring
them back in. I think that is the flaw in the program this way,
that it sounds good to graduate but the reality is as cycles
change over periods of time, we can't see the future. So that
is why we would propose, again, suspending that.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. We will turn now to our
Ranking Member for her questions.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with Mr.
Stark and Mr. Williams, same question. Specifically, what are
your institutions doing to facilitate the entry into ag
production of diversified and direct marketing producers like
Mr. Starline?
Mr. Stark. Well, I will start with that because I had the
opportunity to visit with Mr. Starline before the session began
and as a matter of fact, he obtains part of his financing from
the Farm Credit System, Farm Credit Services of Mid-America. So
we are very actively involved in ensuring that young people can
get their start in farming.
Our institution of Farm Credit Services of America has also
appointed a member of the board. They went out of their way, as
opposed to just having an elected stockholder, to make sure we
put a young person on our board who is 29 years old to assure
the voices of these young people are heard. And so they are
very interested in having that voice heard and made that
appointment.
Additionally, we also have a very active young farmer
program. We do a number of things in that area, as well as
being very focused on serving the needs of small farmers. Small
farmers in our portfolio is the largest portion of our
portfolio at this time.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you. Mr. Williams?
Mr. William. Ranking Member Fudge, thank you for that
question. In our bank we are very excited to work with young
people. That is the lifeblood of our community. That is where
we are going. There has been a lot of talk about farmers'
markets and those kinds of things. The farmers' market in
Gothenburg is held on the sidewalk in front of the bank every
Thursday night during the summer. Several of the producers that
are there are small producers that we finance.
We also have started a program in Gothenburg of working
with our local FFA chapter. We have two bank officers that do a
significant portion of their training, and we help them in
their preparation for state and national competitions. We have
also devised a program to help them become farmers on a limited
basis because they need that experience.
All said, as you heard this morning, farming is not an
easy-entry occupation. But, with the added ingredients and the
environment that we as banks and Farm Credit create, we do the
best job we can to see that this happens. Thank you.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you. And I would certainly hope, Mr.
Starline, if you have these gentlemen sitting here with you
that you would make sure that they do not get out of the room
until you talk to them. Thank you.
Now, to all of you, as we prepare to write the next farm
bill, what changes would you like to see in the area of Farm
Credit? I would like each of you to give me just one thing,
okay? What would you like to see change in the area of Farm
Credit? We can start with Mr. Gerber.
Mr. Gerber. For agriculture and for rural America, one of
the things that is interesting is that rural America is the
only marketplace in this country that does not have a secondary
market available to it other than what we do specifically in
the agricultural real estate mortgage area, and in the area of
the rural utilities business. As you have seen by our numbers
and by the growth, there is a need and an opportunity for that
secondary market and the opportunities that moving investment
from Wall Street into rural America would bring; and we believe
that is some thing that would help make a difference in rural
America is the ability for those markets to have an opportunity
to use the secondary market products.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you. Mr. Stark?
Mr. Stark. I would mention the one thing that I believe
supports the farmers and Farm Credit System, as well as the
credit extension that we have, particularly in the Midwest is
the Crop Insurance Program. And as you face challenges with
budget issues, that is a very strong underpinning to credit
extension throughout the country. I can recall the days of ad
hoc disaster assistance, which were very challenging to know
when and how that might occur. Farmers have in the Crop
Insurance Program a very good risk-management tool. And I would
just encourage your consideration of that in the credit sense.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you.
Mr. Williams. Ranking Member Fudge, you mentioned what
would we do in the farm bill for Farm Credit but I would assume
you are also asking about credit to farmers, not just Farm
Credit.
Ms. Fudge. Absolutely correct.
Mr. Williams. I think it is terribly important that we
remember the challenge that we have as a country behind the
whole farm bill to maintain an abundant and safe supply of food
for our country and the world. In our world we have conflict
over energy and we can certainly get to a point that we have
conflict over food. I think the American people demand and
expect an abundant and safe supply of food.
Specifically, from the American bankers we would like to
see the term limit on FSA guarantees, a suspension of that, and
a continuation of a strong FSA Guaranteed Loan Program. That
program works. It serves over 55,000 farmers in our country and
it is necessary that that continues.
And we would also like to see an examination to be sure
that the Farm Credit System itself continues to follow the
original mission that it was proposed to do in 1916. Thank you.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much. And Mr. Starline, I know
that my time is over but the chair has been gracious enough to
allow me to get the last answer. Mr. Starline?
Mr. Starline. In my eyes, after I graduated college I had
next to nothing as far as equity was concerned. With the new
beginning farmer aspect of FSA with the loans, lowering the
interest rate and lowering the down payment would really help
out beginning farmers and it is a step up in becoming a farmer.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Fudge. Let me return to some
additional questions.
Mr. Stark, you had indicated--and I am curious as to why--
and if you could unpack further your testimony that the capital
requirements of a typical corn farmer are now four times higher
than they were just in 2005. Could you explain that further,
please?
Mr. Stark. Yes, I think there were several things and in
various presentations, one I gave most recently at the National
Feed and Grain Association, I outlined some of those specifics.
It really involved first of all, not only are the cost of
inputs higher, which we are seeing, now, the cost of risk
management programs are being passed on to farmers. Co-ops and
grain merchandisers are no longer extending marketing programs
out beyond 1 year, and in some cases it is even difficult to
get that. So many cases we are setting up marketing loan
programs that didn't exist 3 to 5 years ago because there were
other options available in the market. And the overall cost of
production we are estimating about $700 an acre for farmland.
And then when you get to multiple years production on that that
I mentioned earlier in my testimony, it quickly multiplies.
The Chairman. Can this also be explained by consolidation
of land into fewer and fewer hands and therefore the need for
larger loans?
Mr. Stark. Not necessarily. I would say our estimation is
what would be on a per-acre basis. So, when you really look on
it, regardless of size, the cost of----
The Chairman. It is per acre and not the individual
borrower?
Mr. Stark. Yes.
The Chairman. I see. Okay. Thank you. You also stated that
you loaned about $7.3 billion to beginning farmers. I would
assume that would include value-added opportunities as well as
organic and local food businesses. What percent of your
portfolio is that?
Mr. Stark. We have at Farm Credit Services of America, 17
percent of our portfolio is to young and beginning farmers. So
out of 85,000 customers, a significant portion of our portfolio
will result in loans to farmers less than 35 years of age and
less than 10 years in farming.
The Chairman. Since we are assuming, like Mr. Starline,
that most young and beginning farmers are actually entering
into new models of agriculture that are actually traditional
models of agriculture versus what we understand as production
ag, which is essential for you to be focused on as well; what
percent of the young farmers that you are underwriting are
involved in new enterprises such as his?
Mr. Stark. I don't have those numbers readily available,
but I can tell you that a number of them are involved in
various types of enterprises.
The Chairman. Well, the reason I ask is, we all know that
this is a growing opportunity in agriculture in general and it
actually augments our strong production ag system to create
more entrepreneurial opportunity for local food systems,
strengthening local economies, returning to the connection
between the urban and rural and the farm to the family, and I
think there are multiple benefits in doing that. So that is why
I am trying to get a better sense as to whether or not this
percent of your underwriting that goes to young farmers is
actually targeted to these new emerging trends, small as they
are, but nonetheless emerging trends in agriculture.
Mr. Stark. It would certainly be included in those numbers
but it is not specifically broken out.
The Chairman. All right. I think that would be helpful to
know if you could provide that.
Mr. Stark. We will provide that.
The Chairman. Mr. Williams, in your testimony you stated a
concern that the Farm Credit System as a government-sponsored
enterprise is a risk to the taxpayer, but does your institution
also use advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank System and do
you consider the Federal Home Loan Bank System a risk to the
taxpayer as well?
Mr. Williams. Yes, we do use advances from Federal Home
Loan Bank System on a limited basis to supply funding that is
necessary for us to be able to meet the credit needs of our
community. I think the health of the Federal Home Loan Banking
System is vitally important, and the regulators and everyone
overseeing that needs to recognize that and be certain that
they stay as healthy as possible also, just like Farm Credit.
The Chairman. Let us touch briefly upon the issue of
escalating land values and, of course, this posed perhaps the
most--the drop in land values was part of the reason of the
severe difficulties in the 1980s that we experienced. Will you
explain why the situation may be different as we are seeing
escalating land values today?
Mr. Williams. Yes, I think there are two specific questions
that we need to ask when we are looking at that. One is, is
this an asset bubble and what is the potential risk of land
prices dropping significantly? That is the first question and
that one can be debated on both sides and we will be able to
look in the rearview mirror down the road and know whether that
happens.
I think the second question is the more important question
as to whether this is an asset bubble and if land values do
decrease, what is the result of that decrease? And I think that
is the important difference. And the way I would describe that
is it is not your grandfather's farm anymore as it was in the
1980s when this happened before. And also granddad isn't
running the bank. We do things significantly different both on
the farm and in the bank that have tended to mitigate that
potential risk.
We are in the risk-monitoring business in banking, weighing
risk and analyzing those. The technology that we use today is
substantially different. If you go back to the 1980s, we were
primarily collateral-based lenders. So we were relying almost
solely on the underlying value of that collateral to support
our loans. So in our particular area in central Nebraska when
land values dropped by 35 to 40 percent in the 1980s and we
were relying on that, it was devastating to us. We are now cash
flow lenders.
The other thing is we have not invented unusual and exotic
types of instruments to finance agriculture. In our shop we use
a 60 percent loan-to-value ratio, looking at the front end of
an ag real estate loan. And we analyzed our whole portfolio and
our outstanding portfolio of ag loans right now has a loan-to-
value of about 40 to 45 percent. With that in mind, I would put
it this way. If ag land were to drop, if it were a bubble and
it were to drop that 40 percent or some number like that, we
would see an instant decrease in the net worth of many of our
borrowers but we----
The Chairman. Can I interrupt you for a moment? What was
the loan-to-value in the 1980s?
Mr. Williams. Loan-to-value in the 1980s, we were using a
much higher level because we were based on the collateral at
that point. I would have to look back but I am thinking we were
in the 85, sometimes 90 percent range that we were loaning. And
we, again, at that time had a period of time where we had
significant increases in land value very quickly. And we were
aggressively pursuing that at that time.
The Chairman. Thank you. Ms. Fudge, do you have any further
questions? I just thought of--Mr. Stark, you may want to
comment on this as well because of the preliminary research I
have done into the question suggests there is another factor in
addition to the changing structural requirements that are in
place in banks and the awareness of the industry not to repeat
the past. The issue of not over-leveraging is also manifested
in the fact that a lot of money is moving simply out of cash
into land purchases. This is not taxing, if you will, the
credit system further. Is that a fair assumption?
Mr. Stark. Yes, that is exactly right. You know, one of the
biggest things we see today in land purchases is the amount of
cash going into these transactions as well.
The other thing, Mr. Chairman, that I would mention that at
the Farm Credit System we are doing to really help protect
customers around not only falling land values but also to
locking in the cost relative to land. We have the ability to go
out and fix interest rates up to 15 and 20 years. And that is
really protecting customers in the event that we have higher
interest rates, which will impact land values as well. And so
even this last year, we converted over 15,000 loans or loans to
15,000 customers to lower rates of interest and locked in their
rates of interest to protect them against those kind of
changes. So we are doing everything we can to protect them both
with land values declines as well as interest rate increases.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. With that said, let me
make some concluding remarks and then we will adjourn
momentarily.
This has been a very important hearing to look overall at
the credit system in America. We have a mixed financing system
for agricultural credit in our society and we have done it this
way for a very long time. I think, though, if we can take a
step back and look at the reality that agriculture is one of
the few bright spots in the American economy, and agriculture
is significantly evolving from not only its primary mission to
feed and provide a safe food supply not only for our own people
but for people throughout the world; it has evolved also on the
forefront of both energy, environmental, and national security
policy.
So I want to thank you all for what you do in helping
secure that so we have a sound financing system for American
agriculture. You, Mr. Starline, being a new entrepreneur, we
appreciate your entry into the field as well. Ms. Fudge, do you
have any further commentary?
Ms. Fudge. I would just like to thank you, Mr. Chairman,
and to thank all of our witnesses for today for your excellent
testimony. As a new Member, it is really important for me to
get some background, some foundation as to the significance and
the changes that are going on in credit in agriculture. So I
just want to thank all of you for being here and hope to learn
more about the whole credit issue and how it affects our
farmers today. So I thank you all. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. Under the rules of the Committee,
the record of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar
days to receive additional material and supplementary written
requests from the witness to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Subcommittee on Department Operations,
Oversight, and Credit is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:45 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]


