- HEARING TO IDENTIFY DUPLICATIVE FEDERAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING TO IDENTIFY DUPLICATIVE FEDERAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT, RESEARCH, BIOTECHNOLOGY, AND
FOREIGN AGRICULTURE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 21, 2012

__________

Serial No. 112-31

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-660                    WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     Northern Mariana Islands
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign
Agriculture

TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JIM COSTA, California, Ranking
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          Minority Member
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois        LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina

Mike Dunlap, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     3
Johnson, Hon. Timothy V., a Representative in Congress from
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
McIntyre, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from North
Carolina, prepared statement...................................     5

Witnesses

Tonsager, Hon. Dallas P., Under Secretary for Rural Development,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Submitted questions..........................................    35
Supplementary information....................................    33
Shear, William B., Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, U.S. Government Accountability Office, Washington,
D.C............................................................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    21

HEARING TO IDENTIFY DUPLICATIVE FEDERAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

----------

WEDNESDAY, MARCH 21, 2012

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research,
Biotechnology, and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:10 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Timothy
V. Johnson [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Johnson, Scott, Hultgren,
Hartzler, Costa, and McIntyre.
Staff present: Mike Dunlap, Tamara Hinton, DaNita Murray,
Lauren Sturgeon, Wyatt Swinford, Heather Vaughan, Suzanne
Watson, Andy Baker, Liz Friedlander, John Konya, Jamie
Mitchell, and Caleb Crosswhite.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM ILLINOIS

The Chairman. The Subcommittee on Rural Development,
Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign Agriculture hearing to
identify duplicative Federal rural development programs, will
come to order. Thank you all for being here today and welcome.
Today, we are discussing government efficiency, which,
because of our limited resources, is more important now than
ever. We must find ways to deliver more effective programs
using fewer resources. This is particularly important to our
rural communities. Previously, this Subcommittee has called
attention to the fragmentation of the government's efforts to
address economic development in rural areas. With at least 16
Federal agencies which operate over 88 programs designed to
benefit small communities across the country, it is incumbent
on Congress to ensure these efforts are implemented in a
coordinated fashion.
This Subcommittee has spent a great deal of time reviewing
whether the purpose and goals of agriculture programs in our
jurisdiction are being met. Those hearings served to inform the
Committee about how scarce resources are being utilized and
where opportunities exist to streamline and improve rural
development programs. Previous efforts by the current
Administration, such as the 2010 Memorandum of Understanding
Between USDA and SBA are in acknowledgement of the unorganized
approach to rural development we face today.
The recently convened White House Rural Council is another
indicator that the Administration recognized that our agencies
need to coordinate better among themselves. However, none of
these efforts by themselves have been a catalyst for permanent
change. The efforts put forth so far have been insufficient to
address the concerns about duplicative efforts and the lack of
coordination among agencies, which have the authority to
provide assistance to rural America. Stakeholders across the
country have shared burdens about the confusing array of
agencies and programs, as well as an overly burdensome
application process, which puts assistance out of reach for
small communities which might need it the most.
Following Congressional direction, the GAO, Government
Accountability Office, has taken an extensive look at some of
these issues and will present their initial findings here
today. So I hope that their reports and continuing work will
serve to advance this discussion and provide additional insight
on how our agencies are or aren't working.
We also look forward to testimony by USDA to hear more
about their efforts to administer their programs we are
reviewing. In particular, I hope that additional insight will
be provided into how the Administration is making tangible
changes to the way scarce resources are made more accessible
and how USDA is leveraging smaller budgets to benefit more
communities in a tight fiscal environment.
We appreciate the work our witnesses put in to preparing
their testimony and look forward to an in-depth discussion.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Timothy V. Johnson, a Representative in
Congress from Illinois
Thank you all for being here today, and welcome.
Today we are discussing government efficiency, which--because of
our limited resources--is more important now than ever. We must find
ways to deliver more effective programs using fewer resources.
This is particularly important to our rural communities.
Previously, this Subcommittee has called attention to the fragmentation
of the government's efforts to address economic development in rural
areas. With at least 16 Federal agencies which operate over 88 programs
designed to benefit small communities across the U.S., it is incumbent
upon Congress to ensure these efforts are implemented in a coordinated
fashion.
This Subcommittee has spent a great deal of time reviewing whether
the purpose and goals of agricultural programs under our jurisdiction
are being met. Those hearings served to inform the Committee about how
scarce resources are being utilized and where opportunities exist to
streamline and improve rural development programs.
Previous efforts by the current Administration, such the 2010
Memorandum of Understanding between the USDA and the Small Business
Administration, are an acknowledgement of the unorganized approach to
rural development we face today. The recently convened White House
Rural Council is another indicator that the Administration recognizes
that our agencies need to coordinate better among themselves. However,
none of these efforts in themselves have been a catalyst for lasting
change.
The efforts put forth so far have been insufficient to address the
concerns about duplicative efforts and the lack of coordination among
agencies which have the authority to provide assistance to rural
America. Stakeholders across the country have shared concerns about the
confusing array of agencies and programs, as well as an overly
burdensome application process which puts assistance out of reach for
small communities which might need it most.
Following Congressional direction, the Government Accountability
Office has taken an extensive look at some of these issues, and will
present their initial findings here today. It is our hope that their
reports and continuing work will serve to advance this discussion and
provide additional insight on how our agencies are--and are not--
working together.
We also look forward to testimony by USDA to hear more about their
efforts to administer the programs we are reviewing. In particular I
hope that additional insight will be provided into how the
Administration is making tangible changes to the way scarce resources
are made more accessible, and how USDA is leveraging smaller budgets to
benefit more communities in a tight fiscal environment.
We appreciate the work our witnesses put into preparing their
testimony for this morning and look forward to an in-depth discussion.

The Chairman. I would like to recognize my friend and
Ranking Member, the gentleman from California, Mr. Costa.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this hearing. I think it is important for the Subcommittee to
always exercise its role in appropriate oversight, and we are
pleased that we have today here the Government Accountability
Office, the GAO, to provide us with information on
recommendations that we can go further with as well as with the
United States Department of Agriculture's Rural Development
Programs. And their input, obviously, is always well taken.
I look forward to hearing from the testimony.
Rural America faces challenges. I am always a little bit
hesitant to use the word unique because it is oftentimes an
overused word. But they have challenges that we don't have in
urban America. And because of the population disparities in our
country today, oftentimes our rural elements in our country get
overlooked. And that is one of the important efforts that this
Subcommittee needs to deal with.
The USDA Rural Development has--the United States
Department of Agriculture--over 500 offices. Whether those
offices all are necessary today is a valid question, but they
do, I know because of my own personal experience, provide help
to rural communities for businesses, as well as entrepreneurs,
to deal with economic developments, especially as things
change. For example, in many areas we don't have access to
high-speed Internet, it is dial-up. And yet for these companies
to compete effectively they have to have the same sort of
access in a global economy to deal with their products that
they are pursuing.
So it is important for this Subcommittee to look at
programs that may be duplicative. But we need to ensure that
what may appear on paper as duplicative in practice is in fact
not duplicative. And if it is, then we should address it.
Take, for example, the United States Department of
Agriculture's Value-Added Producer Grant Program, identified as
potentially duplicative in the GAO's report. These grants I
know from personal experiences help agricultural producers and
cooperatives provide market value-added efforts to the products
they produce on a host of efforts. In 2011, the Blue Diamond
growers in California--you are probably familiar with the
almonds that they produce, one of the largest cooperatives in
California and maybe in the country--provided a grant to help
them launch its first retail products in France. We know that
it is not always a level playing field when we are talking
about trade throughout the world. It was very helpful to
helping Blue Diamond market their products in Europe.
In my Congressional District as well, the Rosa Brothers
have a milk company in Hanford, California. They received a
grant to help them offer delivery of locally produced dairy
products. Congress created these programs in 2000 on a
bipartisan basis. They looked at it again in 2002 and in the
2008 Farm Bills to address areas where other Federal agencies
were not. I am not aware of other Federal economic development
programs that focus in this area on agricultural efforts and
products that we can compete with globally if we have a level
playing field.
So when we consider the rural development, economic
development programs, I think we should also keep in mind and
look at it closely as a Subcommittee. Mr. Chairman, the
President's proposal in January to combine Federal Government's
business and trade agencies. I think this has merit and we
ought to look at it. This is a combination of agencies that is
an area where we can get better bang for our buck.
Among the departments and agencies targeted for
consolidation are the Department of Commerce and the Small
Business Administration. This proposal could go a long way
towards address concerns of overlapping Federal economic
development programs. That is not to say that there aren't
other areas that we can look at streamlining on rural
development programs, as we are going to look at today and as
we will hear from the witnesses. One of the ways this
Subcommittee can help minimize the overlap of USDA's economic
development programs with those administered by other agencies
is to ensure--and we have talked about this, Mr. Chairman--that
the definitions of rural are flexible enough to meet the
demands in rural America, because we know in many counties
across the country--whether it is in Illinois or whether it is
in Kansas or whether it is in California or any other state in
the Union--that we may have an urban center within a very rural
county and they fall off the definition of what is defined by
rural.
On February 15 in 2011 and September 13 in 2011, our
Subcommittee held hearings in which the USDA witnesses were
asked by Members on this Committee, in a bipartisan basis,
about the status of the report on rural definitions that the
USDA was required in the 2008 Farm Bill that was produced in
June 2010. And obviously, we were frustrated that the report
had not been submitted given that the report could be one of
the most helpful tools in figuring out how we target our
efforts for rural development. Although they have given us
responses, I am not optimistic that the report will be provided
before the time that we try to reauthorize the 2012 Farm Bill.
I don't still to this day understand why it is so difficult to
provide this report.
Since we are examining the USDA's economic development
programs, I want to take a minute just to talk about an effort
in California that can and should serve as a model for the
agencies across the country. We have heard from farmers and
ranchers and businesses throughout rural communities that the
challenges they face in accessing capital--probably more than
any other single factor--is what has hit hardest in these past
few years--access to capital during tough economic times.
In California, the United States Department of
Agriculture's Rural Development established the California
Financial Opportunities Roundtable. The California
Opportunities Roundtable participants include not only the
Federal entities that include the Small Business
Administration, the Federal Reserve Bank in San Francisco, and
many other private businesses and state agencies. This
innovative capital access project uses impact investing to
drive growth in rural communities across California, while
achieving financial returns for the investors at the same time.
I want to say that we ought to look at reauthorizing in the
farm bill the work that the USDA Rural Development has done in
California, which serves, potentially, as a model for the rest
of the country with limited Federal resources.
Finally, I want to thank the Chairman again and our
witnesses today for working with all of us on the Subcommittee
to ensure that we get the most effective use of the Federal tax
dollars in rural development programs to meet the needs of
rural America.
I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
I would also like to note that Mr. McIntyre is not a Member
of the Subcommittee. He has joined us and in consultation with
Mr. Costa we have agreed and we are pleased to have you here
joining us today. The chair would like to request that other
Members submit their opening statements for the record so the
witnesses may begin their testimony and to ensure that there is
ample time for questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McIntyre follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Mike McIntyre, a Representative in Congress
from North Carolina
Thank you Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Costa for allowing me
to join this hearing today to discuss rural development and the
government's modest role in promoting jobs and growth in rural America.
Having grown up in Robeson County, a poor and rural county in
southeastern North Carolina, I am keenly aware of the problems facing
rural citizens and am particularly interested in the topics that we
will discuss today.
Citizens in rural places experience great difficulty in accessing
the infrastructure and amenities that are available in our urban
centers. The modern economy requires that businesses be able to access
broadband services to connect to the global marketplace, three phase
electric power to run industrial equipment, and clean water to support
communities that supply the labor and skills needed for commerce. If we
are to take seriously our obligation to serve all of the citizens of
this great country, we must not solely cast our views at the problems
facing the population centers in the cities and suburbs. Rural
Americans deserve the attention of their government and need an agency
that directly focuses on addressing rural problems.
We are here today to discuss potential duplicative government
programs in Rural Development. The Rural Development Mission Area at
the United States Department of Agriculture is comprised of three
agencies--the Rural Utilities Service, the Rural Housing Service, and
the Rural Business-Cooperative Service. Each of these agencies is
tasked with the challenge of addressing specific concerns in the rural
economy. Those that work at USDA Rural Development live in the
communities that they serve and are intimately aware of what rural
means and what needs to be done to ensure that rural America remains a
place that families choose to live and businesses are able to grow.
While it is clear that these three agencies espouse similar goals as
other government programs housed in different agencies throughout the
government, the reality is that USDA is the only government agency with
the reach to provide the service and expertise that is needed to serve
rural America. To take any responsibility away from USDA in the areas
of infrastructure investment, housing, or business development would be
a great disservice to rural residents, not just in North Carolina but
throughout the country.
The costs associated with bringing needed services to rural America
can be high. Utility companies and telecommunications providers must
incur higher capital costs to make the investments necessary to provide
services to rural Americans on par with those that we take for granted
in urban centers, but rural communities and businesses have continually
shown us that they can and will responsibly take on these investments
when financing for such endeavors is available.
The United States Department of Agriculture has been at the center
of the effort in addressing rural economic challenges. This effort
began in the last century with rural electrification. After the passage
of Norris-Rayburn Act in 1936, the Rural Electric Administration was
funded to provide loans to private companies, public agencies, and
cooperatives for the construction of electrical supply infrastructure
in rural parts of the country.\1\
-
\2\ Prior to the REA, only
three percent of the 6.3 million farms in the United States received
electricity.\3\ Within 2 years of the establishment of the Rural
Electric Administration, 350 cooperative projects in 45 states were
delivering electricity to 1.5 million farms.\4\ Today, all rural
residents are able to access power and nearly 98 percent are connected
to telephone services.\5\ The successes of our rural electric and
telephone systems did not happen without leadership, vision and
partnership between the public, nonprofit, and private sectors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Dow, E.F. ``Federal Administration of Rural Electrification.''
The American Political Science Review 31.6 (1937): 1107-112. Print.
\2\ Malone, Laurence J. ``The Origins of the New Deal Rural
Electrification Initiative: Market Failure in Delivering Electricity to
Rural Areas Before 1930.'' Economic History Association. March 18,
2012. http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/
malone.electrification.administration.rural.
\3\ Beall, Robert T. (1940). ``Rural Electrification.'' United
States Yearbook of Agriculture. Washington, D.C.: United States
Department of Agriculture. p. 790-809. Retrieved December 30, 2008.
http://naldc.nal.usda.gov/download/IND43893747/PDF.
\4\ Schurr, Sam H., Calvin C. Burwell, Warren D. Devine, and Sidney
Sonenblum. Electricity in the American Economy: Agent of Technological
Progress. Westport, CT: Contributions in Economics and Economic
History, Number 117, Greenwood Press, 1990.
\5\ Malone, Laurence J. ``The Origins of the New Deal Rural
Electrification Initiative: Market Failure in Delivering Electricity to
Rural Areas Before 1930.'' Economic History Association. March 18,
2012. http://eh.net/encyclopedia/article/
malone.electrification.administration.rural.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The challenges of investing in rural infrastructure are not a thing
of the past. We face many of the same difficulties today. In my
district in southeastern North Carolina, many communities in rural
parts of Columbus, Bladen and Pender County are unable to access fast
and reliable Internet and must instead rely upon expensive and
inefficient satellite Internet connections to access the web.
Telecommunication providers are not eager to invest in the rural market
to provide broadband due to high network construction costs and the
relatively few subscribers that the connection would provide. To help
bridge this divide, the Rural Utilities Service offers grants, low
interest loans and loan guarantees to companies that take the lead to
make investments in rural broadband. This is exactly the type of high
value, high return investment that the Federal Government should make
to empower private sector growth and rural economic opportunity, and I
will continue to work with USDA and stakeholders back home to do the
work that needs to be done to ensure a vibrant and dynamic rural
economy.
I am looking forward to hearing testimony from the panel before
this Subcommittee and thank the chair for holding today's hearing.

The Chairman. So with those preliminary comments and my
thanks to everybody for being here, the witnesses, let me
introduce our first panel, who is actually one witness, Mr.
Dallas Tonsager, Under Secretary for Rural Development, USDA,
Washington, D.C. Just proceed when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF HON. DALLAS P. TONSAGER, UNDER
SECRETARY FOR RURAL DEVELOPMENT, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Tonsager. I am pleased to have this opportunity to
discuss the important role USDA Rural Development plays in the
economic development of our nation's rural communities.
Through the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act of
1972, Congress charged USDA with leading the Federal
Government's effort to ensure a prosperous rural America and
declared this task ``so essential to the peace, prosperity, and
welfare of all our citizens that the highest priority must be
given to the revitalization and development of rural areas.''
Secretary Vilsack and I care deeply about rural America.
Over the last 3 years, thanks to resources made available by
Congress, we have made historic investments designed to form
the foundation of a rural economy that is built to last. And
under the Secretary's leadership through the White House Rural
Council, USDA has worked closely with partners across the
Federal family to leverage resources that maximize benefits for
rural communities.
As the only department with the primary responsibility of
serving rural areas, the presence of USDA field offices in
every state helps us serve that specific need of rural
communities. Our direct personal contact with these communities
creates efficiencies in our program delivery, and the employees
who deliver our programs possess expert knowledge of the
challenges and opportunities in these communities.
Rural Development appreciates the ongoing efforts of the
U.S. Government Accountability Office to identify potential
overlap in Federal programs, and we take pride in our uniquely
rural focus and our local program delivery model, which
differentiates rural development from other Federal agencies.
Rural Development's utility programs enable communities to
maintain and upgrade critical rural infrastructure that often
carries a high price tag. Our electric and telecommunication
programs are the only Federal programs that finance the
construction of electric and telecom networks from the
beginning to end. Our Water and Environmental Program is the
only Federal program that lends directly to communities,
particularly very small communities. In order to obtain
financing from us, water and sewer authorities must demonstrate
they have been unsuccessful in obtaining financing elsewhere.
Rural Development has been responsive to GAO
recommendations to increase coordination of Federal programs,
water funding systems in the Colonias along the U.S.-Mexican
border. In addition, Rural Development recently proposed a
modification to our Colonias regulation that would allow us to
better target resources to the areas with the highest level of
need.
Rural Development business and cooperative programs provide
invaluable assistance to rural, small, and mid-sized
businesses. Our Business and Industry Program is the only
Federal guarantee program that offers a maximum guarantee of up
to $40 million and specifically targets agricultural
cooperative businesses. In response to the GAO recommendations,
Rural Development has significantly enhanced its collaboration
with the Small Business Administration that began by signing an
MOU with SBA in 2010.
Our housing programs ensure low and very low-income
families throughout rural America have access to safe, decent,
and affordable housing. Our Direct Home Loan Program is the
only means-tested loan program to directly finance the purchase
of homes in rural areas. In addition, communities interested in
approving any central community facilities like schools,
libraries, hospitals, and public safety buildings can walk into
a local Rural Development office to work directly with our
knowledgeable employees to apply for funding.
In order to continue to serve rural America, we recognize a
need to reposition our agency for the 21st century. To that
end, we have proposed continual process improvements to ensure
that our agency operates in a responsible stewardship of the
taxpayers' dollars. Since 2004, Rural Development's portfolio
has doubled and now stands at $165 billion. I am pleased to
report that the principal dollars delinquent more than 1 year
remains at approximately two percent. Such results are the
product of consistent and proactive servicing of the loan
portfolio and working with trusted borrowers to restructure
their loans and avoid foreclosures.
Improvements to our IT infrastructure remain a central part
of our strategy to manage a growing portfolio with reduced
resources. Employees need to be able to complete their mission
anytime and anywhere to support our customers. Rural
Development's innovative work with multi-county regions is an
important support mechanism for building an American economy
that is built to last. USDA is collaborating with the
departments across the Federal Government to support rural
communities and are working in multi-county coalitions that
foster economic development on a regional scale.
I appreciate the opportunity to work with Members of the
Subcommittee to build a foundation for American
competitiveness. Thank you for your support of these programs,
and at this time, I would be happy to take your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tonsager follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Dallas P. Tonsager, Under Secretary for
Rural Development, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Costa, and Members of the
Subcommittee, I am pleased to have this opportunity to discuss the
important role USDA Rural Development plays in the economic development
of our nation's rural communities.
I am proud to represent agencies that are working tirelessly to
realize the President's vision for America: ``a country that leads the
world in educating its people; an America that attracts a new
generation of high-tech manufacturing and high-paying jobs; a future
where we're in control of our own energy; and our security and
prosperity aren't tied to unstable parts of the world. An economy built
to last, where hard work pays off and responsibility is rewarded.''
Undoubtedly, USDA Rural Development (RD) has a key role to play in this
effort, for the continued revitalization of our American economy will
depend upon a prosperous rural America.
Through the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act of 1972
(Con Act), Congress charged USDA with leading the Federal Government's
efforts to ensure a prosperous rural America and declared this task
``so essential to the peace, prosperity, and welfare of all our
citizens that the highest priority must be given to the revitalization
and development of rural areas.'' Today, Rural Development is
responsible for implementing a suite of programs with the sole mission
of improving the quality of life and economic condition of rural
communities.
Secretary Vilsack and I care deeply about rural communities. Over
the last 3 years, thanks to resources made available in the 2008 Farm
Bill and the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, we've made
historic investments in rural America designed to drive job growth and
form the foundation of a rural economy that is built to last. We want
to build a better future for the men and women who live, work and raise
their families in rural communities--and to extend the promise of
middle class jobs where hard work pays off and responsibility is
rewarded.
And as you know, rural America has unique challenges and assets.
Rural communities are characterized by their isolation from population
centers and product markets and benefit most from initiatives that
integrate local institutions and businesses with state and Federal
agencies that have intimate knowledge of their local needs. Delivering
effective programs to rural America, which comprises over 75 percent of
the total land mass of the United States, is a continual challenge.
As the only Federal Department with the primary responsibility of
serving rural areas, the presence of USDA field offices in every state
helps us serve the specific needs of local rural communities. Our
direct personal contact with these communities creates efficiencies in
program delivery in that one phone call to USDA Rural Development
allows local elected officials to identify resources for a wide range
of community and economic development activities. Our partnerships with
public and private institutions allow us to fund local and regional
business development, expand infrastructure and provide access to
affordable, long-term credit in rural areas. The employees who deliver
Rural Development's suite of programs work alongside farmers, ranchers,
homeowners, schools, businesses, nonprofits, cooperatives, tribes and
local governments to strengthen local economies. They are members of
the communities they serve and possess expert knowledge of the economic
challenges and opportunities that exist in their particular regions.
In 2011 alone, Rural Development allocated almost $29 billion
nationwide to upgrade community facilities like schools and hospitals,
boost the reliability of the electric grid, fund renewable energy
projects, provide affordable and reliable Internet access and create
homeownership opportunities for more than 140,000 families. Since 2009,
Rural Development has provided homeownership opportunities to more than
435,000 families. Sixty-three percent of 2011 funding supported loan
guarantees that enabled private lenders to safely increase the pool of
capital available in rural areas for credit-worthy businesses,
communities, and homebuyers. About 34 percent of our investments were
secure, affordable direct loans that will be paid back with interest.
Rural Development appreciates the ongoing efforts of the U.S.
Government Accountability Office (GAO) to identify potential overlap in
Federal programs, and we take pride in our uniquely rural focus and our
local program delivery model which serves to differentiate Rural
Development from other Federal agencies. Our direct personal contact
between agency personnel, lenders, borrowers, communities, families and
individuals is invaluable and provides in-person technical assistance
that would otherwise be unavailable.
Rural Development's utility programs enable communities to maintain
and upgrade critical rural infrastructure which often carries a very
high price tag. Our Electric and Telecommunications programs are the
only Federal programs that finance the construction of electric and
telecom networks from beginning to end. Our Water and Environmental
program is the only Federal program that directly lends and provides
grants to communities, particularly very small communities. In order to
obtain financing from us, water and sewer authorities must demonstrate
they have been unsuccessful in obtaining financing elsewhere.
In GAO-10-126, GAO examined numerous Federal programs, including
USDA Rural Development, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and the Economic
Development Administration (EDA), that provide assistance to rural
communities along the U.S.-Mexico border, or Colonias, for drinking
water and wastewater projects. In that report, GAO suggested that
``Congress consider requiring Federal agencies to develop a coordinated
plan to improve the effectiveness of drinking water and wastewater
programs in the border region and recommends that the agencies take
steps to comply with statutory and regulatory requirements.''
USDA Rural Development is committed to coordinating with other
funding agencies at the Federal, state, and local level where possible
to meet the needs of rural communities across the country, particularly
the high-need Colonias areas along the U.S.-Mexico border. In addition,
Rural Development disagreed with GAO's assertion that we did not comply
with the existing statute related to Colonias water and wastewater
funding. We are pleased to report that on Friday, March 9, 2012, Rural
Development released a proposed modification to our Colonias regulation
which allows for additional priority points to Colonias areas that are
un-served and that are facing significant health risks. Rural
Development will continue our work to improve our program delivery to
ensure that our country's neediest areas receive funding.
Rural Development's business and cooperative programs provide
valuable assistance to rural small and mid-size businesses and
cooperatives. No other Federal program provides funding for similar
purposes to cooperatives and majority-controlled producer-based
business ventures in rural communities. Our Business and Industry
program is the only Federal guaranteed loan program that specifically
targets agricultural cooperative businesses and is available to
nonprofits as well as for-profit entities.
In GAO-11-318SP, GAO examined overlap and fragmentation among
Federal economic development programs, including USDA Rural
Development's business programs, the Small Business Administration's
8(a) program, and HUD's Hispanic Serving Institutions Assisting
Communities program. In its assessment, GAO recommended that the
Federal agencies need to pursue enhanced collaboration across the
programs. Additionally, GAO requested that the agencies ``collect
accurate and complete data on program outcomes and use the information
to assess each program's effectiveness.''
To enhance inter-agency collaboration on economic development, USDA
Rural Development signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
Small Business Administration (SBA) in April 2010 to improve service
delivery to small businesses in under-served rural areas. Under the
MOU, the agencies agreed to advise potential borrowers of the other
agency's programs, to make each agency's programs more complementary,
and to develop joint training seminars on each agency's programs. More
recently, SBA and USDA are holding a series of joint roundtables across
the country focused on increasing investment in rural communities. The
meetings have presented opportunities to hear from stakeholders of both
agencies about the challenges and benefits of investing in rural
America. With regard to data collection, Rural Development's Rural
Business Service has commenced a series of trainings to improve the
collection and maintenance of data related to program performance
measures and to improve data integrity. The agency evaluates program
performance based on jobs created/saved; businesses assisted; and
kilowatt hours of electricity generated/saved. Additionally, the agency
uses Customer Service Scores to evaluate program effectiveness and
satisfaction.
Housing drives rural economies and supports healthy rural
communities. Rural Development housing programs ensure low and very-low
income families throughout rural America have access to safe, decent
and affordable housing. Our direct home loan program is the only means
tested mortgage loan program to directly finance the purchase of homes
in rural areas. Rural communities interested in building or upgrading
essential community facilities, like schools, libraries, hospitals and
public safety buildings, can walk into a local RD office to work
directly with our knowledgeable employees to apply for funding.
We at Rural Development take our mission of serving rural America
very seriously, and we have long recognized the responsibility we share
with the rest of the Federal Government to reduce the burden on future
generations created by recurring budget deficits. In order to continue
to serve rural America, we recognize a need to reposition our agency
for the 21st century. To that end, we have pursued continual process
improvements to ensure that our agency operates as a responsible
steward of taxpayer dollars. Since 2004, Rural Development's portfolio
has doubled, and now stands at $165 billion. Today, I am pleased to
report that the principal dollars delinquent more than 1 year remains
at approximately two percent of the principal.
Such results are the product of consistent and proactive servicing
of the loan portfolio and working with trusted borrowers to restructure
their loans and avoid foreclosure. Rural Development also has a
longstanding record of streamlining its programs, which has
consistently provided the mission area with the ability to successfully
implement new programs and to meet increased demand for financing in
multiple industry sectors with an unprecedented level of funding, even
as staff levels steadily decreased.
Efficiencies
Looking to the future, Rural Development is in step with the
Department of Agriculture's broader efforts to improve the reliability
and efficiency of the services we provide. In January, Secretary
Vilsack unveiled USDA's ``Blueprint for Stronger Service''. Under this
initiative, the Department identified 379 recommendations for improving
USDA's office support and operations, which includes ways to streamline
the provision of administrative services, such as civil rights,
information technology, finance, human resources, homeland security,
procurement, and property management. To realize further efficiencies,
USDA has proposed closure of 259 domestic offices, facilities and labs
across the country, as well as seven foreign offices, while ensuring
that the vital services they provide are not diminished. Rural
Development alone plans to close 43 offices. In some cases, offices are
no longer staffed and many are within 20 miles of other USDA offices.
In other cases, technology improvements, advanced service centers, and
broadband service have reduced some need for brick and mortar
facilities.
Rural Development is currently focused on managing these
reductions, streamlining our programs wherever possible, and servicing
our existing portfolio to maintain its low delinquency rate.
Collaborative Efforts
Rural Development's innovative work with multi-county regions is an
important support mechanism for President Obama's ``Blueprint for
America'' and building a prosperous American economy that is ``Built to
Last.'' Through a number of efforts, USDA is collaborating with
Departments across the Federal Government to support rural communities
that are building durable, multi-county coalitions that foster economic
development on a regional scale. In addition to providing direct
economic benefits, regional collaboration allows rural communities to
capitalize on economies of scale in infrastructure and public services,
to encourage the development of specialization in industrial sectors
that would make them more competitive, and to locate facilities and
services where they provide the greatest benefit at the lowest cost. We
will continue to partner with other Departments to leverage Federal
resources to more effectively support regional economic development
efforts.
Conclusion
Rural Development is resolutely pursuing President Obama's vision
of an America that leads the way in the development of renewable
sources of energy, reinvigorates a sustainable manufacturing industry,
and promotes the economic well-being of all Americans. Through our
network of local economic development experts across rural America, we
support innovators and entrepreneurs, individual families and entire
communities. Our presence in the rural communities that we serve,
combined with our local knowledge and uniquely rural focus, sets us
apart from other Federal programs and helps us maintain our low
delinquency rate.
We know these investments will pay dividends for years to come.
I appreciate the opportunity to work with Members of the
Subcommittee to build a foundation for American competitiveness. Thank
you for your support of Rural Development programs. At this time, I am
happy to answer your questions.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Tonsager.
Let me just start with what I think is probably a self-
apparent question, but obviously one of the charges of this
Committee will be developing an assessment for how we know how
programs succeed or fail or in between and how those
evaluations that you make form future decisions. So my question
is, right now, how do you evaluate the success of various
programs? And how is that evaluation the basis for specifically
how those evaluations form future decisions on regulatory
changes, applications, and so forth? I think you get the gist
of my question.
Mr. Tonsager. I think the first thing in these kinds of
evaluations to remember is this is primarily about individual
people and groups of people who have identified within their
community something that is needed. In the case of single-
family housing borrowers, of course, success is by somebody who
has repaid their housing loan and successfully done their
housing. For a community that needs a water and sewer system,
it is having a successful project that has been well planned,
thought out, and meets the needs of that community and they
have been able to repay their loans successfully.
So, we begin with that to remember that these are about
these communities, thousands of leadership people who have come
together to come up with a plan who need resources and want to
accomplish a specific task, maybe a hospital. So if we build a
hospital or finance a hospital in a community, the hospital is
successfully serving that community.
Another, of course, important major is job creation, and we
have a couple of processes associated with the measurements of
job creation. In some cases, we have a calculation for a
formula that has been provided for us where they estimate, for
example, the construction of a new home and how many jobs that
might be creating.
In our business programs, we have been using a process to
estimate the number of jobs created, including local judgment
by our staff, and then there are a couple of formulas that we
look at the size of the loan. But we are transitioning in that
process to getting actual results, and by 2013, we will have
actual results on loan-making and the jobs created as the
projects are implemented.
The Chairman. Within your department, I am assuming in any
department of the government there is always duplicative
programs, which, as you look and see where you can make
improvements, what programs do you think stand out as
administered in a way and implemented in such a way that they
do qualify as duplicative in areas that you would like to see
addressed?
Mr. Tonsager. Sure. We have approximately 42 tools right
now that we use to work with rural communities and we like to
have it as a one-stop center, of course. But we believe there
are a couple areas that we would like to work closely with you.
One we have four programs that provide revolving loan funds for
businesses and local communities, and we think there would be a
lot of sense in being flexible with the programs so we can
still serve that broad audience, but we probably don't need
four different programs for that purpose, as well as some of
our grant programs we believe that could potentially be
combined.
So this year, we propose a budget, for example, not to fund
the Rural Business Opportunity Grant Program but to put those
funds into the Rural Business Enterprise Grant Program. We
think that makes a lot of sense. We don't want to diminish
anybody's access, but we would like to work with you regarding
flexibility in the programs. There may be a reduction in the
number of programs that are available for that.
The Chairman. Last, we will hear in a few minutes GAO's
assessments and they have raised a number of issues--do you
feel that you have addressed those issues completely or do you
think you have some work to do in terms of addressing some of
the issues they raise?
Mr. Tonsager. Oh, we know we have some work to do. I know
they have scored us as partially addressing issues. We know we
have some progress to make on some of the statements. In some
cases, we will disagree with them regarding what is said, but
yes, we recognize we need to make some progress.
The Chairman. With that, then, I would recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Costa, for questions.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I raised the issue in my opening statement and I don't know
if you can report to us, but again I find it baffling at this
point. In 2008, we required as a part of the reauthorization of
the farm bill to work on this rural definition issue, which has
been problematic to some of us who represent very rural
districts. And I mean for folks this information--I know my
Subcommittee Members know this--but I represent the number one
agricultural county in the nation, Fresno County, over $6
billion. Kern County I share with another colleague is number
three with over $4 billion in farm gate receipts. Yet Fresno is
not defined as being rural because it has a large urban city in
the center of the county. Why can't we get this report? It is
2012. It is 4 years later.
Mr. Tonsager. We have provided, as you mentioned, a number
of elements to the report that included the information
requested regarding the various definitions. And so previous
testimonies have provided that. It is true that we have not
provided our distinct what we would recommend for a definition.
We are still working internally through that process. I would
like to offer some thoughts, though, regarding that.
We have the current authority, of course, applies very hard
line numbers that if you cross the number it is no longer
eligible. We have an immediate Census coming up October 1. We
will be implementing new Census data regarding rural
definitions from year 2010, and that means some communities
that have grown will no longer be eligible for programs. Some
communities may have shrunk and may become newly eligible.
Mr. Costa. Well, just on that point there are a couple of
other questions. For example, the Administration has a Strong
Cities, Strong Communities Program that includes six cities
across the country--and again, one of them happens to be the
City of Fresno, which is the sixth largest city in the state
now, but yet USDA is involved in this effort, this model
program. You are supposed to be effectively coordinating with
Federal agencies, but yet it doesn't follow under the
definition of rural.
Mr. Tonsager. We try to work with each of the efforts that
are regionally based to have employees involved, and I
believe----
Mr. Costa. So the definition in this case isn't a hard
line?
Mr. Tonsager. For the technical discussion that is in
fact--we don't approve all programs.
Mr. Costa. Let me move on again because of time.
Mr. Tonsager. Sure.
Mr. Costa. USDA's Rural Utilities Service Programs aren't
the focus of our hearing today, but I did mention that in my
statement. Since you raised it in your statement, we are
focusing on duplicative Federal programs, but I want to know
USDA's perspective on claims that rural broadband is
duplicating efforts of the Commerce Department's National
Telecommunications efforts.
Mr. Tonsager. The Department of Commerce had Recovery Act
funds for that purpose but they no longer are engaged in those
programs if I understand correctly.
Mr. Costa. So then it wouldn't be overlapping----
Mr. Tonsager. Right. That is correct.
Mr. Costa.--with government-backed programs by private
investment companies to expand broadband in our rural areas?
Mr. Tonsager. We work with private companies in financing
broadband projects.
Mr. Costa. Finally, I learned from data that the USDA's
Economic Research Service, ERS, that shows that Federal
investment in rural areas is lagging behind investments in
urban areas. It seems to suggest that the claims of
geographical overlap in the Federal programs in this instance
might be unfounded or at least overstated. Have you seen the
data and are you prepared to provide an assessment that
resonates with your experience?
Mr. Tonsager. I recently saw the data, have not had time to
study it. It is my belief that that is the case. We are most
anxious to use our resources to try and draw other Federal
program resources more to rural areas than it has been.
Mr. Costa. It is your belief, then, that there is not an
overlap?
Mr. Tonsager. It is my belief that rural areas do not get
as much Federal resources as urban areas do.
Mr. Costa. On a percentage, per capita basis?
Mr. Tonsager. Yes, sir.
Mr. Costa. Okay.
Well, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired but we will
obviously follow up and I will submit some additional questions
for the record that I would hope we would have a response for.
Mr. Tonsager. Thank you, Congressman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
The chair would then recognize the gentleman, Mr. Stutzman,
from--well, I guess he is not here.
I recognize the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Tonsager, one of the things you mentioned was
flexibility in moving from four programs to one and reducing
those administrative costs, and I quite honestly--if we can go
from four to one and reduce those administrative costs and give
you more flexibility, I think that is a great thing and helps
the taxpayers. I guess my concern goes back to what my
colleague from the other side of the aisle is bringing up,
which is the accountability issue. If you want the flexibility
and we want to give it to you, you have to understand that the
accountability measures have to be there and when the
departments ignore the timely filing of reports so that we can
make sure the taxpayer funds are being spent wisely, then that
certainly gives pause to us giving more flexibility. So I would
like for you to speak to that issue.
And then I would like for you to speak to two other issues;
one is the coordination between the USDA and the SBA and how
that has worked; and then two is the number of businesses who
have received funding from the USDA that are still in business
after 3 years, so those three things, sir.
Mr. Tonsager. Sure. Yes, we need to be held accountable. We
understand that. And we do work our best to file reports in a
timely manner. I am not sure which specific reports you have
concern about. We do believe in transparency and we know that
if we provide you the information regarding our performance, it
helps self-correct because you will bring discipline to that
argument.
If you would provide me with the particular reports that
are lacking, I can give you more information about that.
Mr. Scott. We will get that to you.
Mr. Tonsager. Okay. Let us see. I am sorry. Please forgive
me.
Mr. Scott. The relationship between SBA and USDA and how
that has worked with the----
Mr. Tonsager. Sure.
Mr. Scott.--consolidation if you will of the----
Mr. Tonsager. We did establish the Memorandum. We are doing
joint trainings between our people that are involved in
business funding and trying to learn from each other regarding
their abilities in business lending. Our program, of course,
goes to very large loans where SBA is somewhat restricted in
size. We advocate with clients regarding use of the SBA loans
so we have our staff trained in how the SBA loans work. And if
it is better suited for them in some cases, then we would
advocate that they would pursue an SBA loan. And we also work
more closely with lenders so we would have a group of business
and industry loan lenders, some 1,800 banks that like to use
our program. We try and coordinate--especially when both SBA
and the B&I Program is in the same financial institution.
Mr. Scott. Do you have the information on the number or the
percentage of businesses that you are involved in the initial
or the startup funding that are in business after 3 years?
Mr. Tonsager. I am sorry. I don't have that with me today
but we will certainly provide it to you.
[The information referred to is located on p. 33.]
Mr. Scott. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I don't have any further questions. I yield
back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
The Chair would recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for this
opportunity. As former Chairman of this Subcommittee, I have a
couple of questions for the Under Secretary, and it good to see
you again, Mr. Under Secretary.
I know USDA Rural Development has taken the lead in
addressing one of the most pressing challenges facing rural
America; that is the digital divide separating rural and urban
areas. And I know you are familiar with that with the major
success story that we had in North Carolina down in Columbus
County, a very rural area that now has--with the help of ATMC,
a local provider there--98 percent completed its mission to
connect nearly 1,000 rural residents who otherwise had no
access to high-speed Internet. And I still remember the lady
last August who ran out of her house when she saw me out there
with the crews say thank you, thank you. My son can now do his
homework at home instead of having to go all the way back into
town to try to go to a library or to the school. He could come
home and the young boy can be at home to do his homework.
How is USDA uniquely situated, do you believe, to take the
lead for the Federal Government in investing in our rural
telecommunications infrastructure as compared to other
departments or agencies?
Mr. Tonsager. Well, we of course have a 70 year old
tradition in rural America. We financed the National Rural
Electric System through decades that saw the very first light
bulb and then went to virtually every corner of the United
States. We have done the same with the National Rural Water
System and we have not gotten everywhere with rural water. But
we have been building that over a very long period of time.
Mr. McIntyre. Yes.
Mr. Tonsager. So we have unique skill sets in making very
large credit available to very large organizations and have
done so in a very positive manner. So our presence in rural
America and our long-term history of making financial
commitments that work quite well, is a major component of what
we do.
Mr. McIntyre. Can you speak about the effort to build on
and build out with respect to broadband investments that are
being made by the USDA?
Mr. Tonsager. Sure. Along with our responsibility for
building that system, we also have tools for building
businesses. And so we have been conducting webinars, bringing
in companies that do direct marketing and I think that is one
of the great hopes that was brought by Congress to not only
build this system but make sure economic opportunity happened
for those people that live in those communities. So as we build
out the system we are conducting these webinars with local
organizations, businesses, and companies and bringing together
those efforts so that people might begin to use this wonderful
tool of broadband to build their economic lives.
Mr. McIntyre. I know that a lot of folks are always
concerned about duplicative services, but I would like for you,
given your unique position and the experience you have had in
doing these types of things, to explain to us how USDA Rural
Development that gives significant assistance to much-needed
infrastructure investments--water, wastewater, broadband,
telephone, and electric infrastructure--we know that EDA, HUD,
Department of Transportation, and EPA also do certain aspects
of that but how do you believe that USDA with its extensive
field staff makes a difference when it comes to rural America;
so we can get a handle on what is the difference here and why
is USDA Rural Development so critical in meeting these needs to
keep rural America from being left behind?
Mr. Tonsager. Sure. In my testimony I talked about the
charge in the 1972 Con Act regarding taking the lead in rural
areas. So we see ourselves as an aggressive organization in
trying to bring resources. We know that our mission is rural.
We know that other Federal agencies might not have as
aggressive an approach. I mean generally they are a passive
provider of resources. We see our job as taking our resources,
trying to bring more to the table with private sector, with
other Federal agencies and trying to make sure that rural
citizens have access to as much Federal Government resources as
we can possibly get. So we think our position, having a field
structure, and our mandate to be assertive in our view in
providing these resources makes us unique.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you. And I speak for all of us who have
constituents and ourselves that live in rural areas that with
this time of year and April 15 fast approaching that rural
America are just as much taxpaying citizens as those in urban
and suburban America and should not be left behind. And I want
to thank you for the efforts you make on behalf of rural
America and our citizens, the American taxpayers who do see a
return on their investments that we are reminded of every year
at April 15. The difference it makes in their lives when they
see rural broadband, water, and wastewater projects and the
infrastructure come to make their quality of lives inline with
their fellow American citizens. God bless you and thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. McIntyre.
Now, I would recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr.
Hultgren.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here today. A couple questions. I
understand that Rural Housing Service has been trying to get
some access to the same employment data that HUD uses to verify
tenants' incomes. What benefit would this earned income
verification data provide to RHS and I wonder what is
preventing you from using it?
Mr. Tonsager. I will have to ask my folks what the status
of that proposal. I thought we were getting close if not had
gotten to that point yet. It would help with the evaluation of
loan applications and its time limits of getting the loan
applications done. Having information available would help us
make sure the portfolio performs well and that we are making
loans to eligible applicants as well as making sure that they
get repaid. And I am sorry. I don't know if any of my staff
knows for sure. We will have to report back on the status of
that.
[The information referred to is located on p. 33.] *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: The information request has been answered in three
parts, labeled Insert 2-5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Hultgren. If you can get us the information, that would
be great on that. That would be terrific.
GAO and others have proposed consolidation of the Rural
Housing Programs with HUD. I wonder, do you think the rural
areas would see the same attention under HUD's management as
they currently receive?
Mr. Tonsager. I believe that we provide real opportunities
to remote rural citizens. Forgive me for using the term unique
for rural America, but the people in rural America don't make
as much money. And our particular program, I think the
guarantee program especially is well suited to rural
communities in that we don't have a particular down payment
requirement. We have been very successful in repayment to the
point where for the program cost, it doesn't cost the taxpayers
any money. There is cost, of course, with our system of
delivery but not with the fee that we are assessing. We don't
have a cost and the performance of the program has been very
good.
So, the uniqueness of the programs for housing addresses
the needs of rural people and how to get that delivery in the
far corners of rural America becomes the challenge for perhaps
HUD and others if it were to be combined.
Mr. Hultgren. If it were combined, I mean is there any
expectation or what is the expectation of the amount of savings
as you combine the programs as far as salaries being saved,
expenses for the agency? And then I wondered if there is a
savings, how USDA would seek to reallocate those resources if
there was a consolidation or savings of administrative costs?
Mr. Tonsager. I have not seen any particular identification
of what those savings might be. I would say for the guarantee
program particularly the amount of resources is pretty modest.
We are working with private institutions. The financers are
doing the great bulk of the work. Much of our work is
monitoring of those loans in that case. The direct program
costs more because it is more of a hands-on approach with
individual people and helping them to get good credit. So I am
sorry; I just don't have the information.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. There again, if you have that
information, if you can get that to us or if your staff has
that information, that would be helpful.
Mr. Tonsager. Sure.
Mr. Hultgren. Switching gears a little bit. Under the
current requirements, a community must be outside of a
metropolitan statistical area to qualify for Rural Housing
Programs. MSAs are no longer the compact area they once were
and communities located far from the urban core can still be
considered part of the MSA. I wondered why do you have this
blanket exemption and do you feel some communities are
disadvantaged by this exemption?
Mr. Tonsager. Of course, it is required by law. I mean we
have a specific requirement regarding the geographic area that
we can serve, so we have to follow that to the letter in doing
that.
We are anxious to look at flexibility and I know
Congressman Costa's concern about the rural definition issue.
When we find ourselves with multiple definitions running into
is that we can't address the needs of a whole community. We are
doing a bit here, a bit there, and we are struggling with that
definitional issue and trying to come to grips with what would
be the most useful discussion to have. But the Secretary is
focused a good bit on flexibility in the existing programs and
we are studying that closely.
Mr. Hultgren. What are your recommendations for addressing
those definitional issues? Are there proposals that are in
place? Is there legislation that is introduced that would
address that concern?
Mr. Tonsager. Not at this time. We have not made proposals
at this time.
Mr. Hultgren. Do you expect that to be coming or what is
your thought there?
Mr. Tonsager. We expect after a review process to put
forward some material on the subject.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. But it would take legislative change
you believe----
Mr. Tonsager. Yes.
Mr. Hultgren.--to bring that definition?
Mr. Tonsager. Yes, there are very concise definitions in
the statute regarding each program area. And it would take
definitely statutory change.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. My time has expired. I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Hultgren. The gentlelady from
Missouri, Mrs. Hartzler.
Mrs. Hartzler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In your testimony, you discuss the coordination between
USDA and the Small Business Administration in 2010 in an effort
to improve service delivery to small businesses in rural areas.
So what was the result of this coordination?
Mr. Tonsager. There has been significant activity. We do
training together with the SBA. We provide clients coming in
the door information regarding potential use of SBA
applications or SBA programs if they are better suited to their
needs in that area. So we have ongoing efforts with SBA all the
time. And I mentioned earlier that we see our field structure
as an opportunity to draw more resources from other Federal
agencies into rural areas. So we see our tools as an
opportunity to leverage those agencies to bring their
resources. And so we attempt to do that with as many of the
other Federal agencies as we can, including the SBA.
Mrs. Hartzler. That is very good. Does your interagency
coordination include a conscious effort to determine which
agency should be funding which type of investment even when
both agencies might have clear authority to do so?
Mr. Tonsager. We tend to look at the individual applicants
and try to advocate with them regarding that. We haven't, I
don't think, done a strategy where we looked at which agency
would be best suited in an individual area, so I may not be
quite understanding your question well enough and I will ask my
colleagues if they have any thoughts.
And my deputy points out that the lender is the applicant
to us in the loan guarantee case. And so we work with them.
Mrs. Hartzler. Yes. All right, that makes sense. Now, I
missed the first part of the hearing due to being at another
hearing at the same time--sorry--but we were talking about
consolidating programs here. I came in where you were saying
that you believe that four revolving loan funds could be
consolidated, also some grant programs. Is that the only
duplication or consolidation that you think could be done in
the Department?
Mr. Tonsager. Well, we should consider perhaps some of the
guarantee programs. You know, we have a guarantee program for
large energy projects, we have our Business and Industry Loan
Guarantee Program, and we have a guarantee program and our REAP
Program, which is also energy-related.
We don't have a clearer saying do this, this, and this,
but, if we can look at still having the same audiences that we
are all trying to serve and limit or reduce the number of
programs that are applicable that might be of value, less NOFAs
we have to put out, less procedures we have to go through. So
we don't have a defined kind of agenda on that. We are just
suggesting if we combine some of the tool sets and broaden them
out, get more flexibility as the Secretary has talked about, it
would make some sense.
Mrs. Hartzler. Sounds like some good ideas. Have you put
that into a format that could be transferred over to a
legislative initiative?
Mr. Tonsager. We have not but we would be more than happy
to work with some Members on any proposals you might want to
consider.
Mrs. Hartzler. I would be interested in seeing in writing
some of your suggestions of specific programs you think could
be consolidated to increase efficiencies that we can move
forward with because I think that makes sense for the taxpayer
and for the people that we are trying to serve.
So thank you for what you are doing for rural America. It
is very important, I appreciate it.
Mr. Tonsager. Yes, thank you, ma'am.
Mrs. Hartzler. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you. With that, I believe there are no
more questions. We thank you for your testimony and appreciate
your being here and look forward to hearing from you again.
Mr. Tonsager. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. We will now assemble the next panel, which is
essentially one witness. Our witness now for the second panel
is Mr. William Shear, Director, Financial Markets and Community
Investment, Government Accountability Office.
Please begin when you are ready, Mr. Shear.

STATEMENT OF WILLIAM B. SHEAR, DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL MARKETS AND
COMMUNITY INVESTMENT, U.S.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Shear. Thank you. Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member
Costa, and Members of the Subcommittee, I am pleased to be here
this morning to discuss our work on overlap, fragmentation, and
potential duplication in economic development programs.
As part of our series of reports on these programs, most
recently in February 2012, we reported on the existence of
overlap and fragmentation among those Federal economic
development programs that support entrepreneurs. Specifically,
we focused our analysis on 53 of the 80 economic development
programs at Agriculture, Commerce, HUD, and SBA that fund
entrepreneurial assistance because these programs appear to
overlap the most among the 80 economic development programs.
My testimony today is largely based on information on these
53 programs that is discussed in our recent February 2012
report. Specifically, this testimony discusses our work to date
on, first, the extent of overlap and fragmentation among these
programs; and second, the availability of meaningful
performance information on these 53 programs. I will also
provide an overview of the nature of our ongoing work.
In summary, based on our work to date we have found that
programs that support entrepreneurs overlap based not only on
their shared purpose of serving entrepreneurs but also on the
type of assistance they offer. The programs generally can be
grouped according to at least one of three types of
assistance--first, technical assistance; second, financial
assistance; and third, government contracts. Much of the
overlap and fragmentation among these 53 programs is
concentrated among programs that support economically
distressed and disadvantaged areas and programs that are
disadvantaged in small businesses. In addition, many of these
economic development programs also operate in both urban and
rural areas.
While most of the 53 economic development programs that
support entrepreneurs have reasonable performance measures,
intend to meet their annual performance goals, few evaluation
studies have been completed and little evaluative information
exists that assesses the programs' effectiveness at what they
are intended to serve.
In addition to the work discussed in our recent report, I
will mention two other sources of information--first, progress
made by the agencies in implementing collaborative practices we
had recommended; and second, our continuing work to be
discussed in a report on economic development programs we plan
to issue this summer.
With respect to collaborative practices, in April 2010,
USDA and SBA signed a Memorandum of Understanding. The MOU
defined and articulated a common outcome focused on improving
service delivery to small businesses in under-served rural
areas. USDA's April 2011 survey of state directors indicates
progress under the MOU in several areas, including field
offices advising borrowers of SBA's programs, referring
borrowers to SBA and its resource partners, and explaining ways
to make USDA and SBA programs more complementary. However, we
have not received comparable information from SBA indicating
progress in this area. In addition, HUD, USDA, and SBA have
provided limited evidence that they have taken steps to develop
compatible policies and procedures with either Federal agencies
and this also goes to the issue of defining roles and
responsibilities.
With respect to our remaining audit work, a large part of
it will focus on the extent to which the programs are
duplicative, overlapping, or fragmented and we are especially
focusing on the provision of economic development assistance by
the various agencies and programs in rural America.
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Costa, this concludes
my prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions
at this time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Shear follows:]

Prepared Statement of William B. Shear, Director, Financial Markets and
Community Investment, U.S. Government Accountability Office,
Washington, D.C.
Economic Development
Efficiency and Effectiveness of Fragmented Programs Are Unclear
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Costa, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

I am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on overlap,
fragmentation, and potential duplication in economic development
programs. Over the past year, we have issued a series of reports on
potential duplication among Federal economic development programs,
including a number of rural development programs.\1\ Most recently in
February 2012 we reported new information on the existence of overlap
and fragmentation among those Federal economic development programs
that support entrepreneurs.\2\ Specifically, we focused our analysis on
53 of the 80 economic development programs at the Departments of
Commerce (Commerce), Housing and Urban Development (HUD), Agriculture
(USDA), and the Small Business Administration (SBA) that fund
entrepreneurial assistance because these programs appear to overlap the
most.\3\ According to agency officials, these programs, which typically
fund a variety of activities in addition to supporting entrepreneurs,
spent an estimated $2.6 billion in enacted appropriations on economic
development efforts in Fiscal Year 2010.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Opportunities to Reduce Potential Duplication in
Government Programs, Save Tax Dollars, and Enhance Revenue, GAO-11-
318SP (http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-11-318SP) (Washington D.C.: Mar.
1, 2011) and Efficiency and Effectiveness of Fragmented Economic
Development Programs Are Unclear, GAO-11-477R (http://www.gao.gov/
products/GAO-11-477R) (Washington, D.C.: May 19, 2011).
\2\ GAO, 2012 Annual Report: Opportunities to Reduce Duplication,
Overlap and Fragmentation, Achieve Savings, and Enhance Revenue, GAO-
12-342SP (http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-342SP) (Washington D.C.:
Feb. 28, 2012).
\3\ The number of programs administered by Commerce, HUD, SBA, and
USDA that were identified in GAO-11-477R (http://www.gao.gov/products/
GAO-11-477R) as supporting entrepreneurial efforts decreased from 54 to
53 because Commerce merged its Minority Business Opportunity Center
program and Minority Business Enterprise Center program into one
program that is now called Minority Business Center. In addition, two
of the original Commerce programs identified in our March and May 2011
reports--Community Trade Adjustment Assistance and Research and
Evaluation--have been replaced with two other Commerce programs--Trade
Adjustment Assistance for Firms and the Economic Development--Support
for Planning Organizations--because one of the original programs had
temporary funding and the other original program was misclassified as
an economic development program. The two new Commerce programs that
have been added should have been included in the March and May 2011
reports, according to Commerce officials.
\4\ We excluded the portion of the Community Development Block
Grant funding that HUD reported is not used to support economic
development. The total enacted appropriations for these 53 programs was
about $5.6 billion for Fiscal Year 2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Economic development programs, if effective, can develop and
expand, and thus contribute to the nation's economic growth. However,
the ways that these programs are administered could lead to inefficient
delivery of services to entrepreneurs, such as requiring recipients to
fill out applications to multiple agencies with varying program
requirements, and could compromise the government's ability to
effectively provide the needed service and meet the shared goals of the
programs.
My testimony today is based on information on these 53 programs
that is discussed in our recent February 2012 report. Specifically,
this testimony discusses our work to date on (1) the extent of overlap
and fragmentation among these programs and (2) the availability of
meaningful performance information on these 53 programs. Because we
have ongoing work that will be issued later this year, we also provide
an overview of the nature of our ongoing work.
In summary, based on our work to date, we have found that:

Programs that support entrepreneurs overlap based not only
on their shared purpose of serving entrepreneurs but also on
the type of assistance they offer. Much of the overlap and
fragmentation among these 53 programs is concentrated among
programs that support economically distressed and disadvantaged
areas and programs that assist disadvantaged and small
businesses. In addition, many of these economic development
programs also operate in both urban and rural areas.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ While the definition of rural can vary among programs, USDA's
typically defines it as covering areas with population limits ranging
from less than 2,500 to 50,000.

While most (45) of the 53 economic development programs that
support entrepreneurs have reasonable performance measures and
tend to meet their annual performance goals, few evaluation
studies have been completed and little evaluative information
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
exists that assesses the programs' effectiveness.

As we continue our ongoing work, we are conducting additional
analyses of these 53 programs to determine, among other things, (1)
what support do Federal economic development programs provide to
entrepreneurs and to what extent the programs are duplicative,
overlapping, or fragmented; (2) the effects on entrepreneurs and the
steps agencies have taken to address any duplication, overlap, or
fragmentation; and (3) the extent to which these programs have
established and met performance goals and been evaluated for
effectiveness.
For our February 2012 report, which this testimony is based on, we
focused our analysis on the 53 economic development programs at
Commerce, HUD, USDA, and SBA that fund entrepreneurial assistance
because these programs appeared to overlap the most. We examined the
extent to which the Federal Government's efforts to support
entrepreneurs overlap among these numerous, fragmented programs by
examining their missions, goals, services provided, and targeted
beneficiaries and areas. We also collected information on performance
measures that the agencies collect to track the performance of each of
the 53 programs, and any evaluation studies conducted or commissioned
by the agencies evaluating the effectiveness of these programs. This
process included meeting with agency officials to corroborate the
publicly available information. We also determined the reasonableness
of the performance measures by assessing each measure against agency
strategic goals and specific program missions to determine the extent
to which they are aligned. The work on which this statement is based
was performed from June 2011 through February 2012 in accordance with
generally accepted government auditing standards. Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient,
appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for our findings and
conclusions based on our audit objectives. We believe that the evidence
obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions
based on our audit objectives.
Programs that Support Entrepreneurs Overlap and Are Fragmented
Based on a review of the missions and other related program
information for these 53 programs, we determined that these programs
overlap based not only on their shared purpose of serving entrepreneurs
but also on the type of assistance they offer. The programs generally
can be grouped according to at least one of three types of assistance
that address different entrepreneurial needs: help obtaining (1)
technical assistance, (2) financial assistance, and (3) government
contracts. Many of the programs can provide more than one type of
assistance, and most focus on technical and/or financial assistance:
\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ SBA administers the two programs that solely provide
entrepreneurs with assistance in obtaining government contracts: the
HUBZone program, which supports small businesses located in
economically distressed areas, and the Procurement Assistance to Small
Businesses program, which serves small businesses located in any area.

Technical assistance: Thirty-six programs distributed across
the four agencies provide technical assistance, including
business training and counseling and research and development
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
support.

Financial assistance: Thirty-three programs distributed
across the four agencies support entrepreneurs through
financial assistance in the form of grants and loans.

Government contracting assistance: Seven programs
distributed between two of the four agencies support
entrepreneurs by helping them qualify for Federal procurement
opportunities.

Table 1 illustrates overlap among programs that provide
entrepreneurial assistance in terms of the type of assistance they
provide. For example, USDA administers nine of the 36 programs
distributed across the four agencies that provide technical assistance,
including business training and counseling and research and development
support. The agency also administers nine of the 33 programs
distributed across the four agencies that support entrepreneurs through
financial assistance in the form of grants and loans. Appendix I lists
the programs GAO identified that may have similar or overlapping
objectives, provide similar services or be fragmented across government
missions. Overlap and fragmentation may not necessarily lead to actual
duplication, and some degree of overlap and duplication may be
justified.

Table 1: 53 Programs That Support Entrepreneurs, by Type of Assistance,
as of September 30, 2011 a
------------------------------------------------------------------------
HUD        SBA        USDA       Commerce      Total b
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Technical             2          6          5               4         17
assistance
only
Financial             3          5          5                         13
assistance
only
Technical             7          3          4               2         16
and
financial
assistance
only
Government                       2                                     2
contracting
assistance
only
Technical                        1                                     1
and
government
contracting
only
Financial                        2                                     2
and
government
contracting
only
Technical,                                                  2          2
financial,
and
government
contracting
assistance
-----------------------------------------------------------
Total              12         19         14               8         53
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: GAO analysis of information provided by Commerce, HUD, USDA, and
SBA.

Notes:

a Some of the programs may not have received funding in Fiscal Year
2011.
b The 36 technical assistance programs include those in the following
categories: technical assistance only; technical and financial
assistance only; technical, financial, and government contracting
assistance; and technical and government contracting assistance only.
The 33 financial assistance programs include those in the following
categories: financial assistance only; technical and financial
assistance only; technical, financial, and government contracting
assistance; and financial and government contracting assistance only.
The seven government contracting assistance programs include those in
the following categories: government contracting assistance only,
technical and government contracting assistance only, financial and
government contracting assistance only, and technical, financial, and
government contracting assistance.

Furthermore, we found that much of the overlap and fragmentation
among these 53 programs is concentrated among those that support
economically distressed and disadvantaged areas and programs that
assist disadvantaged and small businesses, including those in rural
areas (see Fig. 1 below). For example, 23 programs provide technical
assistance to businesses operating in areas that are disadvantaged;
USDA administers nine of these programs. In addition, USDA administers
5 of the 26 programs that provide technical assistance to disadvantaged
businesses.
Figure 1: Programs That Provide Technical and Financial Assistance, by
Type of Business and Community Served, as of September 30,
2011.

Source: GAO analysis.

Note: Some of the programs may not have received funding in
Fiscal Year 2011.

The number of programs that support entrepreneurs--53--and the
overlap among these programs raise questions about whether a fragmented
system is the most effective way to support entrepreneurs. By exploring
alternatives, agencies may be able to determine whether there are more
efficient ways to continue to serve the unique needs of entrepreneurs,
including consolidating various programs. In ongoing work, we plan to
examine the extent of potential duplication among these programs as
well as determine the effects of this fragmented system on the delivery
of technical assistance to entrepreneurs.
To address issues arising from potential overlap and fragmentation
in economic development programs, we previously identified
collaborative practices agencies should consider implementing in order
to maximize performance and results of Federal programs that share
common outcomes. Our work to date shows that Commerce, USDA, and SBA
have taken initial steps to implement at least one of the collaborative
practices--defining and articulating common outcomes for some of their
related programs. For example, in April 2010 USDA and SBA signed a
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in response to GAO's 2008
recommendation that the agencies should establish a formal approach to
encourage further collaboration. The MOU defined and articulated a
common outcome focused on improving service delivery to small
businesses in under-served rural areas. Under the MOU, USDA and SBA
agreed that their field offices would advise potential borrowers of the
other agency's programs that may meet their small business financing
needs and coordinate the referral of small business applicants to one
another where appropriate, work to make each agency's programs more
complementary by minimizing differences in program fees and processing
and closing procedures, and develop joint training seminars on each
agency's programs. In addition, USDA and SBA agreed to measure progress
under the MOU. USDA's April 2011 survey of state directors indicates
progress under the MOU in several areas, including field offices
advising borrowers of SBA's programs, referring borrowers to SBA and
its resource partners, and exploring ways to make USDA and SBA programs
more complementary. However, we have not received comparable
information from SBA indicating progress in this area. In addition,
HUD, USDA, and SBA have provided limited evidence that they have taken
steps to develop compatible policies or procedures with other Federal
agencies, or to search for opportunities to leverage physical and
administrative resources with their Federal partners.
Agencies Lack Meaningful Information on the Effectiveness of Programs
that Support Entrepreneurs
Based on our work to date, we found that 45 of the 53 economic
development programs we identified that support entrepreneurs have
reasonable performance measures and tend to meet their annual
performance goals; however, the four agencies have either never
conducted a performance evaluation or have conducted only one in the
past decade for 39 of the 53 programs. In order to effectively evaluate
and oversee the services being provided, Congress and the agencies need
meaningful performance information such as performance measures and
evaluation studies. This information is needed to help decision makers
identify ways to make more informed decisions about allocating
increasingly scarce resources among overlapping programs. Specifically,
performance measures can provide information on an agency's progress
toward meeting certain program and agency-wide strategic goals,
expressed as measurable performance standards. In contrast, program
evaluations are systematic ways to assess a broader range of
information on program performance. As a result, evaluation studies can
help identify which programs are effective or not, explain why goals
were not met and identify strategies for meeting unmet goals, and
estimate what would have occurred in the absence of the program.
Without results from program evaluations and performance
measurement data, agencies lack the ability to measure the overall
impact of these programs, and decision makers lack information that
could help them to identify programs that could be better structured
and improve the efficiency with which the government provides these
services. Moreover, the Federal Government has recently required the
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to coordinate with agencies to
ensure that they better track the results of their programs.
Specifically, the GPRA Modernization Act of 2010 (GPRAMA) requires OMB
to work with agencies to, among other things, develop outcome-oriented
goals for certain crosscutting policy areas and report annually on how
these goals will be achieved.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Pub. L. No. 111-352 (2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Other GPRAMA requirements could lead to improved coordination and
collaboration among agencies. For instance, GPRAMA requires each agency
to identify the various organizations and program activities--both
within and external to the agency--that contribute to each agency's
goal. In ongoing work, we plan to determine reasons why the agencies
(1) do not conduct more routine evaluations of these programs and (2)
have not established and do not track performance measures for 8 of the
53 programs.
Framework for Ongoing Analysis
As mentioned earlier, our ongoing work focuses on, among other
things, (1) what support do Federal economic development programs
provide to entrepreneurs and to what extent the programs are
duplicative, overlapping, or fragmented; (2) the effects on
entrepreneurs and the steps agencies have taken to address any
duplication, overlap, or fragmentation; and (3) the extent to which
these programs have established and met performance goals and been
evaluated for effectiveness. To examine the support Federal economic
development programs provide to entrepreneurs and to what extent the
programs are duplicative, overlapping, or fragmented, we will review
information on the activities and services that the agencies conduct to
administer each of the 53 programs, as well as associated budget
information for each program. We will also evaluate the agencies'
methods for tracking the activities conducted, services provided, and
associated costs against criteria that we have established related to
internal control standards. To identify the effects on entrepreneurs
and the steps agencies have taken to address any duplication, overlap,
or fragmentation, we will, among other things, conduct interviews with
select Federal agency and regional commission officials, entrepreneurs,
and state and local partners in select areas across the U.S., including
rural areas. During these interviews we will determine how the Federal
agencies collaborate to support entrepreneurs, identify any reported
lessons learned from these collaborative efforts, as well as challenges
they face to collaboratively support entrepreneurs. We will also obtain
their views on the negative effects that the overlapping, fragmented,
or duplicative programs have on the efficient delivery of services to
entrepreneurs. Finally, we will interview program officials to
determine the reasons why the agencies do not conduct more evaluation
studies.
Chairman Johnson and Ranking Member Costa, this concludes my
prepared statement. I would be happy to answer any questions at this
time.
Contacts and Staff Acknowledgements
For further information on this testimony, please contact me at
[Redacted] or [Redacted]. Contact points for our Offices of
Congressional Relations and Public Affairs may be found on the last
page of this statement. Key contributors to this testimony include
Marshall Hamlett and Triana McNeil, Assistant Directors; Cindy Gilbert;
John McGrail; Jennifer Schwartz; and Karen Villafana.

Appendix I: List of Programs That Support Entrepreneurs and Related
Budgetary Information
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Program                        FY 2010 obligations
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Department of Commerce
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Grants for Public Works and Economic                        $158,930,000
Development Facilities
Economic Development/Support for Planning                    $31,391,000
Organizations
Economic Development/Technical Assistance                     $9,800,000
Economic Adjustment Assistance                               $45,270,000
Trade Adjustment Assistance                                  $18,987,000
Global Climate Change Mitigation Incentive Fund              $25,000,000
Minority Business Centers (merged the former                 $10,113,693
Minority Business Enterprise Centers and
Minority Business Opportunity Center programs)
Native American Business Enterprise Centers                   $1,351,500
------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Department of Agriculture
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Empowerment Zones                                               $500,000
Woody Biomass Utilization Grant Program                       $5,000,000
1890 Land-Grant Institutions Rural                                    $0
Entrepreneurial Outreach Program/Rural
Business Entrepreneur Development Initiative/
BISNET
Small Business Innovation Research                           $22,000,000
Biomass Research and Development Initiative                           $0
Competitive Grants Program
Value-Added Producer Grants                                  $19,400,000
Agriculture Innovation Center                                         $0
Small Socially-Disadvantaged Producer Grants                  $3,500,000
Intermediary Re-lending                                       $8,500,000
Business and Industry Loans                                  $52,900,000
Rural Business Enterprise Grants                             $38,700,000
Rural Cooperative Development Grants                          $8,300,000
Rural Business Opportunity Grants                             $2,500,000
Rural Microentrepreneur Assistance Program                    $9,000,000
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Department of Housing and Urban Development
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)/                 $2,760,223,970
Entitlement Grants
CDBG/Special Purpose/Insular Areas                            $6,930,000
CDBG/States                                               $1,176,594,747
CDBG/Non-entitlement CDBG Grants in Hawaii                    $5,791,797
CDBG/Brownfields Economic Development                        $17,500,000
Initiative
CDBG/Section 108 Loan Guarantees                              $6,000,000
Section 4 Capacity Building for Affordable                   $50,000,000
Housing and Community Development
Rural Innovation Fund                                        $25,000,000
CDBG Disaster Recovery Grants                               $100,000,000
Indian CDBG                                                  $65,000,000
Hispanic Serving Institutions Assisting                       $6,250,000
Communities
Alaska Native/Native Hawaiian Institutions                    $3,265,000
Assisting Communities
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Small Business Administration
------------------------------------------------------------------------
8(a) Business Development Program                            $56,817,000
7(j) Technical Assistance                                     $3,275,000
Procurement Assistance to Small Businesses                    $3,164,000
Small Business Investment Companies                          $24,262,000
7(a) Loan Program                                           $518,869,000
Surety Bond Guarantee Program                                         $0
SCORE                                                         $7,000,000
Small Business Development Centers                          $112,624,000
504 Loan Program                                             $70,645,000
Women's Business Centers                                     $13,997,000
Veterans' Business Outreach Centers                           $2,500,000
Microloan Program                                            $42,901,000
PRIME                                                         $8,000,000
New Markets Venture Capital Program                                   $0
7(a) Export Loan Guarantees                                           $0
HUBZone                                                       $2,189,000
Small Business Technology Transfer Program                            $0
Small Business Innovation Research Program                            $0
Federal and State Technology Partnership                      $2,000,000
Program
------------------------
Total                                                   $5,561,941,707
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Commerce, HUD, SBA, and USDA.

GAO's Mission
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation, and
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting
its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance
and accountability of the Federal Government for the American people.
GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates Federal programs and
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance
to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding
decisions. GAO's commitment to good government is reflected in its core
values of accountability, integrity, and reliability.
Obtaining Copies of GAO Reports and Testimony
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no
cost is through GAO's website (www.gao.gov). Each weekday afternoon,
GAO posts on its website newly released reports, testimony, and
correspondence. To have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products,
go to www.gao.gov and select ``E-mail Updates.''
Order by Phone
The price of each GAO publication reflects GAO's actual cost of
production and distribution and depends on the number of pages in the
publication and whether the publication is printed in color or black
and white. Pricing and ordering information is posted on GAO's website,
http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm.
Place orders by calling (202) 512-6000, toll free (866) 801-7077,
or TDD (202) 512-2537.
Orders may be paid for using American Express, Discover Card,
MasterCard, Visa, check, or money order. Call for additional
information.
Connect with GAO
Connect with GAO on Facebook (http://www.facebook.com/usgao),
Flickr
(http://www.flickr.com/photos/usgao), Twitter (http://twitter.com/#!/
usgao), and YouTube (http://www.youtube.com/usgao). Subscribe to our
RSS Feeds (http://www.gao.gov/feeds.html) or E-mail Updates (http://
www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php). Listen to our Podcasts (http://
www.gao.gov/podcast/watchdog.html). Visit GAO on the web at
www.gao.gov.
To Report Fraud, Waste, and Abuse in Federal Programs
Contact:

Website: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm
E-mail:
[emailprotected]

Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470
Congressional Relations
Katherine Siggerud, Managing Director,
[emailprotected]
, (202)
512-4400, U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room
7125, Washington, D.C. 20548
Public Affairs
Chuck Young, Managing Director,
[emailprotected]
, (202) 512-4800
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149
Washington, D.C. 20548

The Chairman. Thank you for your testimony.
I have one question. Your testimony indicated most of the
fragmentation found among these programs is concentrated in
programs which have carve-outs for economic or other
eligibility criteria. In your judgment, do those set-asides and
carve-outs lead to a fragmentation of program delivery?
Mr. Shear. You have asked a very good question. And to a
large degree, for the carve-outs, the set-asides can create
certain challenges in delivering programs; yet it involves a
view by the Congress and others toward what types of targeting
is appropriate in programs. So it is one of the challenges in
terms of how programs are structured. So, for example, for
counseling and training programs, some of the programs across
the agencies are more focused on lower-income populations than
some of the others. If you were going to try to combine the
programs, it would be a challenge to have programs under common
administration that would be able to provide those carve-outs.
So yes, the carve-outs can create a challenge in terms of
avoiding fragmentation; but nonetheless, we think there are
opportunities to try to address the fragmentation issues.
The Chairman. Thank you. That is all the questions I have.
I recognize the gentleman from California, the Ranking
Member, Mr. Costa.
Mr. Costa. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Shear, it is my understanding that the GAO, when doing
your evaluation on the potentially duplicative nature of the
Federal economic development programs on the four agencies that
you looked at statutory and regulatory population requirements.
Is that correct?
Mr. Shear. Yes. In our initial work which we reported on a
little over a year ago, our first attempt there was to look at
the design of these 80 programs and there we were focusing very
much on what the programs could fund. So it was our first high-
level look at these programs.
Mr. Costa. Is that a useful tool, do you think, in
preventing overlap?
Mr. Shear. Being here today, I can say that, yes, I think
it was a very effective tool in a sense that we were able to
capture information on how programs were designed to identify
what should be part of the landscape to drill down on. So where
the question was a year ago, how much could be made of what we
found? We viewed it as more of a step to lead to what the
agencies could focus on and what we could focus on going
forward, and that is why we are drilling down in this area. So
if I could take it one step further----
Mr. Costa. I was going to say, so what is your follow-up
going to be?
Mr. Shear. Our follow-up here is that in one thing I am
reporting on today, you notice we use the words overlap and
fragmentation because in terms of the drill-down we have done
among these programs and the information we have collected and
continue to collect and examine is that we have a story that is
largely of overlap rather than duplication. We certainly have a
story of fragmentation where you have various parties and
various agencies undertaking activity that should be
coordinated in a better fashion.
Mr. Costa. So in your final report--again because my time
is limited here----
Mr. Shear. Yes.
Mr. Costa.--are you going to then make recommendations to
the Subcommittee and the full Committee on how we can avoid the
overlapping and duplication in these four agencies?
Mr. Shear. Yes. The biggest part and the drill-down on
rural America and in reaching out to stakeholders in the
economic development process in rural America is to try to get
an idea as far as to what degree there might be duplication in
some of the, for example, loan guarantee programs, some of the
technical assistance programs that Rural Development has versus
SBA and EDA. And so----
Mr. Costa. So you are also looking at----
Mr. Shear.--we are also doing more of a drill-down. We are
looking----
Mr. Costa. Go ahead.
Mr. Shear. I am sorry. We are doing more of a drill-down to
see to what degree----
Mr. Costa. In what timeline are you going to report to----
Mr. Shear. We expect to report at the end of July on that.
Mr. Costa. Of this year?
Mr. Shear. Of this year. What we expect to recommend in
terms of what our expectation of recommendations I will just
list one of them. Under the GPRA Modernization Act, the
agencies are actively involved in crosscutting issues,
including serving small businesses. And so what we are looking
for is informing decisions on strategically how overlap and
fragmentation and how service delivery can be improved by
looking for opportunities for those to--so we are going to be
recommending actions that will better able the Congress and the
agencies to better serve the economic development needs of its
communities.
Mr. Costa. A couple quick questions on your report to us.
Are you going to look at significant differences in the cost of
delivery?
Mr. Shear. Yes. We have collected extensive information
from all four agencies on the cost of delivery. The data
quality varies among the agencies. We continue to ask them for
more refined cost data, so we are really trying to push as far
as we can based on what data the agencies have.
Mr. Costa. You will be able, you think, to make
recommendations on which models work best?
Mr. Shear. We think we will be able to inform decisions. We
are not in the business of picking which programs should be the
winners or losers of what agencies but to provide information
that will inform decisions about how government programs and
economic development programs can be structured to be more
effective.
Among the things we might find is that the data itself that
agencies collect and more importantly how the agencies use that
data to evaluate the effectiveness of their programs, their
mechanisms, and other ways they go about doing their business,
we might make recommendations in the area about how better data
collection and evaluation could lead to better decisions in
program delivery.
Mr. Costa. Well, we will look forward to that report in
July.
And Mr. Chairman, I have no further questions. Thank you
very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
Mr. Scott?
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I would like to follow along that same thought process
if you would, Mr. Chairman. Basically what you are telling us
is that the agencies are not collecting enough data to
determine whether or not the programs that are being funded or
the loans are inefficient or appropriate use of tax dollars, is
that correct?
Mr. Shear. Yes, let me answer in two steps. And we make a
distinction between program metrics that are collected under an
annual basis in what we call evaluations of effectiveness. So I
will use an analogy to counseling and training programs by SBA
where SBA has three major counseling and training programs.
They do have certain metrics on businesses served and certain
metrics about just how many people and how many businesses are
being trained and receive counseling. And that can be useful
within itself. But then what they do is that they conduct
periodic evaluations where they reach out to those who received
counseling and training and they receive information from those
businesses as far as how they valued that counseling and
training, how it has helped them grow their businesses. And
then it collects data on how well the businesses do because
after all, one of the measures of success of how well the
programs do is how well the businesses do after receiving the
counseling and training. So we are looking for more of an
evaluative approach by the agencies as part of managing their
programs.
Mr. Scott. Wouldn't it make sense--I mean every employer
out there that receives and SBA loan or SBA assistance,
certainly the tax ID number of that employer is on the
application with the SBA. Why couldn't you simply look at the
number of jobs created and based on the payroll tax number that
is already being provided?
Mr. Shear. With jobs created, you have brought up a very
important point. Jobs created is one of the metrics that tends
to be used for GPRA purposes. We haven't examined that avenue
to collect data on jobs created. We certainly have looked at a
number of Inspector General reports over time on how agencies
do collect data on jobs created. Part of our issue with jobs
created is it is hard to create a benchmark of what jobs would
have been available by both that particular employer and other
employers in the absence of the SBA assistance. So we are
looking for an approach that looks a little bit more how well
do the businesses do that get the loans?
So, for example, in 2007 we recommended SBA for its 7(a)
Program. It was already collecting a lot of data on its
businesses that get what are called 7(a) loan guarantees, that
they should use that information to try to provide some
evaluative information as far as that, the businesses that
loans are being made to by lenders in the program of whether
those businesses are actually succeeding. So you bring up a
very important point we haven't quite looked at, but we do look
at job metrics as being important to collect, but we are also
looking for something that is more general in terms of what is
the purpose of the program.
Mr. Scott. And Mr. Shear, I appreciate your comments. I
think maybe that is where the breakdown if you will in an
entrepreneur and small business owner who has only been in
Congress for 12 to 13 months like myself is and where maybe
people who have been in the Beltway a lot longer are in that
the number one issue is jobs. Americans want to get back to
work. And if the SBA is going to be there--and I do believe
that the SBA has been a successful government program if you
want to refer to it as that--but if the loan does not create
additional payroll and additional jobs, then the funds probably
should have gone somewhere else where they did create
additional payroll and jobs.
And so I don't understand why it is so hard to get that
metric of the payroll associated with the tax ID number that
got the loan with the SBA backing, because the payroll is going
to be reported according to the tax ID number and the loan is
going to be reported according to the tax ID number. I don't
understand why it is so difficult to look at this tax ID number
there was a million dollars worth of payroll generated before
the loan; 3 years after the loan, total annual payroll now is
$2 million. That seems to me like it would be pretty simple and
help us as the Members evaluate what the most efficient
programs are with putting Americans back to work because that
is our goal is to put them back to work.
Mr. Shear. I think you raise a very important point and
even though we haven't looked at that specific question, I will
certainly bring it up with SBA, have they ever explored this?
but I know from another SBA program that is not included in
this work, we have done a lot of work on their Disaster Loan
Program, and we know that we have been involved a lot in
recommending ways that SBA and IRS can work together in terms
of verifying income and other information by sharing
information for those who apply for disaster loans. So perhaps
that might provide some type of a model for what you are
suggesting.
Mr. Scott. Well, and you are not requiring the entrepreneur
or the business owner to provide any additional documentation?
You are not breaking it down to individual taxpayers, so you
are still protecting their personal identity? You are taking a
tax ID number that the SBA has and looking at the total growth
in wages once the loan was delivered.
Mr. Chairman, I know I have gone over my time. Thank you,
sir.
And thank you, sir, for your testimony.
And I yield back.
Mr. Shear. Thank you.
The Chairman. I have no further questions. I don't believe
Mr. Scott does and nobody else is here so we just want to thank
you for your testimony.
Mr. Shear. Thank you very much.
The Chairman. I have no closing statement to make. Mr.
Costa has already had to go to another committee, and so again
I thank the Members of the Committee and the witnesses for your
testimony. I thank our excellent Republican and Democratic
staffs for their good work that they always do and appreciate
your putting this together.
Under the rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 days to receive additional
material and supplementary written responses from the witnesses
to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Subcommittee on Rural Development,
Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:15 a.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Supplementary Material Submitted by Hon. Dallas P. Tonsager, Under
Secretary for Rural Development, U.S. Department of Agriculture
During the March 21, 2012 hearing entitled, Hearing To Identify
Duplicative Federal Rural Development Programs, requests for
information were made to Hon. Dallas P. Tonsager. The following are
their information submissions for the record.
Insert 1
Mr. Tonsager. We did establish the Memorandum. We are doing
joint trainings between our people that are involved in
business funding and trying to learn from each other regarding
their abilities in business lending. Our program, of course,
goes to very large loans where SBA is somewhat restricted in
size. We advocate with clients regarding use of the SBA loans
so we have our staff trained in how the SBA loans work. And if
it is better suited for them in some cases, then we would
advocate that they would pursue an SBA loan. And we also work
more closely with lenders so we would have a group of business
and industry loan lenders, some 1,800 banks that like to use
our program. We try and coordinate--especially when both SBA
and the B&I Program is in the same financial institution.
Mr. Scott. Do you have the information on the number or the
percentage of businesses that you are involved in the initial
or the startup funding that are in business after 3 years?
Mr. Tonsager. I am sorry. I don't have that with me today but
we will certainly provide it to you.

Between 2002 and 2008, based on readily available data, RBS
identified a total of 3,731 loan guarantees to businesses. Of these
3,731 loan guarantees, almost 99 percent of the businesses receiving
the guaranteed loans were still in operation 3 years after the date of
loan obligation.
RBS identified 203 startup businesses receiving a loan guarantee
under either the B&I Guaranteed loan program or REAP. Of these 203
start-up businesses, 97percent were still in operation 3 years after
the date of loan obligation. (Note: Not all of the guaranteed loan data
identified the date a business was established. Thus, the result on
startups represents a subset of all loan guarantees made to startups.)
RBS does not track date of establishment for its grant programs.
Insert 2
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for being here today. A couple questions. I
understand that Rural Housing Service has been trying to get
some access to the same employment data that HUD uses to verify
tenants' incomes. What benefit would this earned income
verification data provide to RHS and I wonder what is
preventing you from using it?
Mr. Tonsager. I will have to ask my folks what the status of
that proposal. I thought we were getting close if not had
gotten to that point yet. It would help with the evaluation of
loan applications and its time limits of getting the loan
applications done. Having information available would help us
make sure the portfolio performs well and that we are making
loans to eligible applicants as well as making sure that they
get repaid. And I am sorry. I don't know if any of my staff
knows for sure. We will have to report back on the status of
that.

RHS is requesting in the 2013 Budget the authority to be added to
the list of agencies permitted to utilize the Department of Health and
Human Services' National Directory of New Hires Database. In order to
have access to this data, specific authority in law must be granted.
HUD has had this authority for over 10 years. It is the primary income
verification system used by HUD, its public housing authorities, and
multi-family property owners and management agents. Utilization of this
system has substantially reduced instances of improper subsidy payment
errors. This access would provide RHS with the ability to obtain
accurate income and employment information, helping it to better manage
RHS housing programs by ensuring the agency is providing the
appropriate amount of housing subsidy based on the applicant's income.
RHS would use the income matching information to determine multi-family
tenants' eligibility for rental assistance as well as the eligibility
of single family direct loan borrowers' for payment assistance.
In 2010, the White House's Domestic Policy Council created the
interagency Rental Policy Working Group with the Departments of
Treasury, Agriculture, and Housing and Urban Development. As part of
its coordinating efforts, the Rental Policy Working Group has engaged
state, local, individual and private stakeholders to identify
administrative changes that could increase overall programmatic
efficiency and further enhance the ability of communities to create and
preserve affordable housing.
Insert 3
Mr. Hultgren. . . .
GAO and others have proposed consolidation of the Rural
Housing Programs with HUD. I wonder, do you think the rural
areas would see the same attention under HUD's management as
they currently receive?
Mr. Tonsager. I believe that we provide real opportunities to
remote rural citizens. Forgive me for using the term unique for
rural America, but the people in rural America don't make as
much money. And our particular program, I think the guarantee
program especially is well suited to rural communities in that
we don't have a particular down payment requirement. We have
been very successful in repayment to the point where for the
program cost, it doesn't cost the taxpayers any money. There is
cost, of course, with our system of delivery but not with the
fee that we are assessing. We don't have a cost and the
performance of the program has been very good.
So, the uniqueness of the programs for housing addresses the
needs of rural people and how to get that delivery in the far
corners of rural America becomes the challenge for perhaps HUD
and others if it were to be combined.

The President's budget does not support consolidation of RHS
programs with HUD. The Rural Housing Service is the only Federal
program mandated to serve exclusively the housing needs of Americans in
rural areas. Since the 1950s, RHS has recognized the unique economics--
and poverty--of rural America and the need for programs to fill the
housing gap. Over the past 62 years, RHS programs have assisted nearly
3.5 million families with direct loans, guarantees of bank loans, and
grants for home purchase and repair. Yet the need still exists to
improve housing quality and affordability in rural areas.
It is noted that the delivery methods of HUD and RHS programs are
vastly different. RHS programs are provided to recipients (either
individuals or approved lenders) through a network of more than 400
offices where RD staff with local knowledge and expertise work one-on-
one with the borrower to learn and meet their individual housing needs,
whether it be purchase, repair or rental.
HUD programs are generally provided through third parties--
nonprofits or contractors. These third party providers may not have the
same investment or expertise in these rural communities, are generally
not as attuned to local needs, and could prove more expensive in
delivering our housing programs to low income families who still need
our assistance.
Insert 4
Mr. Hultgren. If it were combined, I mean is there any
expectation or what is the expectation of the amount of savings
as you combine the programs as far as salaries being saved,
expenses for the agency? . . .

We have not completed any in-depth study comparing the HUD and USDA
housing programs or the advantages and disadvantages, financial and
otherwise, of any plan to consolidate these programs. It is unlikely
that there would be big savings, given that USDA has a large field
office presence to offer the direct loans, which HUD doesn't have and
would presumably need to add. In addition, the Rural Development
mission area has three services: RHS, RBS and RUS. Taking away some
programs from one of the services does not remove the need for the
infrastructure expenses for the remainder of RD that stays within USDA.
Insert 5
Mr. Hultgren. . . . And then I wondered if there is a
savings, how USDA would seek to reallocate those resources if
there was a consolidation or savings of administrative costs?
Mr. Tonsager. I have not seen any particular identification
of what those savings might be. I would say for the guarantee
program particularly the amount of resources is pretty modest.
We are working with private institutions. The financers are
doing the great bulk of the work. Much of our work is
monitoring of those loans in that case. The direct program
costs more because it is more of a hands-on approach with
individual people and helping them to get good credit. So I am
sorry; I just don't have the information.

We have not completed any in-depth study comparing the HUD and USDA
housing programs nor the advantages and disadvantages, financial and
otherwise, of any plan to consolidate these programs. But our initial
thoughts on the issue are that the savings would be minimal at best.
______

Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. Dallas P. Tonsager, Under Secretary for Rural
Development, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Questions Submitted By Hon. Henry Cuellar, a Representative in Congress
from Texas
Question 1. What effect have recent budget cuts had on Rural
Development agency operations nationwide?
Answer. The recent budget reductions pose challenges, both in terms
of delivering programs and managing our portfolio. Staff reductions, to
a certain extent, challenge RD's ability to deliver some programs in a
timely manner and the agency will have higher training costs as
remaining staff take on new and different responsibilities. Rural
Development's administrative resources are contracting, while its
program portfolio is expanding, putting tremendous strain on the
resources available to manage the portfolio. RD's administrative budget
has decreased by $61 million since Fiscal Year (FY) 2010. Staff levels
have fallen by 1,000 since 2007, with 500 of that total occurring this
FY 2012. RD's portfolio exceeds $165 billion and continues to grow, and
the appropriated program level for FY 2012 is $38.9 billion. Meanwhile,
we make portfolio and risk management top priorities as we strive to
ensure the integrity of RD programs.
To address these challenges, RD agencies are making adjustments and
developing systematic approaches in their business management. For
example, the Rural Business Service (RBS) is reorganizing its staff to
best meet the demands of each program. At the state level, RBS is
providing training across programs to the field support staff,
including continued training of 17 new or acting Business Program
Directors. RBS continues to work with our network of 47 State Offices
and their Business Program Directors and field staff to ensure
successful delivery of all our programs. RBS just recently completed
training on the energy programs across the country. In addition, RD
continues to work with all of our partners, including our network of
over 1,700 community banks participating in the Business and Industry
guaranteed loan program and the cooperative organizations associated
with our cooperative programs, leveraging our available resources to
deliver RD business programs successfully.
The Rural Housing Service (RHS) is exploring a number of ways to
achieve savings and still meet the housing needs in rural America. RHS
has developed a new business model for delivery of the Section 502
Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program (SFHGLP). The centralized
structure model allows states to successfully and consistently deliver
the program with a core group of specialists, technicians, and
assistants. States are able to focus their time and knowledge
specifically on the SFHGLP and offer more efficient and timely loan
review and approval, consistent loan decisions, and increased customer
satisfaction.
Similarly, the Single Family Housing (SFH) Direct Loan Program is
promulgating a rule to create a formal process for designating
qualified loan application packagers as agency-certified. The proposed
rule will streamline application processing of SFH direct loan
applications, reduce the burden placed on the smaller RHS staff and
ensure that the program is successfully delivered to eligible
participants through certified packagers.
The Rural Utilities Service (RUS) has also expanded coordination of
the broadband buildout under the Recovery Act to our State Offices in
order to assist with program delivery. Rural Utilities Service is also
working more closely with other Federal agencies to better coordinate
delivery of similar programs and, where possible, use a regional
approach to leverage economies of scale in infrastructure funding.
RD is also engaged in a number of strategies to ensure that
taxpayer dollars are used in the most strategic way to make the biggest
difference. For example, several RD programs are supporting regional
and community economic strategies that leverage resources and broaden
the scope of project activity. These efforts are often inclusive of
communities hardest hit by economic downturns or persistent poverty
conditions. RD has also been active in supporting the Stronger
Economies Together (SET) initiative which supports the development of
regional economic solutions. These initiatives encourage and engage
direct community involvement as well as multi-county and multi-state
collaboration. Promoting a more regional or collaborative deployment of
resources allows RD to target or concentrate resources in a particular
area, which can in turn bring economic relief to all communities within
the project area.

Question 1a. What about specifically in Texas?
Answer. While the reduction in staff throughout Texas has resulted
in some temporary delays in program delivery, RD has been working there
to implement many of the initiatives described above as part of its
national strategy for tackling the challenges associated with the
recent budget cuts.
Allocations of RD program funds to states are based on formulas
using decennial Census data (see answer to Question 2. below);
therefore, the reduction impact in program levels on Texas is same, in
terms of percentage of change, as the national changes noted above.
The following table shows the program dollar investments in Texas
between FY 2009 and FY 2011:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Program                 2009           2010           2011
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Single Family Housing     $34,100,489    $75,123,994    $59,942,101
Direct
Single Family Housing    $731,761,082   $892,012,446   $826,636,595
Guaranteed
Rural Rental Housing        $749,799             $0       $287,128
Rental Assistance     $38,670,524    $40,038,544    $47,267,993
Community Facilities Direct    $8,529,137    $40,311,837    $58,928,708
Community Facilities     $10,802,500    $17,400,000     $5,605,000
Guaranteed
Community Facilities Grants    $6,117,682     $6,493,968     $1,047,990
Water and Waste Disposal     $56,068,030   $103,326,500    $44,382,000
Direct
Water and Waste Disposal     $35,563,168    $23,389,623    $28,372,415
Grants
Business and Industry     $50,599,965   $134,259,920    $43,000,281
Guaranteed
Rural Business Enterprise      $3,042,310     $1,739,000     $1,402,000
Grants
Intermediary Relending      $1,500,000       $750,000       $998,000
Program
Multi-family Housing      $8,636,900     $4,960,000     $1,500,000
Guaranteed
Home Repair Loans $3,364,569     $3,857,483     $3,554,827
Grants
Farm Labor $5,222,085ogram$3,000,000    $10,781,390
Electric    $262,066,000   $545,395,000   $376,602,000
Telecom     $11,185,641   $241,517,260    $26,285,759
Value-Added Program Grants             $0       $662,500             $0
Renewable Energy Loans an$413,243     $1,767,149    $19,460,104
Grants
Self Help Program        $293,000       $607,945       $619,445
--------------------------------------------
Totals...................  $1,268,686,12  $2,136,613,16  $1,556,673,73
4              8              7
------------------------------------------------------------------------

We anticipate that the FY 2012 budget and requested amounts for FY
2013 will be sufficient to fund qualified applications consistent with
other states. Electric and Telecommunications funds are not allocated
by state, so we cannot currently determine the impact program spending
might have on Texas projects.

Question 1b. Has a shortage of operational or administrative costs
limited the effectiveness and availability of programs to those wishing
to apply?
Answer. For most RD programs, the shortage of operational and
administrative costs has challenged delivery, but RD has worked to
ensure the effectiveness and availability of our programs to
applicants. There are three programs, however, that have been affected:

The Rural Microentreprenuer Assistance Program (RMAP).
Section 726 of the Consolidated and Further Continuing
Appropriations Act of 2012 limited RD salaries and expenses
from utilizing salary and expense appropriations to carry out
the RMAP program. This has resulted in RBS being unable to
accept any applications in FY 2012 for this program.

Rural Energy for America Program (REAP). Section 726 of The
Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act of 2012
limited RD salaries and expenses for delivering REAP such that
RBS can only fund projects totaling $22 million out of the
mandatory $70 million provided in the 2008 Farm Bill for the
program. This reduction in available administrative funds will
limit the number of projects funded.

Bioenergy Program for Advanced Biofuels (9005). Section 726
of the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act
of 2012 limited RD salaries and expenses for delivering the
9005 program such that RBS can only can only make payments
totaling $65 million out of the mandatory $105 million funding
provided in the 2008 Farm Bill. This reduction will limit the
support to advanced biofuel producers.

Question 2. How are state allocations of rural development
determined?
Answer. Rural Business Service

State allocations are made on an annual basis and calculated as
program level amounts, not by budget authority. State allocations are
made for the following programs:

Business and Industry Guaranteed Loans

Rural Energy for America

Rural Business Enterprise Grants

Intermediary Relending Program

The same basic formula criteria, data source, and weight are used
for each of these four programs in determining state allocations. For
FY 2012, the 2000 Census data was used.
The basic formula takes a number of criteria that reflect the
funding needs for a particular program and through a normalization and
weighting process for each of the criteria calculates the basic state
factor (SF). The criteria used in the basic formula are:

State's percentage of national rural population

State's percentage of national rural population with incomes
below the poverty level

State's percentage of national nonmetropolitan unemployment

Each of the three criteria is assigned a specific weight according
to its relevance in determining need. The percentage representing each
criterion is multiplied by the weight factor and summed to arrive at a
state factor (SF). The SF cannot exceed 0.05.

SF = (State's percentage of national rural population  0.5) + (State's
percentage of national rural population with incomes below
the poverty level  0.25) + (State's percentage of national
nonmetropolitan unemployment  0.25)

State's percentage of national nonmetropolitan unemployment

The amount allocated to a state for a program is calculated by
multiplying the state's State Factor by the amount available for
allocation for that program less the sum of the amount held in reserve
by the National Office plus the total base and administrative
allocation for that program:

SF  (Amount available for allocation ^ (National Office Reserve +
total base and administrative allocations))

Each program identifies a ``base allocation.'' The ``base
allocation'' is the minimum amount that will be allocated to the state.
If the allocation formula results in an amount less than a program's
base allocation, RBS will allocate that state the base allocation. For
example, in FY 2012, the base allocation for the Business and Industry
Guaranteed Loan program is $5 million. If the formula calculated an
allocation of $3.5 million for State A, the Agency would allocate $5
million to State A. For FY 2012, the base allocations for the four
programs are:

Business and Industry Guaranteed Loans--$5 million

Rural Energy for America--$50,000 for loan and grant
allocations; $20,000 for grant allocations of in the amount of
$20,000 or less

Rural Business Enterprise Grants--$72,000

Intermediary Relending Program--$150,000

Rural Housing Service

The allocations are need based per state. For instance, the
criteria for the Section 502 Direct loan program include: State's
percentage of the national number of rural occupied substandard units
(25% weight); state's percentage of national rural population (10%);
State's percentage of the national rural population in places of less
than 2,500 population (15%); State's percentage of the national rural
households between 50 and 80 percent of median income (30%); and,
State's percentage of the national number of rural households below 50
percent of area median income (20%).
We use the decennial Census for our allocation formulas. The
allocation formulas for Fiscal Year 2012 were based on the 2000 Census
data. While the allocation formulas for the other SFH programs vary,
all are based on the size and need and the decennial Census.
Multi-Family Housing loan and grant funds are not usually allocated
by state. Multi-Family Housing publishes annual notices soliciting
applications from the national office, for loans in its Section 515
direct and Section 538 guaranteed loan programs, and grants and loans
in its Section 514/516 Farm Labor Housing and Preservation and
Revitalization programs. Funding awards are made on a case-by-case
basis, based on the applications' scores and feasibility of the
transactions involving the loans or grants (as determined by Rural
Housing's underwriting of the loan). Housing Preservation Grants are
allocated to states based on a formula factor published by RHS.
Community Facilities (CF) Direct and Guaranteed loan funds are
allocated to states based on a formula that contains the following
three criteria and weights: (1) State's percentage of national rural
population (50%), (2) State's percentage of national rural population
with incomes below the poverty level (25%), and (3) State's percentage
of national nonmetropolitan unemployment (25%). CF Grant funds are
allocated to states based on a formula that contains the following two
criteria and weights: (1) State's percentage of national rural
population (50%), and (2) State's percentage of national rural
population with incomes below the poverty level (50%). The National
Office generally retains a reserve of 10 percent of the appropriated
amounts for CF to fund high priority projects when a state has
insufficient funds.

Rural Utilities Service

In RUS Water and Waste Programs, funds are allocated to states
based on a formula derived by guidance in the statute and codified in
our regulations. The formula is based upon the latest decennial Census
data for rural population, rural poverty and rural unemployment. The
weighting of the criteria is established in RUS 1780 regulation, which
is 50 percent for rural population and 25 percent each for rural
poverty and rural unemployment.
Electric and Telecommunications funds are not allocated by state.

Question 2a. Do these allocations take into account operational
costs?
Answer. RD does not take into account operational costs when making
state allocations.

Question 2b. Or are allocations need based, or based on population
or land area?
Answer. Allocations are generally based on the basic parameters:
rural population, poverty and unemployment. Thus, rural population is
directly accounted for in the allocation process. To the extent
``need'' is reflected by a state's poverty and unemployment rates, then
the allocation takes into account ``need.''
Land area is not included in the allocation process.

Question 3. Are agencies, such as yours, communicating with other
agencies doing similar work in similar areas?
Answer. USDA works closely with other agencies such as SBA and HUD
to better coordinate overall policy and leverage opportunities for our
customers. In particular, the White House Rural Council builds on other
interagency relationships to increase coordination and leveraging.
Through collaboration, USDA Rural Development is able to utilize its
unique field office structure, which allows the Federal Government to
maintain a local presence in the rural communities we serve. Other
Federal partners do not have a local presence in these communities that
can assist in the development and growth of the community, and thus
USDA can facilitate those agencies' ability to reach local communities
directly.

Question 3a. If not, is there a reason for a lack of information
sharing?
Answer. Not applicable.

Question 3b. If so, can you provide examples of these partnerships?
Answer. Examples are provided below.

USDA and the Small Business Administration (SBA) are working
together to bring private equity and venture capital investors
together with start-up rural businesses, especially at the
state and local level where they frequently collaborate to
conduct outreach and training events. Through the White House
Rural Council, SBA and RBS partnered to host a series of six
roundtable discussions on increasing private investment capital
for rural small businesses in FYs 2011-2012. This effort
includes partners from the financial industry, Farm Credit
Administration, and state agencies. The two agencies also
established a working group to create consistent and
streamlined application processes.

USDA and SBA also meet regularly to discuss new partnership
opportunities, including joint lending for projects. Each
agency's unique lending parameters create leverage
opportunities and the impact of this leveraging increases
access to capital for rural businesses. For example, a rural
business can use a Business and Industry (B&I) loan guarantee
for the purchase of real estate and also use an SBA guarantee
for working capital or equipment. The impact of this leveraging
for rural businesses is increased access to capital.

A formal Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) describes the cooperation between
RHS and HUD on cross-checking disaster assistance recipients.

The Federal Interagency Partnership for Colonias, farm
workers and rural communities connects Federal, state, and
local government agencies and community organizations, such as
legal aid groups, to discuss and solve legal problems that
impact Colonias and migrant farmworker communities. On June 12,
2012, USDA, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), and the U.S. Department of the Treasury's
Community Development Financial Institutions Fund (CDFI Fund)
announced a joint ``Border Community Capital Initiative''
(Border Initiative), a collaboration designed to increase
access to capital in the U.S./Mexico border region which
includes some of the poorest communities in the country. The
three agencies signed a Memorandum of Understanding that will
offer up to $200,000 to nonprofit and/or tribal financial
institutions serving colonias for direct investment and
technical assistance focusing on affordable housing, small
businesses, and community facilities.

Single Family Housing Guaranteed Loan Program (SFHGLP)
partners with the Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) in evaluating applications via an automated underwriting
system. Automated underwriting systems are an efficient,
consistent, objective and accurate method of mortgage
underwriting compared with traditional manual methods. RHS's
automated underwriting system is known as the Guaranteed
Underwriting System (GUS) and uses a modified version of HUD's
scorecard to measure an applicant's ability to repay the
mortgage debt as agreed. Collaboration between Rural
Development and HUD has led to recent changes in the mortgage
scoring utilized by the Agency.

RD collaboration with the Department of Homeland Security/
Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Federal
Communications Commission to improve access to emergency
communication systems and disseminate critical information to
rural communities. The Community Facilities Direct and
Guaranteed Loan and Grant programs can support public safety
licensees by funding necessary equipment and upgrades. These
improvements will help these licensees in meeting the Federal
Communications Commission's mandatory narrow banding deadline
of January 1, 2013.

MOU between USDA and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
on improving sustainability of rural water and waste systems.
Since the MOU has been in effect, both agencies have worked
together and with rural stakeholders to: encourage partnering
of funding across the agencies; develop sustainability
assessment tools, promote the hiring of Veterans by rural water
and waste systems (in partnership with the Veterans
Association), conduct webinars to promote system partnerships
in rural areas (two so far--Ohio and Kentucky), and conduct
rural water and waste sustainability workshops. (March 13 in
Michigan; May 9 in California, one other by the end of the FY
2012).

USDA is a key member of the Interagency Infrastructure Task
Force (ITF), chaired by EPA and including USDA, HUD, Indian
Health Service and Department of Interior, that is working to
improve access and sustainability in Native American and
Alaskan Native Communities. The current focus of the task force
is on sustainable tribal utilities. Recent activities include
hosting a series of calls featuring presentation from Tribal
Utilities on successful efforts and the unique challenges of
providing and sustaining water and waste utilities in tribal
communities.

RD executed a MOU with the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) to improve collaboration and to strengthen
healthcare infrastructure in rural America. To help meet the
health care needs of rural America, USDA RD and HHS's Office of
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology and
Health Resources and Services Administration are partnering to
leverage resources to increase the availability of capital for
healthcare facilities and health information technology, with
the goal of improving the accessibility and quality of medical
services in rural communities.

RD coordinates with the Department of Energy on a variety of
smart grid, energy efficiency and renewable energy initiatives,
and with the EPA on emissions regulations. RD has also been
active in interagency policy development related to broadband
deployment, public safety communications and critical
infrastructure with the Commerce Department's National
Telecommunications Information Administration.

USDA is coordinating with other Federal and state agencies
to improve the water and waste disposal infrastructure
application process across funding agencies. To that end, USDA
is chairing a working group that is seeking to standardize a
key component of the application process (the Preliminary
Engineering Report) with the goal of adoption by Federal and
state funders. USDA is also leading a similar effort through
the ITF that would be implemented by all Federal funders of
tribal water and waste infrastructure.

Interaction continuously occurs at our 47 State Offices with groups
such as state housing finance agencies, state regulators and support
groups. Our most effective interaction with outside groups occurs at
the local office level. Staff in each of 400+ offices is embedded in
rural communities and are aware of the assistance available locally.
They work closely with local governments, community action agencies,
church and business groups, lenders and others to achieve the mission
of our programs.

Question 4. Have you reviewed the GAO report how agencies working
in rural water areas on the border are doing duplicative work (Rural
Water Infrastructure--Improved Coordination and Funding Processes Could
Enhance Federal Efforts to Meet Needs in the U.S.-Mexico Border Region)
and are you implementing any of the recommendations the report
recommends, or would need congressional authorization to move forward?
Answer. RD is proud of the assistance we have provided to the
Colonias regions for development of water and waste disposal
infrastructure projects. Since 2007, more than $130.4 million has been
invested by Rural Development in water and waste infrastructure
projects to serve Colonias areas, benefiting approximately 143,000
individuals.
On March 9, 2012, we proposed modifications to RUS regulations that
would improve targeting of funds provided by Congress for the Colonias
to those areas with the least access to water and waste infrastructure.
The comment period closed on May 8, 2012, and a final regulation will
follow later this summer.
We coordinate at the state and Federal levels with other funding
agencies on Colonias projects and continue to strengthen our
relationships to ensure that we are working together to better serve
the Colonias. As part of our plan for improving delivery to the
Colonias, we had planned to initiate and lead a comprehensive outreach
effort which would include USDA's Federal, state and local partners and
stakeholders.
Questions Submitted By Hon. Peter Welch, a Representative in Congress
from Vermont
Question 1. The Value-Added Producer Grant Program, or VAPG,
provides competitive grants to our nation's agricultural producers to
establish value-added, and producer-owned, enterprises. Grant funds can
be used for one of two purposes. First, grants are awarded for
developing business plans and feasibility studies. In other words, the
program works to ensure that the businesses our producers are creating
will be viable and sustainable in the long-term, which is smart.
Second, grants are awarded for working capital to operate these value-
added businesses. In these cases, applicants must show they've done
their homework and that they have the business plan and feasibility
study in place.
Answer. Correct. That is how the Value-Added Grant Program is
delivered.

Question 2. VAPG is a popular and unique program, because it helps
farmers increase their share of the food dollar and improve farm
incomes, and because it helps create jobs in farming communities.
What's more, there's nothing else like it. It's the only competitive
grants program for agricultural producers to add value to their
products and thus to add value to our economy. Many of my colleagues on
the committee have constituents that received grants earlier this year.
Answer. Yes. That is how the program works

Question 3. Can you speak to the uniqueness and success of VAPG in
contributing to rural economic development and job creation?
Answer. The Value-Added Producer Grant (VAPG) program is unique in
that it provides the funding that allows independent agricultural
commodity producers, agricultural producer groups, farmer and rancher
cooperatives, and majority controlled producer-based business ventures
to participate in the economic returns found in the value-added
markets. Grants assist awardees in conducting feasibility studies to
develop business plans and strategies for creating marketing
opportunities and to provide capital to establish alliances or business
ventures that enable producers to better compete in domestic and
international markets. In addition to promoting creative, innovative
and resourceful businesses, VAPG funds facilitate greater participation
in emerging and new markets for value-added products and allow
producers to capture a larger share of the marketing margin--
essentially converting them from commodity producers to value-added
business entrepreneurs.
The VAPG program has had positive impacts for both rural economic
development and agricultural producers in that it has provided for the
resources needed to expand market share and encourage producers to
invest in ideas that would lead to value-added enterprises. This
investment has resulted in more of the marketing margin accruing to
producers in both existing and new value-added businesses. Examples of
projects to illustrate the success of VAPG are:

MOO-ville Creamery. In 2005, MOO-Ville creamery in
Nashville, MI, was in the process of installing a dairy
processing plant, but needed help with funding the operations.
It received a VAPG that provided critical working capital to
allow it to purchase inventory, pay personnel expenses, provide
training to employees and buy a lighted sign. The VAPG award
allowed the operation to continue, and they now operate a
retail store on property where they sell milk, ice cream and
cheese made from milk from their dairy operation. It also sells
to restaurants, coffee shops and retail stores.

San Miguel Produce. Located in Oxnard, California, San
Miguel Produce is an independent producer of organic and
conventional cooking greens. In 2009, it received a $299,874
VAPG working capital grant for socially disadvantaged farmers
and ranchers. With this grant, San Miguel Produce has been able
to expand markets for their ``Cut 'n Clean Green'' products and
increase revenues over 500 percent.

The Country Pumpkin. The owner of the Country Pumpkin in
Sutton, Nebraska, started raising pumpkins at the age of 13 as
part of his SAE (Supervised Agricultural Experience) project
for FFA. The pumpkins were sold off a trailer that was parked
at the end of their driveway. Today the Country Pumpkin has
grown to offer more than 50 varieties of pumpkins, squash,
gourds, and ornamental corn including many heirloom varieties.
A few years ago, the owner recognized the need to extend the
September and October pumpkin market to something that could be
sold year round. In 2009, the owner applied for an $86,150 VAPG
planning grant to look into products that could be made from
pumpkins. The feasibility study was completed by the Food
Processing Center at the University of Nebraska and showed that
there was a market for the pumpkin puree and identified several
businesses that were interested in buying the fresh, locally
grown pumpkin puree.

Champlain Orchards. In 2009, Champlain Orchards in Shoreham,
Vermont received a $146,959 VAPG working capital grant to
expand value-added processing and marketing of apples, peaches,
small fruit and vegetables grown on the farm. The young owners,
who now operate the 100 year old family-owned farm, strive to
preserve the best traditions of Vermont apple farming, while
tapping the best of new farming advances. Expanding their
processing and marketing will help increase sales of value-
added products by $1 million over a three year period. In the
early months after receiving the award, there was an increase
in gross income of 19 percent and an increase in cider sales of
8 percent as a result of this VAPG.

Question 3a. Can you also speak the demand for this program to help
inform strengthened funding for the program in the new farm bill?
Answer. Since the program was established in 2001, we have been
able to make awards to about 33 percent of the producers applying to
the program and to fund about 30 percent of the funds being sought.
Specifically, since 2001, RD has received 5,256 applications seeking
approximately $809 million and has been able to make 1,730 awards for
over $241 million. Since 2009, Rural Development has received 1,063
applications requesting approximately $136.5 million. For this 3 year
time period, RD has funded 495 projects totaling $62.7 million.
Since 2001, the VAPG program has assisted over 1,700 individual
producers, cooperatives, and other rural entrepreneurs establish value-
added agriculture businesses and increase their economic well being
across rural America. While the demand for funding has historically
exceeded supply, awards from this nationally competitive program have
reached each of the 50 states and Puerto Rico during this same time
period.


