- HARMONIZING GLOBAL DERIVATIVES REFORM: IMPACT ON U.S. COMPETITIVENESS AND MARKET STABILITY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HARMONIZING GLOBAL DERIVATIVES
REFORM: IMPACT ON U.S. COMPETITIVENESS
AND MARKET STABILITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GENERAL FARM COMMODITIES
AND RISK MANAGEMENT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-17

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
67-064                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     Northern Mariana Islands
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
------

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk Management

K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas, Chairman

STEVE KING, Iowa                     LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa, Ranking
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              Minority Member
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      PETER WELCH, Vermont
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois

Matt Schertz, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Boswell, Hon. Leonard L., a Representative in Congress from Iowa,
opening statement..............................................     4
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Conaway, Hon. K. Michael, a Representative in Congress from
Texas, opening statement.......................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Lucas, Hon. Frank D., a Representative in Congress from Oklahoma,
opening statement..............................................    20
Submitted letter.............................................   109
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     6
Prepared statement...........................................     8

Witnesses

Sommers, Hon. Jill E., Commissioner, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Washington, D.C....................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Chilton, Hon. Bart, Commissioner, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Washington, D.C....................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Submitted letter.............................................   112
Callahan, Thomas F., Executive Vice President and Chief Executive
Officer, NYSE Liffe U.S., LLC, New York, NY; on behalf of NYSE
Euronext.......................................................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Damgard, John M., President, Futures Industry Association,
Washington, D.C................................................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    43
Deas, Jr., Thomas C., Vice President and Treasurer, FMC
Corporation; President, National Association of Corporate
Treasurers, Philadelphia, PA...................................    47
Prepared statement...........................................    49
Miller, Sarah A. ``Sally'', Chief Executive Officer, Institute of
International Bankers, New York, NY............................    52
Prepared statement...........................................    53
O'Connor, Stephen, Chairman, International Swaps and Derivatives
Association; Managing Director, Morgan Stanley, New York, NY...    77
Prepared statement...........................................    80
Thompson, Larry E., Managing Director and General Counsel, The
Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, New York, NY..........    91
Prepared statement...........................................    92

HARMONIZING GLOBAL DERIVATIVES
REFORM: IMPACT ON U.S. COMPETITIVENESS
AND MARKET STABILITY

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk
Management,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. K.
Michael Conaway [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Conaway, Neugebauer,
Schmidt, Austin Scott of Georgia, Crawford, Huelskamp,
Hultgren, Hartzler, Schilling, Lucas (ex officio), Boswell,
McIntyre, Kissell, McGovern, David Scott of Georgia, Courtney,
Welch, and Peterson (ex officio).
Staff present: Tamara Hinton, John Konya, Kevin Kramp, Ryan
McKee, Matt Schertz, Debbie Smith, Heather Vaughan, Liz
Friedlander, Clark Ogilvie, and Jamie Mitchell.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM TEXAS

The Chairman. Again, thanks for everybody being here. Today
we hold our fifth hearing to examine the implementation of the
derivatives provisions within the Dodd-Frank Act. In previous
hearings, many witnesses touched on international efforts to
adopt derivatives regulatory reform and the impact such changes
and regulation will have for the competitiveness of the U.S.
and the stability of global financial markets.
In this morning's hearing we will explore the critical
element to implementation: international reform and the
importance of global coordination. Among many lessons, the
financial crisis served as a severe reminder that instability
can spread quickly through a global financial system.
Efforts to improve regulation of financial markets must be
both cooperative and coordinated among nations. Assuring a
coordinated and international regulatory approach is important
to Members on both sides of the aisle and to stakeholders
regardless of their size or role in the marketplace. Further
ensuring we do not inadvertently place our own domestic
financial system at a competitive disadvantage due to
unnecessary cost and regulatory burdens should be a goal we
must not lose sight of. Following the G20 commitment to adopt
certain OTC derivatives reforms by the end of 2012, countries
around the world began to craft their own proposals for
derivatives reform. Both in timing and scope, the U.S. is far
ahead of other nations in implementing these reforms.
Our position as we move first represents significant
coordination challenges at home and abroad. By acting well
ahead of other nations, we needlessly risk creating serious
disadvantage to our own markets by failing to understand and
prepare for the substance of international proposals that are
far behind us.
Today it is my hope that we can explore certain critical
issues for international harmonization. First, the impact of
timing on the ability for the U.S. to coordinate with foreign
regulators. As nations move at different speeds and with
staggered effective dates, how will this impact coordination
and the competitiveness of U.S. firms and markets?
Second, the impact on competitiveness of U.S. businesses.
An overly narrow or limited approach to end-users exemption by
U.S. regulators will increase costs and the reduce the ability
of businesses across the country to manage risk. The question
is how will a more flexible approach to the end-user exemption
in the EU or elsewhere impact the competitive position of U.S.
businesses vis-a-vis their international competitors.
Third, the implications for global coordination of
inconsistent proposals among U.S. regulatory authorities.
Consistency among proposals should begin first at home. The
U.S. regulatory agencies to date have not demonstrated a high
degree of coordination. The question is how will these
inconsistencies among our domestic agencies' proposals impact
the ability for the U.S. to coordinate with foreign regulators.
Fourth, the existing or potential differences between the
U.S. and foreign proposals that will create opportunities for
regulatory arbitrage. Market activity will invariably flow to
geographical and financial sectors where the regulatory burden
is lowest. Significant differences in regulatory proposals will
lead to arbitrage and they will ultimately undermine the very
market stability and transparencies these reforms were intended
to promote. Where is the risk of arbitrage the greatest and are
the U.S. regulatory--and what are the U.S. regulatory agencies
doing to avoid divergence?
And finally, the reach of the Dodd-Frank in the U.S. into
non-U.S. activities of global market participants. Just as
markets are global, so are market participants. U.S. financial
regulators have a history of recognizing and deferring to
foreign regulatory regimes when registered entities engage in
activities outside the U.S. Yet to date, significant
uncertainty remains around the implication of Dodd-Frank
internationally and recent proposals indicate that our
regulatory agencies intend to take a different approach that is
contrary to Congressional intent. The question is what will be
the consequences of extraterritorial application of Dodd-Frank
particularly for the competitiveness and viability of U.S.
firms. At the end of the day, that should--today's hearing is
about American competitiveness and ensuring U.S. businesses are
not put at disadvantage that will inhibit their ability to
create jobs and grow the economy. Without any shortage of
issues to discuss, I look forward to hearing from our--today's
witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Conaway follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. K. Michael Conaway, a Representative in
Congress from Texas

Today, we hold our fifth hearing to examine the implementation of
the derivatives provisions within the Dodd-Frank Act. In previous
hearings, many witnesses touched on international efforts to adopt
derivatives regulatory reform, and the impact such changes in
regulation will have for the competitiveness of the U.S. and the
stability of global financial markets. In this morning's hearing we
will explore this critical element to implementation--international
reform and the importance of global coordination.
Among many lessons, the financial crisis served as a severe
reminder that instability can spread quickly through a global financial
system and efforts to improve regulation of financial markets must be
both cooperative and coordinated among nations. Ensuring a coordinated,
international regulatory approach is important to Members on both sides
of the aisle and to stakeholders regardless of size or role in the
marketplace. Further, ensuring we do not inadvertently place our own
domestic financial system at a competitive disadvantage due to
unnecessary costs and regulatory burdens should be a goal we mustn't
lose sight of.
Following the G20 commitment to adopt certain OTC derivatives
reforms by the end of 2012, countries around the world began to craft
their own proposals for derivatives reform. Both in timing and scope,
the U.S. is far ahead of other nations in implementing these reforms.
Our position as first-mover presents significant coordination
challenges at home and abroad. By acting well ahead of other nations we
needlessly risk creating serious disadvantages to our own markets by
failing to understand and prepare for the substance of international
proposals that are far behind us.
Today, it is my hope that we can explore some critical issues for
international harmonization:

The impact of timing on the ability for the U.S. to
coordinate with foreign regulators. As nations move at
different speeds and with staggered effective dates, how will
this impact coordination and the competitiveness of U.S. firms
and markets?

The impact on the competitiveness of American businesses. An
overly. narrow or limited approach to the end-user exemption by
U.S. regulators will increase costs and reduce the ability of
businesses across the country to manage risk. How would a more
flexible approach to the end-user exemption in the EU or
elsewhere impact the competitive position of U.S. businesses
vis-a-vis their international competitors?

The implications for global coordination of inconsistent
proposals among U.S. regulatory agencies. Consistency among
proposals should first begin at home. The U.S. regulatory
agencies to date have not demonstrated a high degree of
coordination. How will inconsistencies among our domestic
agencies' proposals impact the ability for the U.S. to
coordinate with foreign regulators?

Existing or potential differences between the U.S. and
foreign proposals that will create opportunities for regulatory
arbitrage. Market activity will inevitably flow to geographical
and financial sectors where the regulatory burden is lowest.
Significant differences in regulatory proposals will lead to
arbitrage and may well ultimately undermine the very market
stability and transparency these reforms were intended to
promote. Where is the risk of arbitrage greatest, and are the
U.S. regulatory agencies doing enough to avoid divergence?

The reach of Dodd-Frank into non-U.S. activities of global
market participants. Just as markets are global, so are market
participants. U.S. financial regulators have a history of
recognizing and deferring to foreign regulatory regimes when
registered entities engage in activities outside the U.S. Yet
to date, significant uncertainty remains around the application
of Dodd-Frank internationally, and recent proposals indicate
our regulatory agencies intend to take a different approach
that is contrary to Congressional intent. What would be the
consequences of extraterritorial application of Dodd-Frank,
particularly for the competitiveness and viability of U.S.
firms?

At the end of the day, today's hearing is about American
competitiveness, and ensuring U.S. businesses are not put at a
disadvantage that will inhibit their ability to create jobs and grow
the economy.
Without any shortage of issues to discuss, I look forward to
hearing from today's witnesses.

The Chairman. Ranking Member Mr. Boswell, do you have a
comment?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. LEONARD L. BOSWELL, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM IOWA

Mr. Boswell. Well, I do, and I want to thank you again, Mr.
Chairman, for staying on the course to look at this. We have a
lot of responsibility in ag and you have a major one with this
Subcommittee, no question about it. And I have learned a lot. I
want to say a couple comments, but I want to say to our
witnesses, both of you, I don't know you personally, but I know
something about your history.
I admire what you do. It is probably thankless. You both
have to vote. You both have to participate and so I just
appreciate you coming here and giving us the all sides, and
what you think. Calling on your experience and all those things
is extremely important to this country because, just for
example, and I will say something in my comments here in a
second, I have learned a lot.
I farm corn, soybean, cattle, hogs, that is kind of what I
know about--the Chairman, the Ranking Member of the full
Committee, and I. But I have learned a lot, for example, from
Mr. Neugebauer and so on about cotton. Not why, because I am
not a cotton farmer, but my best--one of my very best friends
going to college and in our life, our flying experience--it
just goes on and on and his two sons and my kids and so on--we
have stayed that way.
I have learned a lot about cotton. But I know that when the
price of cotton is good well, everybody says, ``Look, there
they go, forgetting the cost of inputs.'' And those days we
had, those years we had those droughts--both of you guys know
about this. Well, it is the same way with corn. You know
everybody is all pumped up now, $7.00 corn, maybe more. Wow,
look what is going on. They never mention what the cost of
inputs are. Have you ever heard them talk about that?
They talk about gas, but I don't think there is hardly
anybody that realizes what it has advanced to. The cost to
produce a bushel of corn, costs about $6.00. And you know; that
is not much margin. You think about the high cost of the
capital investment to raise that bushel of corn. Risk is big.
And so we need this kind of information. We need the pros and
cons and everything whether it is--whatever it is.
So I just wanted to tell you that I personally admire you
for serving on that Commission, both of you. Thank you. Now,
the hearing today seeks to investigate the timing and
coordination of derivatives oversight at home and globally. I
understand they are concerned regarding global reform and the
pace at which our G20 partners are addressing the problems that
led to international market failure in 2008.
During the Pittsburgh Summit of 2009, the G20 nations
agreed to adopt regulations that would create a framework to
regulate over-the-counter derivatives and improve oversight and
transparency of the domestic and international markets. I know
that some here today will be commenting on extraterritorial
jurisdiction and how market reform and the definition of a swap
execution facility will affect subsidiaries and parent
companies overseas. And we look forward to hearing your insight
and working on these issues as we try to move forward.
A great deal of concern has been levied on global
competitiveness, the effects of regulation, and the policy of
U.S. companies and subsidiary branches here in our country.
However, the Commissioners present today, you both note in your
testimony there has been a great deal of coordination and
consultation with foreign regulators. You have each called the
proactive amount of consultation unprecedented.
And Commissioner Sommers, you note in your testimony at
CFTC and the SEC staff engage in these discussions with the
European Commissioners on a daily basis. I agree that we must
work with our global partners on international policies for
reform and I thank the Commissioners for your hard work in
crafting rules and regulations. Thank you.
I also want to thank industry participants who have put in
the time and the dedication to review these regulations and
their effects on American business and market liquidity. So far
I have been confident in what I have seen and heard from CFTC
and the testimony submitted here that we are communicating with
the G20 and moving in the right direction.
My opinions on implementation are not breaking news as I
have expressed these sentiments toward our pace in OTC reform
several times, I don't think we can slow down. An important
agreement made among the G20 at the Pittsburgh Summit was much
more than on international agreement. The decision to create
effective reform to reduce systemic risk and enhance market
stability is a promise that we made to American taxpayers, and
we have a responsibility to make good on those promises. We
must ensure our implementation provides harmony for all users
and maintains the integrity of the marketplace for risk
mitigation.
I remain committed to working with my colleagues in
Congress to provide the CFTC with the tools and personnel
needed to create successful reform. And I am disappointed that
our colleagues on the Appropriations Committee have overlooked
this in their current mark-up for the Fiscal Year 2012 funding.
Just in the last few hours, the CFTC did identify important
work to all of us to protect not only market users, but also
every American affected by the players who manipulate markets
for their own financial gain. Just yesterday the CFTC charged
several oil traders with purposely driving up the price of oil
in order to make huge profits. This was done on the backs of
our constituents not only at the pump, but at the grocery
store, on the farm, small businesses--about every aspect of our
life across the country.
In closing, I appreciate your contribution again to the
investigation and increased transparency not only in our
markets, but in this rule-making process and I look forward to
hearing the testimonies and working with you to ensure fair and
practical implementation with our global partners on behalf of
the American taxpayers. Thank you very much. I look forward to
what you have to say. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Boswell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Leonard L. Boswell, a Representative in
Congress from Iowa

Thank you Chairman Conaway. I would like to thank our witnesses and
everyone for joining us today as we review implementation of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform Act and global derivatives reform.
The hearing today seeks to investigate the timing and coordination
of derivatives oversight at home and globally. I understand that there
are concerns regarding global reform and the pace at which our G20
partners are addressing the problems that led to international market
failure when our nations met in 2009. During this meeting at the
Pittsburgh Summit the G20 nations agreed to adopt regulations that
would create a framework to regulate over-the-counter derivatives and
improve oversight and transparency of domestic and international
markets.
As well, I know that some here will be commenting on
extraterritorial jurisdiction and how market reform and the definition
of a swap execution facility will affect subsidiaries and parent
companies overseas. I look forward to hearing your insight and working
on these issues as we move forward.
A great deal of concern has been levied on global competitiveness,
the effects of regulation and policy on U.S. companies and subsidiary
branches here in our nation. However, at the same time, Commissioners
Sommers and Chilton, you both note in your testimonies that there has
been a great deal of coordination and consultation with foreign
regulators. You each called the proactive amount of consultation
``unprecedented'' and Commissioner Sommers, you note in your testimony
that CFTC and SEC staff engage in these discussions with the European
Commission on a ``daily'' basis.
I agree that we must work with our global partners on international
policies for reform and I thank the Commissioners for your hard work in
crafting rules and regulations; I also want to thank industry
participants who have put in the time and dedication to review these
regulations and their effects on American business and market
liquidity. However, so far, I remain confident in what I have seen and
heard from CFTC and in the testimonies submitted that we are
communicating with the G20 and moving in the right direction. My
opinions on implementation are not breaking news as I have expressed
these sentiments toward our pace of OTC reform several times: we must
not slow down.
An important agreement made among the G20 at the Pittsburgh summit
was much more than an international agreement. The decision to create
effective reform to reduce systemic risk and enhance market stability
is a promise we made to American taxpayers and we have the
responsibility to make good on this promise. We must ensure our
implementation provides harmony for all users and maintains the
integrity of the marketplace for risk mitigation. I remain committed to
working with my colleagues in Congress to provide the CFTC with the
tools and personnel needed to create successful reform and I am
disappointed that our colleagues on the appropriating committee have
overlooked this in their current mark for the Fiscal Year 2012 funding.
As always, I appreciate your contribution to this investigation and
increased transparency not only in our markets but in this process. I
look forward to hearing the coming testimonies and working with you to
ensure fair and practical implementation with our global partners on
behalf of American taxpayers.
Thank you.

The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Boswell. Our Ranking Member of
the full Committee is with us. Mr. Peterson, you have comments
you want to make?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Boswell for holding this hearing and welcome to the
Commissioners Chilton and Sommers, and I associate myself with
Mr. Boswell's remarks. We appreciate the work you are doing.
It is important for us to have a thorough understanding of
the steps that the CFTC is taking to implement the Dodd-Frank
Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. As everybody
knows, this Committee played the primary role in writing Title
VII of this legislation with the goal of bringing greater
transparency and accountability to the derivatives marketplace.
And I think it is imperative that we make sure that the
Commission is on track so I think the sharing is good.
Today we are looking into global derivatives reform and I
still have some serious concerns that banks are once again
trying to pit regulators against each other as part of their
efforts to delay or even repeal financial reforms. When this
Committee went to Europe for a week back--I think it was in
December of 2009--probably the biggest thing we learned was
that these big banks were telling the Europeans that if they
regulated them they were going to move to the U.S. and they
were telling the U.S. if they regulate them they were going to
move to Europe.
Well now, I am hearing rumors that some of these big U.S.
banks that operate over there as well are telling the European
regulators that if that if they will not have as tough
regulations as we have in the U.S., they will move their
business to Europe. So it is kind of a preemptive strike in
that case. So I am concerned about what is going on here.
Apparently some of the other exchanges in Singapore and so
forth are trying to lure people there. The whole idea, I guess,
is to try to avoid any kind of regulation.
But the other thing that I am concerned about is that
yesterday the House Appropriations Committee's Agriculture
Appropriations Subcommittee marked up their work. And in page
55 of their bill, there is a limitation not to exceed $25,000
for expenses for consultations in meetings hosted by the
Commission with foreign governmental and other regulatory
officials. So if we are concerned about arbitrage and if we are
concerned about getting these regulations in sync, why would we
put a limitation on the Commission's ability to be able to meet
with these folks? You know, this is kind of crazy.
So these are some of the concerns I have that--of what is
going on here. So I would like some answers about what that
provision is trying to accomplish. I also hope that today's
witnesses will be able to shed some light on the issue of this
supposed arbitrage between Europe and us.
In closing, I want to reiterate that while the rulemaking
process so far may have not been perfect, I do not think that
we need to hit the reset button and send the agency back to
square one as some may like to see. Again, these are proposed,
not final rules and I think we need to be patient and let the
agency work through their process, and they are giving plenty
of time to folks and they are having public input and so forth.
And I just think if we delay this until December like some
people want to do then we are just going to put more
uncertainty into the situation not less. So I thank you, Mr.
Chairman, for holding today's hearing and I look forward to
hearing from our witnesses. I yield back.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Peterson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Collin C. Peterson, a Representative in
Congress from Minnesota

Good morning. Thank you Chairman Conaway and Ranking Member Boswell
for holding today's hearing. And welcome, Commissioners Chilton and
Sommers.
It is important for us to have a thorough understanding of the
steps the CFTC is taking to implement the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act. This Committee played the primary role in
writing Title VII of this legislation with the goal of bringing greater
transparency and accountability to the derivatives marketplace. It is
imperative that we make sure the Commission is on track.
Today we are looking into global derivatives reform. I have some
serious concerns that banks are trying to pit foreign regulators
against each other as part of their efforts to delay, or even repeal,
financial reforms. I have heard that banks are still lobbying EU
regulators to water down their proposed rules with the promise that
they will move to Europe; then they turn around to lobby U.S.
regulators with the same promises.
I hope today's witnesses will be able to shed some light on this
issue.
In closing, I want to reiterate that while the rulemaking process
so far may not be picture perfect, I do not think we need to hit the
reset button and send the agency back to square one as some may like to
see. Again, these are proposed, not final, rules. We need to be patient
and let the agency work through their process.
Again, I thank the Chairman for holding today's hearing and look
forward to hearing from our witnesses.

The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Peterson. I appreciate that. The
chair would ask that other Members submit their opening
statements for the record so that our witnesses may begin their
testimony.
Our first panel today are two Commissioners from the CFTC.
I want to welcome them both here. We have the Honorable Jill
Sommers, Commissioner, Commodity Futures Trading Commission,
Washington, D.C.; and the Honorable Bart Chilton, Commissioner,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Washington, D.C. Thank
you both for coming. I appreciate the time you have put in
getting ready for today. So Ms. Sommers, if you will start
first, and then Mr. Chilton, we will go to you.

STATEMENT OF HON. JILL E. SOMMERS, COMMISSIONER, COMMODITY
FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Sommers. Good morning Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Boswell, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to today's hearing on harmonizing global
derivatives reform: impact on U.S. competitiveness and market
stability. I am Jill Sommers and I have worked in the
derivatives industry for over 15 years and have been a
Commissioner at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission since
August of 2007. The views I present today are my own and not
those of the Commission.
Over the past 10 months, the CFTC has been moving at a
rapid pace to promulgate swaps rules included in the Dodd-Frank
Act. Staff has been working closely with their counterparts at
the Securities and Exchange Commission and other U.S.
regulators and has been consulting closely and sharing draft
rulemaking documents with regulators in the European Union,
United Kingdom, Japan, Canada, and elsewhere.
Notably, staff has been communicating daily with European--
with the European Commission to narrow differences on
derivatives reform between our jurisdictions. This
unprecedented level of cooperation has proven effective in
aligning regulatory objectives and harmonizing most regulatory
requirements. However, I am concerned that some important
substantive differences between derivatives reform in the U.S.
and in other jurisdictions do exist.
Other jurisdictions are not as far along in their reform
process which may harm the global competitiveness of U.S.
businesses, and our failure to clarify how our rules will apply
internationally has created a great deal of uncertainty both in
the U.S. and abroad. I would like to briefly address each one
of those issues today.
At the G20 Summit convened in Pittsburgh in September of
2009, President Obama and other world leaders agreed that
standardized OTC derivatives contracts should be traded on
exchanges or electronic trading platforms where appropriate and
cleared through central counterparties by the end of 2012 at
the latest. Other jurisdictions are working to meet this end of
2012 deadline, but we are working to implement reform much
sooner. I believe a material difference in the timing of rule
implementation is likely to occur, which may shift business
overseas as the cost of doing business in the U.S. increases
and create other opportunities for regulatory arbitrage.
In Europe, legislation on clearing and reporting
requirements for over-the-counter derivatives called the
European Market Infrastructure Regulation or EMIR may not be
finalized for weeks. Yesterday, the ECON Committee of the
European Parliament adopted its report. The next phase of this
process is for the Member States or Council to adopt a position
and then the two bodies will work--excuse me--will work for an
agreement on a common position. After adopting legislation,
EMIR directs authorities to draft technical standards which may
take close to a year.
While the timing differences on these specific reforms
between the U.S. and the EU will depend in large part on how
quickly we are able to finalize and implement rules at the
Commission, there is even a greater disparity in timing between
the U.S. and EU in implementing other reforms in the OTC
derivatives market. Rules on mandatory trade execution and
other provisions that are parallel to provisions in Dodd-Frank
are being considered as part of a review of the EU's 2007
Markets and Financial Instruments Directive or MiFID. However,
formal legislation has not been proposed and I am not certain
that these reforms will be complete until 2012 at the earliest.
In Asia, Japan has passed its legislation and plans to
implement reform by the end of 2012. Other jurisdictions such
as Singapore, Australia, Hong Kong, and Korea are also either
providing or planning to provide clearing services. At the
CFTC, on the other hand, after 10 months, eight public round
tables, 14 open Commission meetings, and more than 50 proposed
rules, notices, or other requests seeking public comment, we
have nearly completed the proposal stage of our rules and are
moving forward with reviewing comments from the public in
preparation for drafting and voting on final rules.
In order to do so effectively, however, I believe we must
work at a more deliberate pace, not simply so that our timing
is aligned with other jurisdictions, but so that we can
thoroughly consider proposed rules to ensure that we get it
right. Beyond timing, carefully tailoring these rules to
address legitimate concerns from the public while upholding out
statutory obligation is, I believe, a critical component of
rulemaking. However, I feel these concerns may be addressed
differently across jurisdictions.
For example, a provision in the EU's proposed legislation
on clearing and reporting of OTC derivatives would explicitly
exempt multilateral development banks such as the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Such organizations
whose statutory mission is to combat poverty and foster
economic development are not exempt under any of the
Commission's proposed rules. And I believe this should be
addressed.
As another example the EU is considering exempting pension
funds from mandatory clearing of their swaps transactions while
Dodd-Frank does not contemplate any such exemption. I am also
deeply concerned that differences remain with respect to rules
being considered at the Commission and in Europe for the
mandatory execution of swaps on a trading platform.
The rule that the Commission proposed on swap execution
facilities will create an inflexible model whereby all requests
for quotes must be submitted to, at a minimum, five swap
dealers. The more flexible approach being considered in Europe
and also by the SEC would allow counterparties to submit a
request for quote to a single dealer and still satisfy the
trade execution requirement. This is another area where there
is a potential for regulatory arbitrage.
In other areas such as capital and margin requirements for
uncleared swaps, exemptions from mandatory clearing for inter-
affiliate transactions and ownership limits on market
infrastructure, we may not know the extent of regulatory
divergence for some time, but our staff continues to work
closely with our regulatory counterparts as rules develop.
I am also concerned about the uncertainty we are creating
in the marketplace by not addressing the application of Dodd-
Frank to foreign entities in foreign transactions. Section
722(d) of Dodd-Frank explicitly states that the Act does not
apply to activities outside the United States unless those
activities have a direct and significant direction with
activities in, or effect on, commerce of the United States or
contravene the rules that the Commission may promulgate to
prevent evasion of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Commission has not
given the public any formal guidance on what this section means
in practice.
In the past, staff at the Commission has used its authority
to rely on the assistance of foreign regulators for the
supervision of entities located abroad, so long as the foreign
jurisdiction is found to have a comparable regulatory structure
in place. Unfortunately, we have not proposed a mechanism to do
this with respect to any of the rules being put forth under
Dodd-Frank. This has already created regulatory uncertainty for
firms with global operations as they attempt to plan for the
future.
Not only will our failure to establish clear rules in this
area leave firms unable to determine what their compliance
obligations may be, but it will most certainly drain critical
Commission resources if we attempt to respond to these
questions on a case by case basis. I am hopeful that this is
one of the areas in which the CFTC and the SEC will each adopt
a similar approach to prevent market participants from being
subjected to multiple interpretations.
Finally, I believe that one of the most important
components of this new regulatory landscape for swap
transactions is to achieve global consistency and cooperation.
I believe we must maintain clear sight of our global objectives
of improving transparency, mitigating systemic risk, and
protecting against market abuse in the derivatives markets as
we address the challenges in front of us. Thank you for
inviting me to testify today and I will answer any questions
from the Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sommers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner, Commodity
Futures Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.

Good morning Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell and Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me to today's hearing on
``Harmonizing Global Derivatives Reform: Impact on U.S. Competitiveness
and Market Stability.'' I am Jill Sommers. I have worked in the
derivatives industry for over fifteen years and have been a
Commissioner at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission since August
of 2007. The views I present today are my own and not those of the
Commission.
Over the past 10 months, the CFTC has been moving at a rapid pace
to promulgate swaps rules included in the Dodd-Frank Act. Staff has
been working closely with their counterparts at the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC) and other U.S. regulators, and has been
consulting closely and sharing draft rulemaking documents with
regulators in the European Union (EU), United Kingdom, Japan, Canada,
and elsewhere. Notably, staff has been communicating daily with the
European Commission to narrow differences on derivatives reform between
our jurisdictions. This unprecedented level of cooperation has proven
effective in aligning regulatory objectives and harmonizing most
regulatory requirements.
However, I am concerned that (1) some important substantive
differences between derivatives reform in the U.S. and other
jurisdictions do exist, (2) other jurisdictions are not as far along in
their reform process, which may harm the global competitiveness of U.S.
businesses, and (3) our failure to clarify how our rules will apply
internationally has created a great deal of uncertainty, both in the
U.S. and abroad. I would like to briefly address each of these issues
today.
Timing
At the G20 summit convened in Pittsburgh in September 2009,
President Obama and other world leaders agreed that ``standardized OTC
derivatives contracts should be traded on exchanges or electronic
trading platforms, where appropriate, and cleared through central
counterparties by end of 2012, at the latest.'' Other jurisdictions are
working to meet this end of 2012 deadline, but we are working to
implement reform much sooner. I believe a material difference in the
timing of rule implementation is likely to occur, which may shift
business overseas as the cost of doing business in the U.S. increases
and create other opportunities for regulatory arbitrage.
In Europe, legislation on clearing and reporting requirements for
over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, called the European Market
Infrastructure Regulation, or EMIR, may not be finalized until the end
of summer. After adopting legislation, EMIR directs authorities to
draft technical standards by June 30, 2012. While the timing
differences on these specific reforms between the U.S. and EU will
depend in large part on how quickly we are able to finalize and
implement rules at the Commission, there is an even greater disparity
in timing between the U.S. and EU in implementing other reforms to the
OTC derivatives market.
Rules on mandatory trade execution and other provisions that are
parallel to provisions in Dodd-Frank are being considered as part of a
review of the EU's 2007 Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, or
MiFID. However, formal legislation has not been proposed and I am not
certain that these reforms will be complete until 2012 at the earliest.
In Asia, Japan has passed its legislation and plans to implement reform
by the end of 2012. Other jurisdictions such as Singapore, Australia,
Hong Kong, and Korea are also either providing or planning to provide
clearing services.
At the CFTC, on the other hand, after 10 months, eight public
roundtables, fourteen open Commission meetings, and more than 50
proposed rules, notices, or other requests seeking public comment, we
have nearly completed the proposal stage of our rules and are moving
forward with reviewing comments from the public in preparation for
drafting and voting on final rules. In order to do so effectively,
however, I believe we must work at a more deliberate pace, not simply
so that our timing is aligned with other jurisdictions, but so that we
can thoughtfully consider proposed rules and ensure we get it right.

Substantive Differences
Beyond timing, carefully tailoring these rules to address
legitimate concerns from the public, while upholding our statutory
obligations, is, I believe, a critical component of rule writing.
However, I fear these concerns may be addressed differently across
jurisdictions. For example, a provision in the EU's proposed
legislation on clearing and reporting of OTC derivatives would
explicitly exempt multilateral development banks such as the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Such
organizations, whose statutory mission is to combat poverty and foster
economic development, are not exempt under any of the Commission's
proposed rules, and I believe this should be addressed. As another
example, the EU is considering exempting pension funds from mandatory
clearing of their swaps transactions, while Dodd-Frank does not
contemplate any such exemption.
I am also deeply concerned that differences remain with respect to
rules being considered at the Commission and in Europe for the
mandatory execution of swaps on a trading platform. The rule the
Commission proposed on swap execution facilities, or SEFs, will create
an inflexible model whereby all requests for quote must be submitted
to, at a minimum, five swap dealers. The more flexible approach being
considered in Europe (and also by the SEC) would allow counterparties
to submit a request for quote to a single dealer and still satisfy the
trade execution requirement. This is another area where there is a
potential for regulatory arbitrage.
In other areas, such as capital and margin requirements for
uncleared swaps, exemptions from mandatory clearing for inter-affiliate
transactions, and ownership limits on market infrastructure, we may not
know the extent of regulatory divergence for some time, but staff
continues to work closely with our international counterparts as rules
develop.

Extraterritoriality
I am also concerned about the uncertainty we are creating in the
marketplace by not addressing the application of Dodd-Frank to foreign
entities and foreign transactions. Section 722(d) of Dodd-Frank
explicitly states that the Act does not apply to activities outside the
United States unless those activities have a direct and significant
connection with activities in, or effect on, commerce of the United
States or contravene rules that the Commission may promulgate to
prevent evasion of the Dodd-Frank Act. The Commission has not given the
public any formal guidance on what this section means in practice. In
the past, staff at the Commission has used its authority to rely on the
assistance of foreign regulators for the supervision of entities
located abroad so long as the foreign jurisdiction is found to have a
comparable regulatory structure in place. Unfortunately, we have not
proposed a mechanism to do this with respect to any of the rules being
put forth under Dodd-Frank. This has already created regulatory
uncertainty for firms with global operations as they attempt to plan
for the future. Not only will our failure to establish clear rules in
this area leave firms unable to determine what their compliance
obligations may be, but it will most certainly drain critical
Commission resources as we attempt to respond to questions on a case-
by-case basis. I am hopeful that this is one of the areas in which the
CFTC and the SEC will each adopt a similar approach to prevent market
participants from being subjected to multiple interpretations.
I also wanted to briefly mention differences between the U.S. and
Europe in our approach to position limits. The Commission has for years
imposed position limits in the agriculture commodity markets, and has
proposed a rule to impose position limits in the energy and metals
markets. Regulators in the EU have historically not used position
limits and, even under current proposals, may only mandate position
limits in agricultural commodity markets. This is an area in which we
need to ensure that our rules are harmonized to the maximum extent
possible.
I believe one of the most important components of this new
regulatory landscape for swap transactions is to achieve global
consistency and cooperation. I believe we must maintain clear sight of
our global objectives of improving transparency, mitigating systemic
risk and protecting against market abuse in the derivatives markets as
we address the challenges in front of us. Thank you. I am grateful for
the opportunity to speak about these important issues and am happy to
answer any questions.

The Chairman. Thanks, Ms. Sommers, we appreciate that. Mr.
Chilton, your comments?

STATEMENT OF HON. BART CHILTON, COMMISSIONER,
COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Chilton. Thanks. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for
inviting me. Thank you, Mr. Boswell, Ranking Member Peterson,
Members of the Committee. It is great to be with Commissioner
Sommers, my colleague. She is the chair of our advisory
committee on global markets and she does an excellent job. We
owe her a debt of gratitude for the meetings she has put
together.
Mr. Conaway, I actually agree with a lot of what you said
at the beginning about making sure--and what my colleague said
about being sure we do this in a deliberate way and that we are
careful, and that we don't create these opportunities for
regulatory arbitrage. But I guess where I diverge is that you
know the law is the law. That is our mandate to deal with and I
think it is a good law in that we had this economic fiasco and
clearly the regulatory apparatus we have for the OTC land, this
is the over-the-counter swaps. None of the companies that had
to be bailed out went under because of business done on the
regulatory exchanges.
The regulatory exchanges in the U.S. did very well, and I
think we did a good job of regulating them. But the over-the-
counter swaps were a credit. The dresit default swaps were
created and led to the downfall of AIG and this hideous bailout
we had. That is the regulation that we are trying to deal with.
That is really the focus. I think we need to do it. The
question is doing it in a deliberate way, as you said, Mr.
Chairman, and making sure that we are cautious and we don't go
too far and overreach. And we are in the process of the
rulemaking right now.
I think if we do it the right way, it will actually not
just make markets safer and sounder, but that it will be more
efficient and effective. If you looked at markets, whether it
is, hogs or corn, or metals or energy, you will see a lot of
nearly unprecedented volatility recently. And we can address
part of that through some of these rulemakings. But I think the
added residual benefit if we do it correctly is that it will,
in fact, make us more competitive, that people will want to use
our markets more because we have legitimate sideboards on the
regulatory--our regulatory regime. I don't know. Mr. Boswell
left, but that movie, Field of Dreams. I don't know if anybody
remembers it where Kevin Costner talks to the cornfield, and it
says, ``If you build it they will come.'' I sort of had that
view about regulation and the Europeans, that if we went first
that maybe they would come along, but I wasn't sure. And I
think what is being demonstrated now is that they really also
believe that it will give them a competitive advantage if they
have the regulatory regime in place.
And so, actually by listening to my colleague's timing on a
lot of this I think it is different than what we would have
thought 2 years ago or a year and a half ago. We were talking
about delays of 1\1/2\ or 2 years between the U.S. and the EU.
But that chasm has been compressed now so that we are not
looking at a year delay. We are looking at maybe 6 months and
that is if we don't, for example, stagger our implementation.
We are required to do things by certain dates under the law. We
are not going to meet all our deadlines because we want to be
deliberative.
But there is a provision in Dodd-Frank that says we can't
implement it--a final rule--we can't require anybody to do
anything in less than 60 days, but there is no end time. We
could implement it in 2 years. I am not suggesting that, but it
gives us the flexibility. If we think we are going down the
wrong path and this Committee or any other Committee wants to
call us up and tell us we are doing a bad job, it gives us the
ability to delay that already. We have that authority
currently. It is in the law and I think it is a good provision.
So as Commissioner Sommers said we are working really in an
unprecedented fashion, not just with our colleagues on the SEC
and other Federal agencies, but with our European counterparts.
The Chairman has been over there many times. Some of us have
been over there talking about these issues, and I think we are
actually making significant progress on harmonizing. And while
I am concerned about regulatory arbitrage to some extent--I
think that we have to be, I think ultimately I am very
optimistic about where we are headed.
You know in that movie, I don't know if maybe he is talking
about something nobody remembers, but the banker constantly
wants Kevin Costner to sell the farm. He says you got to sell
it. You are going under. You got to sell it. You have Kevin
Costner invest in a baseball diamond and finally at the end the
banker says wait a minute. Where did all these ballplayers come
from? Don't ever sell this farm.
And I know this isn't a dream. I know this isn't a movie--
that we are talking about serious issues here but there is a
little bit of a parallel in that if we invest in these
regulations then they will have greater value. And I think the
banks are beginning to see that. I think the traders are seeing
that. It is just a matter of not going too far and seeking the
right balance. And if we do that, we need the budget to do that
as Ranking Member Boswell and Ranking Member Peterson talked
about. We need the budget to do that. You know the thing that
passed yesterday in Appropriations Subcommittee is a 45 percent
cut from the Administration's proposal and a 15 percent cut
from the current fiscal year budget. So, we won't be able to do
the job that we have been asked to do if we don't have the
resources.
But ultimately, I believe, Mr. Chairman, that if we do this
the right way it will make us more competitive and that this
will be good not just for market participants, not just for the
folks that are going to testify later and in this room, but it
will actually be good for consumers, and it will be good for
the economic engine of our democracy. Thanks very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Chilton follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Bart Chilton, Commissioner, Commodity
Futures Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.

Good morning, Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, and Members
of the Subcommittee, and thank you for inviting me to today's hearing
on global derivatives regulation. I am pleased to testify alongside my
colleague, Commissioner Jill Sommers, who does an outstanding job as
the Chair of our Global Markets Advisory Committee (GMAC).
I believe the financial regulatory reforms that we are currently
working upon in the U.S., and specifically at our agency, will make the
U.S. futures industry safer, sounder, more efficient and effective, and
more competitive than ever before. I also believe that the European
Union has the same view with regard to the need for financial
regulatory reform, and the benefits thereof. The U.S. and the European
Union are the predominate swaps markets, and reform in both of these
markets will provide the basis for other jurisdictions to undertake
similar measures. I am hopeful that our brethren Asian regulators also
have such a view.
I would note with great concern consideration by the House
Appropriations subcommittee of language that would essentially cut our
budget. To my mind, this is penny-wise and pound-foolish. We went to
the brink of economic disaster, Congress gave us the directives in
Dodd-Frank to ensure that doesn't happen again, and now there are those
who would keep us from having the budget to do the job.
This morning I will provide comments on the status of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission's (CFTC's) efforts in the area of
international harmonization on derivatives reform and implementation of
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. I will
be meeting with regulators in several European Union countries in June,
and so my remarks are made in light of those upcoming discussions.
We have been coordinating--in an unprecedented manner--with our
European and Asian counterparts on all major issues relating to the
implementation of over-the-counter (OTC) oversight regulation. Of
course, there are differences on some provisions of our respective
laws, but the level of overall harmonization is substantial. In
addition, it's fortuitous that many jurisdictions are developing
regulations contemporaneously. This allows us to craft corresponding,
standardized, conforming, or complementary rules as appropriate.
In addition to frequent, ongoing, and productive staff phone
contact with regulators around the world, we also maintain--as much as
possible with our budget constraints--face-to-face contact with foreign
regulators. Our Chairman made two visits to Brussels over the past year
to speak to high-level European politicians about the legislation, and
our director of international affairs also meets regularly with the
European Commission's financial attache here in Washington to discuss
salient issues. We also have video conference with European Commission
staff and the other U.S. financial regulators on OTC regulatory reform.
In addition, we participate in numerous International Organization of
Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and Financial Stability Board (FSB)
committees, which are instrumental in providing fora to discuss and
develop policy and guidance.
Generally, in our international discussions, we are guided by the
2009 Pittsburgh G20 Communique, which set forth four key directives
which all G20 countries must implement by the end of 2012. Those are,
specifically:

Clearing of all standardized OTC derivatives;

Trading on an exchange or electronic trading platform,
``where appropriate'';

Reporting of all OTC derivatives to a regulator or trade
repository; and

Higher Capital Requirements on uncleared derivatives.

These four elements provide a useful benchmark that entities such as
IOSCO and FSB can use in their assessment of progress on OTC reform.
Most importantly, these guidelines are consonant with the Congressional
directives provided in the Dodd-Frank Act.
Dodd-Frank is our primary compass in this area, and Section 752(a)
of the Act expressly provides for international coordination on
regulatory matters. In that vein, we are adjured specifically to
``consult and coordinate with foreign regulatory authorities on the
establishment of consistent international standards'' as to OTC
transaction regulation.
As we move forward in this area, one of the thorniest issues we
have to deal with is the topic of ``extraterritoriality.'' Section
722(d) of Dodd-Frank provides that the Act won't apply to activities
outside the U.S. unless they have a ``direct and significant connection
with activities in, or effect on, commerce'' in the U.S., or contravene
Commission regulations needed to prevent evasion of the futures laws.
This is an issue that has been the subject of much legal debate, but I
think that we need to cut through that morass to provide some certainty
to market participants who are concerned about what laws are going to
apply to them. In that respect, while we don't yet have all the
answers, we are working toward a consistent method to discuss and
develop a satisfactory resolution of the issue, and provide legal
certainty for markets and participants. Just as we have with all of our
other Dodd-Frank initiatives, we welcome the input of market users in
addition to that of our fellow regulators, here and abroad.
As to the timing of initiatives, while the European legislation
that is set forth in the European Markets Infrastructure Report (EMIR)
and in the European securities laws (MiFID) are likely to be adopted
later this year (and thereby putting Europe somewhat behind the U.S.
timeframe), in practice, this may have little substantive impact, as
Chairman Gensler has indicated that we will be pursuing a phased
implementation in the U.S. In each jurisdiction, the key goal is to
meet the end-2012 deadline set by the G20.
In closing I'd like to briefly mention two issues that are
particularly important to me: speculative position limits and high
frequency traders (HFTs). I appreciated the opportunity to testify
before this Subcommittee last December on speculative position limits.
Dodd-Frank provides that, in establishing position limits for exempt
and agricultural commodity futures and options traded on or subject to
the rules of a designated contract market, the Commission ``shall
strive to ensure'' that trading on foreign boards of trade (FBOTs) in
the same commodity will be subject to comparable limits and that any
Commission limits will not cause price discovery in the commodity to
shift to trading on FBOTs. We are considering how we can engage foreign
regulators to ensure parity in regulatory controls over significant
position holders. In the E.C.'s MiFID review, it is considering giving
all national regulators the power to impose position limits. I have
said numerous times that we in the U.S. can and should do better in
this area, that there are things we can do now (such as spot month
limits in swaps and on the regulated exchanges, based on a percentage
of deliverable supply). I hope that we, both in the U.S. and
internationally, can move forward expeditiously in these efforts to
protect markets and consumers from excessive speculation.
As to HFTs, while I recognize the value that these participants can
bring to the market in terms of adding liquidity and tightening
spreads, I have concerns about some possible negative effects that this
relatively new type of activity may have on traditional market uses. I
have heard from commercial entities, and indeed from some HFTs
themselves, that this is an area that deserves some heightened scrutiny
from regulators, to ensure that all market participants get a fair
shake and a level playing field. I look forward to working with my
colleagues, here and abroad, to ensure that these types of market
innovations do not result in anticompetitive effects for any markets or
participants.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify. I'd be pleased to
answer any questions.

The Chairman. Thanks Mr. Chilton. I appreciate that. Mr.
Peterson, just by way of clarification, the restriction on the
$25,000 that was in yesterday's mark-up was in the 2009
Appropriations bill--exact same language when you were chair.
Mr. Peterson. No--will the Chairman yield?
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Peterson. No, I am aware of that, but in 2009 we didn't
have this issue in front of us and we weren't obviously having
a hearing worrying about harmonization, so----
The Chairman. Well, it--
Mr. Peterson.--it would appear to me that the right thing
to do would be to take that restriction out of it.
The Chairman. Right. Yes, the implication I had from you
that we stuck it in there kind of out of left field in whole
cloth and it wasn't--real provisions, okay.
Mr. Peterson. No, no, I just think it is ironic that we are
sitting here concerned about making sure that we harmonize and
yet we are putting restriction on them. And as Mr. Chilton just
said, you know we are also cutting their budget significantly
and this is going to--I think it is going to cause a bigger
problem than some of those other----
The Chairman. Well, I don't disagree that the provision
probably shouldn't be in there, but I just also want to make
sure the record reflects----
Mr. Peterson. Well, well----
The Chairman.--that was carried over. And probably----
Mr. Peterson.--maybe we can work together to get it out----
The Chairman. Exactly.
Mr. Peterson.--when the bill comes to the floor.
The Chairman. There will be a period of time when the
regulations are different no matter what happens under the--you
can't paint a scenario in which everybody pulls the trigger on
the exact set date, so there will be a natural period for
arbitrage that we will be able to observe. Maybe because it
doesn't look to be permanent there won't be a lot of movement
between markets as a result of forum shopping or regulatory
scheme shopping, however you want to phrase that. But Ms.
Sommers, first and then Mr. Chilton, how are you going to
address clear meaningful differences between the EU proposals
and/or Asian proposals as you get the final rules in place once
they get theirs in place and you see perhaps a better scheme.
How--what kind of flexibility does the Commission have to
adjust on the fly for the betterment of all the good things
that Mr. Chilton said at the closing of his comments?
Ms. Sommers. Thank you, Mr. Conaway. I think that you made
a very good point in your question by saying that we probably
won't all pull the trigger on the same day. The important part
is that we make sure that the rules are in--as consistent as
possible across jurisdictions no matter what date they are put
into effect. So what we are doing right now is trying to make
sure that any of the inconsistencies that do exist, that we
know exist, we are working to resolve those with our
counterparts. The hard part for us will be if we have already
finalized a rule this year with regard to trading requirements,
reporting requirements--when those are not even going to be
considered in Europe. We wouldn't see what the legislative text
would look like until this time next year.
The Chairman. Well, what are the mechanics that you have
available to do that? Do you have to go through the full new
rule proposal altogether if you?
Ms. Sommers. Right. If we want----
The Chairman. Let us assume that Europe came up with a
scheme that we like better. We would have to repropose----
Ms. Sommers. Right.
The Chairman. And then while that is going on we would have
an industry that is out there putting in systems and building a
scheme to comply with our rule, and yet we are headed in a
different direction. So you would have to go through this whole
rule making process again?
Ms. Sommers. We would have the ability to re-propose a rule
if we wanted to change something that we had put in place.
The Chairman. Mr. Chilton, any comments about how flexible
you guys----
Mr. Chilton. Just briefly, Mr. Conaway, you know that we
are in the middle of a process. This is sort of like, you don't
want to call an end to it, but we do have plenary authority, in
general, in the Act that we could go in and re-propose a rule.
We also have a provision in there that talks about comparable
and comprehensive regulations. So we can sort of say well,
there is another agency in Europe or wherever, they do a good
job. But we can also say we are not so sure about that. So we
have authority where we could go in and be creative if we see a
problem that would create issues for U.S. businesses or for
U.S. consumers. But I agree. We need to be deliberate on this.
We need to make sure we are working closely with them.
The Chairman. Ms. Sommers, is there--do you have a
counterpart in the SEC of an advisory committee that looks at
harmonization for not only the SEC share of Dodd-Frank but
yours and the international link? Do you have a--is there a
round table or something that you guys work with?
Ms. Sommers. To my knowledge the SEC doesn't have advisory
committees, but SEC Commissioner Kathy Casey is very involved
in international issues. She and I both participate in IOSCO
meetings. Ms. Casey participates in the Financial Stability
Board, so they are also very actively coordinating with
international counterparts.
The Chairman. Is there a rational conversation between you
two----
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
The Chairman.--at reference to making sure, because we have
some instances already just between our two regulators in which
you have the industry jammed up. Okay. Then I yield back. The
Members will be recognized for questions on seniority of when
the gavel went down, for those that were present. So with that
we will go to Mr. Boswell for 5 minutes.
Mr. Boswell. Well, thank you. These are challenging times.
Don't make any mistake about it. I catch myself saying that
history is being written. We just don't know what it is going
to say. It is kind of up to you and us to make it the best we
can and it probably won't be perfect, but we have to do the
best we possibly can. I was called away so I didn't follow
everything that you said, Mr. Chairman, but I don't want to
get--if I get redundant just give me an elbow and I will move
to another--no, I am serious. I don't want to do that because I
read the report. But, did you discuss somewhat more about the
cooperation, the unprecedented level of cooperation among
foreign regulators? Did you discuss that? Did you make any
further comment on that?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, sir. In my testimony I did discuss it.
Mr. Boswell. Yes, okay. We will pass on that for a minute.
Regarding your testimony, Commissioner Sommers, positional
limits--is it your view that if the Europeans decide to let
speculators have free reign by imposing no position limits that
we should match them in order to, ``ensure our rules harmonize
to the maximum extent possible?''
Ms. Sommers. No, sir. I--our markets and specifically with
addressing the enumerated agricultural markets, we do have
position limits. Europe does not have those limits on their
agricultural markets, so I think that the system that we have
right now works very well for us and works in our agricultural
markets. We also have accountability levels in our energy
complex which is consistent with what they have right now for
those products that trade in the UK. I am suggesting that I
think we try to harmonize what we may do in the future with
them as well.
Mr. Boswell. Okay. Mr. Chilton, you have any comment on
that point?
Mr. Chilton. Just briefly, there are spot month limits in
the agriculture commodities. The law requires that we have not
only spot month limits in just the agriculture, but also in the
metals complex and the energy complex, so we are expanding. It
also requires that we have deferred month limits, so that would
be other months and then an aggregate limit and this is both
for the OTC area and for the regulated exchanges. So it is true
that we have had position limits in ag, and quite frankly, I
think it is sort of a testament to how well position limits can
work, that we have had them for so long, and that by in large
there haven't been too many problems. So, I am hopeful as I
have said before this Subcommittee and many times that we put
limits in place right now. I think that we wouldn't see such
volatility in some prices and that it wouldn't actually impact
that many traders, the proposal that we have had. We said that
you can't have more than ten percent of a market. Then we have
a little multiplier on there over--in markets with over 25,000
contracts you can have 2.5 percent of it. So, I mean we are
talking about very large positions. You know if it were my
decision I would probably be a little bit more restrictive, but
I think our proposal, Mr. Chairman, errs on the high side to
allow for us to put some legitimate limits, only the largest of
the large would be under this. I think that would help markets,
but ultimately we may have to recalibrate, reassess where we
are on the limits. Thank you for the question.
Mr. Boswell. Well, I will address this question to you
first then. Your testimony cites the Dodd-Frank requirement for
the Commission that these limits do not cause price discovery
in the commodity to shift trading to foreign boards of trade.
Given your interest and speculative position limits, how is the
Commission working to balance the needs of setting appropriate
limits for speculators without encouraging mass migration to
foreign markets?
Mr. Chilton. That is a good question. I will try to be
brief, Mr. Boswell. We have an agreement already that we
reached with the IntercontinentalExchange in London where they
have a look-a-like contract to our West Texas Intermediate
Crude and they actually--working with the FSA, the regulator in
the UK, they actually give us data on a daily basis. And they
have said and the IntercontinentalExchange has said that they
would comply with limits that we would put in place. You know
again, I think you err on the high side on limits at first
because you don't want to have these market disruptions. You
don't want to have migration and then you see whether or not
you need to recalibrate at some point. Is our proposal that we
call 10 and 2.5, that I explained, is that the magic number? Is
that the same for--should it be the same for silver as it is
for crude oil? I don't think so, but right now we should just
err on the high side, get them in place, have folks get used to
them, and then if we need to recalibrate, then we could
recalibrate up at some point if we think we need to. Not many
people have given us a whole lot of heartache on the limits
being too restrictive so far. A few, but not many.
Mr. Boswell. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Boswell. We will deviate just a
minor bit to recognize the Chairman of the full Committee,
Frank D. Lucas.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM OKLAHOMA

Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I appreciate the
courtesy. Commissioner Sommers, I want to congratulate and
thank you for addressing the very real concern about legal
certainty at the Commission's last public meeting. And I share
this concern as do a growing number of market participants. I
sense that if it weren't for the need to respond to the
Commission's crushing request for comments on some 60 proposed
rules, the legal certainty issues would be the primary concern
for all currently engaged in trading OTC swaps. As you know,
Commissioner, the CFMA protected the OTC swap markets from
being regulated like futures contracts by exempting them from
the futures contracts regulatory scheme. Dodd-Frank eliminates
that exemption or legal certainty. Swap contracts have been
relied on for nearly a century opting for a robust regulatory
scheme of the OTC swap market. The very real problem that we
have now is is that the legal certainty is eliminated on July
16 of this year, but the new regulatory regime created by Dodd-
Frank won't be implemented by then. And by some estimates won't
be implemented perhaps for a year or 2. Just this morning I
received a copy from the Electric Trade Associations petition
for reconsideration of an exemptive relief. I would like to
submit, Mr. Chairman, this petition submitted by the National
Rural Electric Cooperatives Association and four other trade
associations for the record.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The document referred to is located on p. 109.]
Mr. Lucas. Thank you. With Chairman Gensler's continued
optimism concerning the implementation schedule, I can
understand why the Commission rejected the Association's
petition back in December. But now 5 months later and less than
2 months away from the implementation date, it is crystal clear
that the end-users will be looking for and need similar relief.
Can you tell this Committee if the Commission will look
differently upon the Associations petition to have its swap
activity grandfathered and remain legally certain under the
Commodity Exchange Act? Can you--would you suggest ways that we
can aid and broaden your review of these applications?
Ms. Sommers. Thank you for the question, Mr. Chairman. I
think that the Dodd-Frank statute does provide the CFTC with
the authority to grant grandfather relief to the sections
2(h)(1) and 2(h)(3) markets. We did address that by asking for
entities to submit petitions to us last fall. We denied
granting this grandfather relief because as you said we were
hopeful that the new framework would be in place by then. I do
think that we have the authority to grant these entities relief
to let them continue to rely on the Sections 2(h) that were put
in the Act by CFMA, and we could do that by Commission order.
And I would hope that we would be able to do that for the
section 2(h)(1) and section 2(h)(3) markets.
What we are not able to do because the statute does not
give the CFTC the authority is to address the repeal of other
provisions like sections 2(d) and 2(g). Market participants
that rely on the relief under sections 2(d) and 2(g) would not
be able to have the legal certainty given to them under the
grandfather relief.
Mr. Lucas. It would appear then that the--in this case the
Electric Trade Associations have a real point and a real bone
of contention and that--I do not pretend to be an attorney,
Commissioner, but I can see where the certainty ends on July
16. Up until the point either a relief is provided in part of
the issue or the final rule is put into place, I can see if
where I thought I were legal counsel to these groups, I would
be spastic about making any new decisions or engaging in any
contracts. Is that an unreasonable observation on my part?
Ms. Sommers. No, sir. I do believe that the Commission
needs to take some action in this and within these issues.
Mr. Lucas. Thank you, Commissioner. I yield back the
balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Lucas. The chair now recognizes
the Ranking Member of the full Committee for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Ms. Sommers, you
have been involved in this international stuff. Have you heard
about these rumors that I have, about people going to the
regulators and trying to come up with lighter rules? Have you
heard any of that?
Ms. Sommers. I have not heard specifically from foreign
regulators that those comments have been made to them, but I
can assure you that they are--those concerns are expressed to
us quite frequently with regard to any sort of inconsistency
within the rules and making it easier for foreign competitors
to do business than it is for U.S. businesses. They are
stressing to us that companies here are concerned about any
inconsistencies. So as we work forward implementing all of
these rules, I think all of us have to keep that in mind that
we want to be as consistent as possible with our international
counterparts and that is what we are trying to do.
Mr. Peterson. Can either one of you tell me the practical
impact of this--if this appropriations bill that went through
yesterday actually becomes law and you--it is a reduction of
about $30 million from what you have now. Do you know what
impact that is going to have? Or if you don't is there some way
to have somebody from the Commission give us information about
what would actually happen if the cuts took place. What
wouldn't you do that you would normally do and so forth? And
then also on this $25,000 deal if that is going to limit your
ability to work with the foreign regulators, should we get rid
of that limitation? I don't know if you have answers to that
today, but----
Ms. Sommers. I do not have specific information about the
$25,000. I would guess that that does not limit our ability to
travel to----
Mr. Peterson. No, I don't think it does, but it apparently
limits your ability to host people here. That is not very much
money, you know. And I think the European regulators were just
here. I guess this has been in the law. I don't know, so I
don't know how it works exactly. But I guess if somebody down
there that deals with this can get me that information. That
would be helpful.
Ms. Sommers. We can absolutely get you more specific
information. Just with regard to the first part of your
question, as you know, we just received our appropriation for
2011 a few weeks ago and received approximately a $35 million
increase in our budget which was very helpful because a
significant portion of that money went towards technology. And
that is one of the places that we are in most dire need. The
number that was marked up yesterday would take us back to
approximately the level we were at in Fiscal Year 2010.
Mr. Peterson. So that probably would impact the technology
more than anything then?
Ms. Sommers. I would guess that that is true.
Mr. Peterson. In the last one we had--I had been told and I
guess I haven't actually seen this in writing that a couple--3
weeks ago Goldman Sachs said that they thought that all this
uncertainty, all this passive money in the oil market had
raised the price of oil $27 a barrel and then somebody else,
some other group said it was $20 a barrel. Is that in fact the
case?
Mr. Chilton. Well, I am not an economist.
Mr. Peterson. No, no, but I mean were those statements
made?
Mr. Chilton. Those are statements--you accurately reflect
statements that other people made. And a lot of people want to
make these arguments and they want to have an actual number and
I have been very reluctant to ever give them. But yes, Goldman
made that statement and so have others. Just let me say, Mr.
Chairman, briefly on the budget. It would be crippling to our
budget--we would not be able to enforce the regulations that
Congress asked us to do so under the proposed budget that was
approved yesterday.
Mr. Peterson. But----
Mr. Chilton. We could----
Mr. Peterson.--you could write the rules?
Mr. Chilton. We could write the rules but we would be a
hollow shell. We wouldn't be able to actually enforce them. And
you know, Members, we are going from a $5 trillion annualized
trading in the regulated exchanges to hundreds of trillions of
dollars. And Commissioner Sommers is absolutely right on the
technology. There is something that I have talked about a lot
recently called high frequency traders. And I call them cheetah
traders as in the fastest land mammal because they are so fast,
fast, fast. I think they are having an impact on markets, but
we can't keep up with these guys. We can't keep up with the
cheetahs. And when I say that I am not like with a Boston
accent, like a card cheetah. But we can't keep up with these
guys because we don't have the technology, so we need the
budget.
Mr. Peterson. All right, thank you Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Yes, sir. The gentleman yields back. Mr.
Neugebauer for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the panel.
I want to go back to a little bit about this harmonization
process and particularly around the swap activities occurring
outside the United States. Is it my understanding that both the
CFTC and the SEC have yet to address the territorial scope of
their proposals. But however, in April, the prudential
regulators proposed a rule for the application of margin
requirements as required by Title VII for major swap
participants and swap dealers. Under this, prudential
regulators proposed margin requirements would apply to all
transactions of U.S. financial institutions whether they are
U.S. or non-U.S. customers. And so the question that I have is
that if we haven't worked out the territorial issues, to me
this is going to put some of our U.S. companies in somewhat of
a disadvantage here if they are having to impose those on their
non-U.S. customers. So I think these are the kinds of things
that many of us are concerned about in this harmonization
process. Ms. Sommers, do you want to address that?
Ms. Sommers. Thank you for the question, Congressman
Neugebauer. I think that the proposal that was put forth by the
prudential regulators is with regard to the capital and margin
for banks or bank holding companies that they regulate. So it
is for swap dealers or major swap participants that are under
the regulation of the Fed or prudential bank regulators. There
is no question that they address, you know the issue of
extraterritoriality within that provision by saying that if
capital and margin would apply to all activities of U.S.
businesses and that potentially could put U.S. businesses at a
competitive disadvantage.
What we are looking towards is harmonizing capital and
margin with our regulatory counterparts in Europe. So if, for
instance, Europe imposes the same type of capital and margin
scheme in Europe on their regulatees, then there would not be a
discrepancy between what foreign banks would have to post
versus what U.S. banks would have to post. We just don't know.
At this point there is some uncertainty.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, and here is I think one of the things
that could concern me is that if we are out in front of
everybody and then we assume, as you articulated that you feel
like you are in a cooperative mode with these regulators; but
ultimately the people you are negotiating with probably aren't
the people that are going to vote on whether to adopt those are
not.
Mr. Sommers. That is right.
Mr. Neugebauer. And so what would be--what does the world
look like in a year or 2 when the parliament or the governments
in the Asian markets decide to adopt different and maybe less
restrictive regulations, then what is our recourse at that
particular point in time?
Ms. Sommers. I am not sure, but I think as Mr. Conaway
suggested, we would have to rethink our regulations in my
opinion.
Mr. Neugebauer. So is there, Mr. Chilton, did you want to
reflect this?
Mr. Chilton. I will try to be brief.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes.
Mr. Chilton. You know, the law says that we have this
provision where we can defer if something is comparable and
comprehensive like I talked about earlier, but we also have
this provision that people talk about section 722(d) in the
Act, which says that if the activity has a significant and
direct impact on U.S. commerce. So we could at some later
point, Congressman, say, ``You know what? Now that we have seen
what the EU has done maybe we want to reassess that issue of
significant and direct impact.'' I think we have some
flexibility.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, I just want to go to an agricultural
question and it is really for my edification. So the other--
obviously agriculture in U.S. uses commodities and hedging
opportunities extensively. Do we see that same kind of activity
in other countries? Are other countries utilizing the hedging
strategies as well?
Mr. Chilton. Yes, and a lot of them, Congressman, use our
markets for those strategies. Mr. Boswell was talking about
cotton early. Some of the volatility we have seen in some of
the markets occurs actually when our markets aren't open during
the trading day, but during the overnight trading hours when
some of these electronic firms and maybe some of the cheetah
traders are involved in the market. So, they use our market.
They do use them for agriculture hedging, sir.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, this will follow-up, is my
understanding that the transactional fees in some of those
markets are less than the transactional costs in our markets.
So is cost a part of this harmonization piece?
Mr. Chilton. Well, those are generally set by the
exchanges, sir, so you know they all have their own business
propositions, so I don't know about the exact transaction cost
in exchanges outside of the U.S. I am sorry.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, I think--and I know that my time--I
think one of the things I was talking about was not setting the
price, but also making sure that the parameters are such that
the pricing should be more market driven.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Kissell, 5
minutes.
Mr. Kissell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for this
opportunity to have the hearing today and try to examine the
implementation of this most important legislation. And thank
you, Commissioners, for being here today. My first question is
one of curiosity. I happened to read, and it is probably 3
weeks ago and it was in a newspaper that indicated that there
were concerns in Europe that certain banks there were trying to
dominate and manipulate the derivatives market and they were
being investigated. I was just wondering if you have knowledge
of that. If so, how accurate of a summary was that and what
implications might it have towards what is going on here?
Mr. Chilton. I will give sort of a bureaucratic answer to
you, Congressman Kissell. You know we can't comment on any
investigations that we have, et cetera. I read the news story
that you did, but, unless we were in Executive Session, we
couldn't discuss it.
Mr. Kissell. Well, that was not the answer I was expecting,
but I understand that answer. It would seem to me that it would
indicate there are certain issues that are taking place in the
markets over there that we are trying to avoid long term, and
some of the problems that we have had here in the markets. So,
I thought it was kind of interesting. And so at some point in
time if we could elaborate there it would be interesting to
know how that might affect the discussions here.
Mr. Chilton. Congressman, I just want to be clear. I am not
suggesting anything either way. I am just saying that those
sorts of questions about investigations would be done in an
Executive Session. So I am not saying yes, no--I am not saying
anything.
Mr. Kissell. Understood completely. Understood completely.
As we talk about the give and take of trying to implement
regulations and Commissioner Sommers, you said we are not going
to pull the trigger on the same date. And I think that goes
without saying. As we have gone back and forth in looking at
what we are doing versus what we expect some of the foreign
markets to do, are there any exceptionally daunting challenges,
things where we see that this could be bad? Anything that we
know we have to overcome that just stands out above others in
terms of trying to even this out as much as possible?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, sir, I do think that there are some
inconsistencies that do exist currently. Of course, Europe has
not passed a final version of their legislation yet, so
anything could happen from now until then. Some of the issues
that I point out in my testimony with regard to pension funds,
they are exempting pension funds from the clearing requirement
in Europe, and that is a significant discrepancy because we do
not have the authority to do that under Dodd-Frank.
There may be differences in how they consider end-users in
Europe. There may be differences in how they will allow trading
on swap execution facilities. The current CFTC proposal
requires a request for quote to go out to a minimum of five
dealers. And Europe may not do that. If they have single dealer
platforms, that will be a significant discrepancy. So those are
issues that we are watching very closely.
Mr. Kissell. And Commissioner Chilton, you indicated you
know that we do have some flexibility in implementation of this
as we see these things start to pan out as more definition is
given. Are you comfortable, and I guess a question for both of
you, comfortable that we have the structure to implement what
we need to do, plus have the ability to adjust as we need to
and still keep that structure?
Mr. Chilton. We do not have the structure in place to deal
with the regulation that Congress has asked us to undertake. We
can't do it without the budget--particularly talking about the
technology point that, Commissioner Sommers, I think you and I
both agree on. But we don't have the staff. I mean, we have
been looking at markets with $5 trillion annually. These
markets are growing to be hundreds of trillions of dollars. We
need to set up new divisions to deal with swaps. We need
experts. We need economists. We don't have the ability to do it
now, and the budget that is proposed would cripple us at this
point. We could continue to do what we are doing right now,
sort of the status quo. I don't think that is good enough. I
think consumers demand more and I think given the realities of
the economy in the last several years they deserve it.
Mr. Kissell. Commissioner Sommers, any thoughts?
Ms. Sommers. I agree with Mr. Chilton that we no doubt need
the resources to be able to implement all of the additional
authority that we received under Dodd-Frank. I also think that,
as we look through the authority we were given, we were not
given exemptive authority, broad exemptive authority like we
have had in the past. So if we look towards either foreign
entities or domestic entities that we would like to exempt from
the regulation, we don't have that authority to make those
decisions within the Commission. But otherwise, I do think that
we have some discretion and flexibility in what we propose.
Mr. Kissell. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman. Mr. Austin Scott, from
Georgia, for 5 minutes. Mr. Scott?
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
think we all agree that we are in a global financial market and
certainly transactions can occur in the U.S. or outside of the
U.S. and that is I think where our concerns are. But just to
get a feel, and I know that there are a lot of people watching
us, Commissioner would you--the total value of the outstanding
contracts today for the OTC, what approximately is that?
Ms. Sommers. I don't have a current number for that. I
think that the numbers that are usually thrown about are $300,
$400, $500 trillion. Somebody on the next panel may have a much
better idea of that.
Mr. Chilton. She is right that the numbers are thrown
around. Bloomberg said the other day $601. I thought it was
$615 trillion. Last year it was $585. I don't know and that is
the point.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Chilton. We don't know what is going on and that is why
I believe we are given the authority to figure it out, because
it had a direct impact on our nation's economy.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir. It is my
understanding that it is somewhere north of $600 trillion and
that even in the market value that would be over $20 trillion
which is a huge number and which far exceeds even the value of
the S&P 500.
Mr. Chilton. Now, we wouldn't get all that, Congressman,
because the SEC is going to do some of those which is a
significant share.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir. But what I am
getting at and it somewhat gets back to your question,
Commissioner. I mean do we know--I guess what would help me and
what I would ask if you would have somebody on your staff put
it together. It is kind of the last 10 years, the increases on
an annual basis of the value of the outstanding contracts as
best we can estimate them, the gross market value of those
contracts, the number of transaction annually. Do we have any
idea how many transactions we have annually?
Ms. Sommers. BIS does publish some numbers on the over-the-
counter market and we can get you those.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. And then the percentage of it
that is debt related, has that changed? I mean, most of the
time we see that \2/3\ of it is debt related or over the course
of time has that changed?
Ms. Sommers. I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. And I think that gets back to
one of the concerns that we have is that there are so many
questions, and there are so many paths that we can go down. The
European Union, my understanding is they have their list of
exemptions. If it is easier for someone to trade overseas, they
are probably going to trade overseas, but they also--the
capital requirement that they set I mean, approximately $14
million U.S. dollars. Is that correct--for a clearinghouse? Is
that--that is what was reported in Bloomberg or Forbes or one
of the articles that I read--$14 million?
Ms. Sommers. Is this a capital requirement, I am sorry,
on----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir. Yes, ma'am. I am
sorry.
Ms. Sommers.--who?
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. The capital requirement to be
a clearinghouse. Was it $14 million?
Ms. Sommers. Their rules have not been finalized yet so I--
this may be something that is in their current proposal. They
did approve something within committee yesterday.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, ma'am. What do you expect
the capital requirement to be? Just approximately what would
you think would be an appropriate capital requirement?
Ms. Sommers. For entities that want to be clearing members
of----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sommers.--of a clearing house? The open access
provisions that we proposed in our proposal last fall, I
believe we are at $50 million. Is that right, $50 million for
an entity before they could be a clearing member of a
clearinghouse.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I personally feel that $14.1
million is a pretty small bank and even in South Georgia. I
have some other questions, Mr. Chairman, but I will yield back
to you. But I would appreciate it if you could have some
staff--just so that we can help explain to the general public
why it is necessary to do something at this stage.
The Chairman. If the gentlemen would yield? Could you
modify that just a bit to add to that the number of contracts?
I do think there is a--the number of contracts versus notional
value may not track the growth and notional value may not track
the number of contracts themselves. And the real issue is the
number of contracts and players playing with those contracts.
The notional value is important, but if we could add the number
of contracts along that track as well. The gentleman yields
back. Mr. Welch for 5 minutes.
Mr. Welch. Thank you very much. One of the frustrations in
the chair I sit in is this: On the one hand, the futures
markets do play a very important role and historically have
provided significant benefit to our farmers and to our
consumers. But there is, I think beyond dispute, evidence that
the financial markets have been inverted so that instead of
them providing that price setting function they provide a
speculator opportunity. And on the one hand speculators are an
important part of the market to provide liquidity, but on the
other hand if it gets out of balance, then the consumer ends up
getting smashed. And I just want to--and so I get frustrated
about that because we have to protect our consumers.
And then when we get into the rule-making question, I hear
the concerns about the implementation of the regulations and
the go slow approach. The focus then becomes about protecting
the financial players in the futures market and that
oftentimes, as I see it, comes at the expense of protecting the
consumers. So there has got to be, and mind you Mr. Chairman, a
bit of a balance here. And Ms. Sommers, I guess I want to ask
you what your philosophy is. Do you see that the level of
speculation that has injected itself into the futures market in
fact is threatening the smooth functioning of that toward
achieving its other goal of providing some protection to our
consumers, our end-users, our commodity producers?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, thank you for the question. I
think that, it is part of our mission at the CFTC to make sure
that our markets are free from abuse and manipulation and that
is what we do every day. Looking at our markets, is making sure
that we do not see manipulative activity or abuse in those
markets.
Mr. Welch. I am trying to understand this a little bit
more. It is not necessarily manipulation. If the rules allow
this enormous infusion of cash, people can legally do that. But
their purpose and their use of that is different than some
farmer in Illinois. And bottom line, who are we working for?
Are we working for the farmer in Illinois, or the hedge fund in
New York? They are both doing legal activities, but one comes
at the expense of the other. So how do you see it, your
responsibility as a Commissioner--I will ask Mr. Chilton this,
too. When it comes to balancing those concerns: that farmer,
who is trying to get stability in his price and that hedge fund
guy who is trying to make a slight margin on a legal activity?
Ms. Sommers. I think that that is what our economists are
there to do, to review the market activity every day to make
sure that we don't see some sort of imbalance.
Mr. Welch. Well, did you see that Mr. Peterson cited that
Goldman study that said $27 in the price of a barrel of oil
which is in the range of $100 now is due to a speculation
premium? Do you agree with that? Do you have any reason to
dispute that?
Ms. Sommers. It is just not something that our economists
have put together. That is--it is not even----
Mr. Welch. Well, why wouldn't that be of concern to you? I
mean, if the average person going to the pump is paying 25
percent higher gas prices, $4 instead of $3, why is that not a
concern of ours?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, I am not suggesting I wouldn't be
concerned about that. It is something that our economists look
at constantly and when there are issues, they bring them to our
attention and we focus on those.
Mr. Welch. Mr. Chilton?
Mr. Chilton. I agree with your concerns, Congressman, and
you know I talk about it a lot. But let me go right to this
with regard to producers, ag producers. And I have heard this
from a lot of folks. I do think speculators are having an
impact. I don't think they are driving prices, but I think they
keep them beyond what they should be. So I do think there is a
speculative premium there every time somebody goes and fills up
their tank. But what I have heard from commercials and a lot of
farmers is that it doesn't serve the same purpose, some of the
markets that it used to, that there is so much volatility that
they can't get into the markets. Earlier I talked about
overnight trading and when folks in Tennessee wake up and want
to trade cotton sometimes but the market is limit up or limit
down. And I don't want to pick on just cotton. This happens in
a number of the commodities. So it is a concern that the
function, Congressman, that you talked about has been changing.
And that is why it is up to us to try and figure out what is
going on with the speculative influence and it is not really
just a black and white issue as much as people want to portray
it as that. And it is also why we need to look at things like
these cheetah traders that I have talked about. And I know I
keep raising it, but when you--can you believe that no place in
our regulations, no place in Dodd-Frank are the words ``high
frequency trading.'' So this is something very new and it is
another thing we have to look at.
Mr. Welch. I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thanks, Mr. Welch. Mr. Crawford for 5
minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This question is
actually directed to both Commissioners and you can decide who
or both of you may want to respond. As I understand it,
implementation of rules and regulations in the time frame that
we are currently operating under will make regulatory arbitrage
a very real threat to U.S. markets in various capacities. It is
unclear to me, however, how this might affect various market
participants. Would there be any short or long term
consequences to end-users such as farmers who are long actuals
in the markets if this threat materializes?
Mr. Chilton. Yes, I am concerned in general about how the
markets have shifted, Congressman, and the impact on end-users.
You know, if you had to say why do we have these markets, I
would say one, it was for the ability for hedgers to--from
commercial end-users, to farmers, to people that have an
underlying interest in the physical commodity grown: corn, or
beans, or cotton, whatever--it is a vehicle for them to hedge.
And two, would be to level out prices for consumers so that
they aren't paying hardly anything at harvest time and paying a
lot at planting time. And I think the markets, as I said
earlier, I think they operate efficiently and effectively, but
we need to watch out for these changes that are occurring. And
so I would agree that we need to look at it and do a better
job, I think.
Mr. Crawford. Did you want to add to anything,
Commissioner?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, Congressman, I think what I would say is
as we move forward promulgating all the rules that we are
required to promulgate under Dodd-Frank; we have to consider
the costs to all of the market participants. So if the cost of
doing business increases dramatically in the United States, of
course they are going to pass that on to end-users, to the
customer, to the consumer. I think there is no doubt that new
regulation has costs associated with it, but we need to keep in
mind those costs as we are moving forward to make sure that we
are doing everything we can in the most efficient and effective
way so that we are not overly burdening market participants.
Mr. Crawford. Well, I see--and if you will indulge me for
just a minute, you mentioned the cotton market, Commissioner
Chilton. And I have watched that very closely. I come from a
pretty heavy cotton area in the Arkansas Delta and we lost some
pretty big players as a result of some instability a few years
ago. And that had to do with limits up over several days. And
my concern is that bona fide hedgers, and those are the farmers
in my district, whether it be cotton farmers, rice farmers,
soybean, whatever, are losing their real price discovery
mechanism that allows them to plan. Certainly, there is fallout
that the consumers are going to face because of the issue you
just illuminated. At what point do we get to a place where we
can rely on that real time price discovery, the open outcry
model that has really brought us to the dance thus far. At what
point do we get back there, because we have the 24/7 dynamic.
We were seeing limits that were off the charts. I mean, in the
700 point limit up for several days in a row that caught two
major cotton players and put them out of business. How do we
fix these problems and get more capital from bona fide hedgers?
Because the truth is if you are farming, you are long actuals.
You have to offset that risk. I want to see us incentivize
those farmers to invest in the short position to hedge the
risk, but they are not wanting to do it. They are afraid to do
it. When do we get to that point?
Mr. Chilton. Well, again, Congressman, these markets are
changing, the dynamics are changing, the traders are playing;
you have speculative interests who were not in these markets
before becoming enlarged--to a large extent. You have pension
funds, hedge funds, exchange traded funds that put their money
in and keep it for a long period of time. That is a dynamic.
The cheetah traders I talked about is a different dynamic. And
then the 24-hour cycle that several Members have talked about
is a dynamic. And so on the IntercontinentalExchange, I think
they do a very good job trying to adapt to the market, but they
are dealing with a moving target.
I will give you one example in cotton in particular. At the
beginning of the year there were a bunch of limit ups. There
were--there have been limit ups and lots of limit downs, but at
the beginning of the year I think it was until the beginning of
February, there were 14 limit ups. And I looked at--had our
staff look at it when those occurred. Well, of the 14, 11
occurred before the markets in Washington--in New York even
opened up. They were dealt with. Now, you don't want to say
that is a bad thing for the business, because that trading was
coming from China, a lot of it, and it was adding some
liquidity to the markets. But at the same point, people in your
state were getting up and saying, ``Well, I think I will go
trade today. Wait a minute, I can't trade. The market is
closed.'' So they are trying to adapt with all these things and
I think they do a good job. But we--they just need to keep at
it and so do we.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Commissioners, I appreciate it.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman for yielding. I
insulted one of the twins over there, Mr. Courtney or Mr. Welch
when I looked up. So Mr. Welch, I apologize. Mr. Courtney, I
apologize. One of you guys got----
Mr. Welch. All us Irish guys look alike, you know.
The Chairman. You have very similar haircuts so I will
just--sorry about that--and you sit beside each other. Mr.
Courtney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you both
Commissioners for being here today and for your testimony. You
know I wanted to make one observation about what is going on
with your budget. The numbers which were mentioned earlier here
today, a number of us sit on the Armed Services Committee and
the Pentagon is the number one consumer of fossil fuels in the
world. Secretary Mabus during one of his appearances recently
observed that every $10 a barrel increase in the cost of oil
costs the Navy $300 million a year in terms of its annual fuel
costs. The Air Force, I am sure is even exponentially higher in
terms of their fuel consumption.
So the taxpayer actually has some skin in this game in
terms of trying to make sure you get your job balanced and
functioning because you know we are all paying. And to the
extent that there are inefficiencies which Commissioner Chilton
talked about because of the excessive volatility, I just think
it is incumbent on all of us who set budgets to recognize that
for a relatively small investment, the taxpayer will
potentially get a much bigger return in terms of stabilizing
some of the costs that our military incurs, as well as a whole
host of other Federal agencies. And certainly state and local
governments are in the same boat as well in terms of their fuel
usage.
You know Commissioner Chilton, thank you for your
leadership in terms of the testimony on the position limits. I
can tell you that back home the end-users in terms of heating
oil have basically exited the market. They will not sell lock-
in contracts to their customers next winter because they have
no confidence that what is going on in terms of the price has
any possible connection to supply and demand.
And, I was interested to hear your remarks that there
actually have been some--it sounded almost like an MOU with
folks in London regarding position limits. And I was wondering
again, if you could just sort of talk about that a little bit
more. Because certainly that is one of the issues that I am
sure our people are nervous about moving too fast.
Mr. Chilton. Yes, Congressman, good question. Thank you for
your leadership. Yes, the IntercontinentalExchange in London,
not the one I was talking about a minute ago in New York. A
couple of years ago I agreed to stick by our limits should we
impose them and give us real time date about the market. So
that is a contract on delivery in the U.S. Now, they are not
giving us information on their own contracts that are happening
in Europe, but on a contract that is delivered in the U.S. They
have agreed to do this. And actually, I think it showed a lot
of leadership on their part.
Congressman, I did want to--you were giving little facts
there and you know it is not just the government and state and
local governments, too. The airlines, for example, Don
Bornhorst who is a VP at Delta said that for every dollar
increase in the cost of crude oil they annualize, it cost them
I think it is $300 million. Now, nobody likes paying baggage
fees, but you sort of see hundreds of millions of dollars and
say that is a significant impact on businesses. It has a
significant impact on consumers also, so again, I think it is
just getting these things right. On limits, I think we should
do it. I think we should have done it back in January. But we
will get there eventually, I am confident.
Mr. Courtney. The other sort of little factoid that I think
you could sort of look at here is that we went through a lot of
consternation about extending the tax cuts in December. One of
the provisions was to reduce the Social Security payroll tax
for employees by two percent. An average American family was
calculated to get about $800 in this year in 2011 because of
that change. And, when I am talking to a Chamber of Commerce in
eastern Connecticut or a senior center, that savings has just
been obliterated in terms of what has been going on just in the
last few months or so. So the economic bounce that we were
hoping to get by getting people some money in their pockets is
just getting totally eaten up.
I realize that there are economists who maybe are advising
you differently about what is actually happening out there, but
I will tell you that the public who pays your salaries and who
is looking to us and looking to you doesn't buy it. They just
feel that there is no justification for what is going on out
there and their whole--sort of the whole momentum of an
economic recovery is being undermined. And I would yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Thanks Mr.
Courtney. Mr. Hultgren for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you both and
sorry it is kind of a busy morning. I know a lot of us have
been in and out with some other committee hearings going, as
well. So I apologize if you have touched on some of this. I
know you have, but maybe not as specifically as I was hoping to
hear.
Commissioner Sommers, I just wanted to follow up on some of
the discussion of pension funds and impact on pension funds.
And I just wanted to drill a little bit more deeply of what you
expect the impact or outcome of the different treatment of
pension funds that we see here in the U.S. versus the EU. Since
there is that difference there, what do you see as the outcome
of that difference?
Ms. Sommers. I think it is a cost to the people who have
invested in those pension funds. I am sure there will be
somebody on the next panel who can answer this more
specifically, but the exemption in the European legislation
text is to exempt those pension funds from clearing
requirements for I think either 2 or 3 years, and then looking
to what should be done with them after that. Dodd-Frank does
not give us the ability to do that, so pensions will not be
exempted from the clearing requirement in the U.S. So obviously
that adds cost.
Mr. Hultgren. How significant do you think those costs will
be? Do you have any sense?
Ms. Sommers. I don't.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Switching gears just a little bit. In a
March letter to Chairman Gensler, the FSA expressed concern
that CFTC's proposal to set a $50 million cap on the amount of
capital clearinghouses can require potential clearing members
to have, it could actually increase risk to the system. I just
wondered do you agree with that? Would it increase risk? And
are there any other proposals currently before the Commission
that you think may also increase risk to the system?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I--what I would say about that is
I agree that there is a legitimate concern out there from the
buy-side that they have not been given access to clearing. And
to be able to deal with that concern, there is a provision in
Dodd-Frank that requires open access from clearinghouses. What
we did to address that is to set a very low threshold for
clearing members. We have received public comment on that and
will now revisit what the appropriate threshold or what the
appropriate number will be before we move to a final rule.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Thank you very much. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. Mr. Huelskamp, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I apologize for
my tardiness, but I do have a few questions I would like to
follow up on and it is a question I asked last time I was here,
and asked of the Commissioners or other Commissioners. But is
it still the case that in your new rules you have yet to define
a swap dealer and end-user? Have those been defined in
regulations yet?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, we have proposed definitions for those,
yes.
Mr. Huelskamp. And the proposed definitions, those are not
yet approved by you?
Ms. Sommers. They have not been finalized.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. Then I indicated previously the
difficulty with expecting folks to comment on rules that they
don't know if they have been impacted yet. Is that still the
difficult situation these folks are in?
Ms. Sommers. What we did to address that, sir, is when we
proposed the definition for products, what is a swap, what is
not a swap, what--jointly with the SEC, is we reopened a number
of other comment files that relied on that definition. So those
comment files were opened for an extended 30 days to allow
people to look at the product definition and be able to comment
on the other proposals as well at the same time.
Mr. Huelskamp. But they are still uncertain whether or not
it would apply to them, so they are sending in comments such as
if they would happen to somehow, sometime apply to me, this
would be our comments. Is that generally what they are saying?
Ms. Sommers. They would, I assume, be sending in comments
based on the rule that we have proposed. So as proposed, what a
swap would be that there is no certainty that that is what the
final rule will say as to a definition, but they would be
commenting with regard to the proposal.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. That is still difficult for me to
understand why we would do it in that manner. Second thing I
would like to comment on or ask questions on something you
mentioned as I was walking in. And I apologize about--did you
mention a cost-benefit analysis of these regulations? And those
are--have those been--is that part of the proposed regulations
that you put before the public?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, within our proposals of--we have complied
with Section 15(a) of the Commodity Exchange Act which requires
that we consider costs and benefits of proposals. So there is
really just kind of cursory language included in those
proposals. It is my understanding that as we move forward
because we are not prohibited to go further and to actually
quantify what the costs would be associated with proposals,
that we will be able to do a more thorough economic analysis of
our proposals, going forward.
Mr. Huelskamp. And you are able to--are you able to do
those before you define the actual entities that would be
impacted or do you have to await that final rule?
Ms. Sommers. I am hopeful that we will include a more
thorough economic analysis within any final rules.
Mr. Huelskamp. But if you haven't defined swap, swap
dealer, end-user, how do you do the economic analysis? Are you
telling me you need to wait until those definitions have been
finalized?
Ms. Sommers. The economic analysis based on the definitions
would be within that specific proposal. So when we finalize the
definition of a swap dealer, the economic analysis based on
that definition would be within that proposal.
Mr. Huelskamp. So then the comments then could not be
directed towards the economic analysis given that you have
closed the comments on the proposed rule. Is that correct?
Ms. Sommers. If the comment had been closed, then they
wouldn't have the ability to do that. I think what you may be
suggesting, sir, is that the definition should be finalized
first and I agree with that.
Mr. Huelskamp. So you will finalize the definitions first?
Ms. Sommers. I can't give you that commitment. I am hopeful
that we would do that.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes, who can give me that commitment? The
other Commissioner or two of you? Who would make that--who
makes that final determination?
Mr. Chilton. There would have to be a third one of us here,
sir, to make a commitment.
Mr. Huelskamp. Could I count on both of you to be two of
the three that we need to provide that certainty?
Mr. Chilton. I believe we need to do these definitions
first. I agree with you 100 percent that it is very difficult
for us to know what we are doing without doing the definition.
And it is an uncertainty that we need to remedy quickly and I
also believe--agree with Commissioner Sommers, that we need to
do a better job with our cost-benefit analyses. Some of this,
in all fairness, is with regard to this OTC world that we don't
have a lot of experience in. So I think that is why we have
probably given a more cursory view of doing that than we would
have like to have done.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes, and I appreciate that commitment. We
are looking for number three then and but yes, that is my
concern is about the lack of experience with that particular
world and its impacts. That is the uncertainty that I think
will do considerable damage if we get this wrong. So I
appreciate that and the time, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. I want to thank
our panel for coming and spending time with us today. Thank you
very much. Mr. Chilton, can I get you to take a question? Well,
you have a comment. Go ahead.
Mr. Chilton. I just wanted to correct the record, Mr.
Chairman. I was informed when I talked about the cost for Delta
Airlines, a dollar increase is $100 million. I believe I said
$300 million. So I just wanted to correct the record.
The Chairman. It is just numbers, but thank you for
correcting the record on that. Mr. Chilton, would you take a
question for the record? You made a comment I think earlier
about a 64 percent increase in speculation as a result of
information you received on a special call authority of ICE.
Can you help our staff understand how you computed that--
understand how you did it and those kinds of things? Don't do
it right now but for the record?
Mr. Chilton. Yes, we look at----
The Chairman. Well, if you wouldn't mind, we don't need it
just--if you wouldn't mind.
Mr. Chilton. For the record, on the record, Mr. Chairman,
absolutely.
The Chairman. Because we have another panel and we need to
get to those.
Mr. Chilton. Yes.
[The information referred to is located on p. 112.]
The Chairman. So thank you very much both for coming today.
The comments are helpful and we appreciate it. Ms. Sommers, Mr.
Chilton, thank you very much.
Ms. Sommers. Thank you.
The Chairman. We will now move to the second panel who have
been waiting patiently for the grilling to cease with our first
panel so if you could move. All right, well, let me introduce
the panel. The panel and Commission brought a big entourage
with them this morning and it clears much of the seating. Our
first witness on the second panel will be Mr. Thomas Callahan,
the Executive Vice President and Chief Executive Officer of New
York Stock Exchange, Liffe U.S., LLC, on behalf of the New York
Stock Exchange Euronext from New York. We have Mr. John
Damgard, from the Futures Industry Association here in D.C. We
have Mr. Thomas Deas, Vice President and Treasurer for FMC
Corporation in Philadelphia. We have Ms. Sally Miller, CEO of
Institute of International Bankers, right, right. We have Mr.
Stephen O'Connor, Managing Director, Morgan Stanley, and
Chairman, International Swaps and Derivatives Association, New
York, New York. In the interest of full disclosure, my son
works for Morgan Stanley in Los Cruces, New Mexico and has
absolutely nothing to do with what Mr. Connor's going to say
this morning. Put a plug in for my son. And Mr. Larry Thompson,
Managing Director and General Counsel for The Depository Trust
& Clearing Corporation in New York City.
Before we begin I am going to have to apologize to the
panel. I committed to a speech at noon and I am going to have
to slip out before you get too--we have Mr. Neugebauer coming
back and if he is not here when I have to leave then Mr.
Huelskamp will sit in and I have read your testimony--will read
your comments from the questions that are answered. I
appreciate you coming, putting up with this process of being
the second panel. So with that, Mr. Callahan, if you will try
to squeeze yours in within 5 minutes that way we will be able
to get to everybody.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS F. CALLAHAN, EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENT AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NYSE LIFFE U.S., LLC, NEW YORK, NY; ON
BEHALF OF NYSE EURONEXT

Mr. Callahan. Terrific. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member
Boswell, and Members of the Subcommittee, my name is Tom
Callahan. I am the CEO of NYSE Liffe U.S. which is the U.S.
futures exchange of NYSE Euronext. The NYSE Euronext group
operates 13 securities and derivatives exchanges in six
countries. Thank you for holding this hearing today.
As a multinational company with operations in multiple
countries, with customers located on every continent, we are
particularly grateful for your focus on U.S. competitiveness
and the fact of international coordination. We recognize that
Dodd-Frank has placed enormous strains on the CFTC resources
and we commend the CFTC and its staff for their extraordinary
efforts to implement the Act. However, we are concerned that in
some instances the CFTC is electing to use its discretionary
authority under Dodd-Frank to propose burdensome and
unnecessary restrictions that are not consistent with the
purposes of Dodd-Frank, and will impair U.S. competitiveness
and market stability.
One such example is the CFTC's proposal on registration of
foreign boards of trades or FBOTs. Currently, U.S. market
participants can access comparatively regulated FBOTs directly
from terminals in the U.S., so long as the foreign board of
trade has obtained an approval letter from CFTC staff. This is
commonly referred to as no action relief. This kind of
framework has worked well for years and has benefitted the U.S.
market participants through increase in access to global
products and liquidity. Dodd-Frank provides the CFTC with
discretionary authority to register FBOTs that offer terminal
access in the U.S.
However, the CFTC has proposed to use this authority to
replace the existing approval regime entirely with a formal
registration requirement for all FBOTs offering access in the
U.S. We believe this is an unnecessary and burdensome and
costly approach. Given the significant resource constraints
that the CFTC currently faces requiring each existing no action
recipient to resubmit and for the CFTC to re-review previously
submitted information seems unwarranted. In addition, this
proposal would set a negative precedent for other jurisdictions
who could use this proposal as an excuse to erect barriers to
access by U.S. exchanges.
The second example is the CFTC's proposed overhaul of the
core principles governing designated contract markets or DCM's.
In particular, the CFTC proposed to require a DCM to delist a
futures contract that fails to maintain average trading volume
through the centralized market of at least 85 percent. Just as
with FBOT registration, these changes are not mandated by Dodd-
Frank. This proposal seems contrary to the goals of Dodd-Frank
since it will likely cause market participants to decrease
trading on the regulated futures exchanges and increase their
trading in OTC swaps.
In addition, the proposal would create an incentive for the
trading to move offshore which is not--to places such as Europe
which are not contemplating similar requirements. This proposal
may inhibit development of liquid markets in new products.
These products often require more than the CFTC's proposed 12
month grace period to establish liquidity before they can trade
and exchange on a centralized market.
Recall that DCM's or as they are more commonly known,
futures exchanges performed remarkably well during the recent
crisis. This begs the question of why U.S. exchanges are now
being targeted by reforms that potentially disadvantage them in
the global marketplace even though Dodd-Frank did not mandate
these changes.
A third example of regulation not required by Dodd-Frank is
that of ownership restrictions on exchanges. While Dodd-Frank
requires the promulgation of rules to address conflicts of
interest, it does not require application of rigid ownership
percentages or caps. Nonetheless, the CFTC is considering
arbitrary ownership limits for DCMs. These restrictions may
inhibit the creation of new DCMs and DCOs and have negative
effects on market competition; certainly not the intended goals
of Dodd-Frank. Furthermore, European regulators have not
proposed similar ownership restrictions, thereby compromising
the ability of U.S. and foreign exchanges to operate across
borders.
In closing I want to mention two areas where there are
significant differences between the CFTC's approach and that of
foreign regulators and the SEC. We are concerned that these
differences may impair U.S. competitiveness and cross border
access for U.S. market participants.
First, the CFTC's proposal on swaps execution facilities or
SEFs have significant differences both at the SEC's parallel
proposal and the proposal of EU and other jurisdictions. For
example, the SEC and the CFTC do not seem to agree on how many
participants must receive a quote transmission in an RFQ
transmission. Finally, the timing and scope of the clearing for
OTC derivatives in the U.S. should coordinate with the rest of
the G20. As it currently stands, the clearing mandate for OTC
derivatives will likely take effect in the U.S. prior to those
mandates being established in other jurisdictions potentially
incentivizing swap trading by market participants in foreign
markets not yet subject to a clearing mandate. Thank you and I
look forward to any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Callahan follows:]

Prepared Statement of Thomas F. Callahan, Executive Vice President and
Chief Executive Officer, NYSE Liffe U.S., LLC, New York, NY; on Behalf
of NYSE Euronext

Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, Members of the
Subcommittee. My name is Tom Callahan, and I am the Chief Executive
Officer of NYSE Liffe U.S., LLC (``NYSE Liffe U.S.''), a subsidiary of
NYSE Euronext. The NYSE Euronext group operates 13 securities and
derivatives exchanges in six countries.\1\ NYSE Liffe U.S. is a futures
exchange designated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission
(``CFTC'') as a contract market (``DCM''). I am pleased to appear this
morning on behalf of NYSE Euronext and its affiliated exchanges as the
Subcommittee considers both the progress towards and challenges to
international harmonization in connection with the implementation of
the derivatives title of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act of 2010 (``Dodd-Frank'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\  NYSE, NYSE Arca Equities, NYSE Arca Options, NYSE Amex
Equities, NYSE Amex Options, NYSE Liffe, NYSE Liffe U.S., NYSE Blue,
NYSE Alternext Equities, Euronext Paris, Euronext Brussels, Euronext
Amsterdam, and Euronext Lisbon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We believe that the reduction of systemic risk and the enhancement
of transparency through expanded use of clearinghouses and organized
trading markets are important objectives. The adoption of these and
related goals by the Group of Twenty (``G20'') countries is also a key
and indeed critical element in enabling us to accomplish these
objectives. As a multinational company with exchange operations in
multiple countries, and customers located on every continent, we are
acutely aware that effective international coordination is critical
both to the accomplishment of Dodd-Frank's intended results as well as
to the commercial success and competitive positioning of U.S.
exchanges, clearinghouses and other market participants.
Effective global coordination will have the salutary effects of
preventing regulatory arbitrage, improving market efficiency and
raising the quality of regulatory oversight in all participating
jurisdictions. Ineffective coordination of regulatory policy, however,
will lead to market fragmentation. Where that occurs, U.S. end-users
and investors could be disadvantaged both in accessing foreign markets
and in their ability to trade in liquid U.S. markets.
We believe there are three key dimensions to effective global
coordination: first, working cooperatively to establish coordinated
regulatory policy at the international level; second, establishing an
appropriate framework for cross-border market access that does not
require regulators to assume unrealistic and unduly costly
extraterritorial regulatory obligations that they are not positioned to
discharge effectively; and third, adopting a mutual recognition
framework for comparable foreign regulatory regimes recognizing that
comparable policy objectives may be realized through varying regulatory
mechanisms.
We believe that the CFTC's traditional approach to recognition of
comparable foreign regulatory regimes has worked well over the years,
but we have some concerns that its proposals under Dodd-Frank would
unduly depart from that approach. Before addressing those specific
proposals, however, I would like to highlight two overriding principles
that we believe should inform the CFTC's and the Securities and
Exchange Commission's (SEC) implementation of Dodd-Frank:

First, we believe that Dodd-Frank should not serve as a
basis for the CFTC (or the SEC) to take on unnecessary and
inappropriate extraterritorial regulatory obligations. Rather,
Dodd-Frank should serve as a basis to supplement the CFTC's
existing approach to cross-border market access through the use
of new authorities to address clearly evasive activity. In this
regard, extraterritorial jurisdiction is only appropriate where
legitimate U.S. regulatory concerns exist, such as where
foreign markets offer ``look-alike'' products that are linked
directly to contracts traded on U.S. DCMs and that may be used
to circumvent important U.S. regulatory objectives. However,
any such exertion of extraterritorial jurisdiction should be
narrowly tailored to preventing such circumvention. As a
corollary, permitting U.S. investors to access foreign markets
on an appropriate basis is critical if U.S. market providers
are to be permitted to access investors outside the United
States on appropriate and commercially viable terms.

Second, it is critical that the CFTC, where possible, seek
harmonization--or, at a minimum, comparability--with other
regulators in implementing derivatives reforms. Significant
differences with foreign regulators, particularly the European
Union (``EU''), and domestically with the SEC, could preclude
the establishment of an effective comparability-based framework
for cross-border access. This will in turn encourage regulatory
arbitrage that can only be addressed, at a significant cost to
market participants, through steps that will invariably
fragment markets regionally and foster illiquidity and
increased costs of execution. Harmonization and comparability,
in contrast, will protect the international competitiveness of
U.S. exchanges, clearinghouses and other market professionals
and ensure U.S. market participants have cost effective access
to critical risk management products.

1. Cross-Border Market Access

A. Access to Foreign Markets
Currently, U.S. market participants can access comparably regulated
foreign boards of trade (``FBOTs'') directly from terminals in the U.S.
This access has been permitted by the CFTC under a long line of no-
action relief. The NYSE Liffe markets in London and Paris have been
open to U.S. market participants under this system since 1999, and the
Amsterdam market has been open to U.S. market participants since 2005.
Not only has this existing approval process proven effective at
expanding the range of products available to U.S. market participants,
increasing liquidity, and lowering costs, but it also has given the
CFTC a great deal of flexibility in terms of tailoring relief to
particular markets and modifying the conditions for such individual
operations over time. This framework for cross-border access has worked
well since its inception, benefitting U.S. market participants.
Dodd-Frank provided the CFTC additional flexibility in the form of
discretionary authority to directly register FBOTs that offer terminal
access in the U.S. While we appreciate that adoption of a rules-based
standard may be useful as a supplement to the existing no-action
regime, particularly for FBOTs that offer ``look-alike'' contracts that
are linked directly to contracts traded on U.S. DCMs, we are concerned
that replacing the no-action regime entirely with a registration
requirement for all FBOTs offering access in the U.S. is unnecessary
and unduly costly.
Pursuant to this authority, the CFTC has proposed to require the
registration and oversight of FBOTs that provide qualifying U.S.
persons with direct electronic access to their trading and order
matching engines. The proposed approach would represent a striking
departure from the CFTC's existing regime, which has been influential
in encouraging other jurisdictions to look to comparable U.S.
regulation as a basis for mutual recognition.
In particular, given the significant resource constraints the CFTC
faces in implementing Dodd-Frank, the CFTC's proposal to require each
existing no-action recipient to re-submit, and the CFTC to re-review,
information that was already reviewed by CFTC staff in connection with
the original approval seems especially unwarranted. It would also
impose unnecessary costs and burdens on foreign applicants.
The CFTC's proposal, if adopted, would also set an undesirable
precedent for other jurisdictions, such as the EU, which are
considering permitting U.S. market operators to operate abroad on a
mutual recognition approach.

B. Access to U.S. Markets
In the futures markets, the CFTC has traditionally allowed foreign
market participants and intermediaries to access U.S. Designated
Contract Markets (``DCMs'') without subjecting them to direct CFTC
regulation so long as they, like U.S. customers, access the DCM through
a CFTC-registered futures commission merchant. While the CFTC has
proposed to extend this approach to swaps at the intermediary level,
there are still questions about whether a foreign market participant
can trade swaps on a U.S. DCM or swap execution facility (``SEF'')
without becoming subject to regulation as a swap dealer or major swap
participant. So that we can, in the future, offer trading in swaps on
NYSE Liffe U.S. to both U.S. and foreign market participants--thereby
attracting the greatest amount of liquidity--we believe it is important
for the CFTC to clarify this point.

2. Harmonization and Comparability
In order for any mutual recognition regime to work--and to avoid
undesirable arbitrage between U.S. and foreign markets and different
types of U.S. markets--regulators must take care to adopt consistent
approaches to similar issues or at least recognize where different
means can be used legitimately to achieve common objectives. These
principles have, for over twenty years, been implicit in the CFTC's own
approach to comparability under Part 30. We are concerned, however,
that the CFTC's current proposals for DCMs, including ownership
restrictions, might lead to an unwarranted departure from those
principles; the approaches being proposed for the regulation of SEFs
are inconsistent; and we also believe it is important that the CFTC
coordinate with other G20 jurisdictions on key aspects of reform,
including clearing mandates and swap data repositories (``SDRs'').

A. Designated Contract Markets
The CFTC has proposed a substantial overhaul of the core principles
governing DCMs, including proposing to require a DCM to delist a
contract that fails to maintain average trading volume through
centralized markets of at least 85%. These changes are not mandated by
Dodd-Frank and will likely have a significant negative impact on the
competitiveness of U.S. DCMs. In the U.S., market participants may
increase their trading in swaps that offer futures-like exposure,
including on SEFs. In the EU, current reform proposals do not
contemplate any such requirements, thus creating an incentive for
derivatives trading to move offshore to European exchanges.
The proposed 85% central trading threshold is particularly
problematic because it may inhibit the development of liquid markets in
new products, which are often initially traded outside of centralized
markets and often require more than the proposed 12 month grace period
to establish adequate liquidity. Trading in these products will almost
surely move to SEFs and offshore--thereby eliminating the still
significant price discovery function played by block transactions that
are executed subject to the rules of DCMs. The potential migration of
these existing contracts away from DCMs seems completely contrary to
the goals of Dodd-Frank and will likely have serious ramifications for
market participants with open positions in affected contracts,
disrupting effective risk management strategies by reducing contract
liquidity and in some cases requiring market participants to hold
existing positions to expiration. There are significant adverse market
and risk management effects of applying an arbitrary and inflexible
standard.

B. Ownership Restrictions
The CFTC is considering substantial restrictions on the ownership
of DCMs and SEFs which may inhibit the creation of new DCMs and SEFs
and have deleterious effects on market competition. These effects are
magnified by the significant capital requirements for DCMs also
mandated by the CFTC. Moreover, European regulators have not proposed
similar ownership restrictions for exchanges operating in Europe,
compromising the ability of U.S. and foreign exchanges to operate
across borders in any future comparability-based cross-border
framework.
We acknowledge that potential conflicts of interest can raise
potentially serious issues and we applaud the CFTC for its leadership
in addressing these concerns. However, we feel strongly that the
consistent oversight of compliance with the existing core principles,
CFTC rule approval requirements and other safeguards provide
substantially better tools to mitigate potential conflicts than blunt
ownership limitations that could stifle innovative solutions and new
ventures. The market is too diverse to become subject to a one-size-
fits-all approach to conflicts. Rather, different market models must be
allowed to develop for different products. For these market models to
develop in a successful and transparent manner, a broad range of market
participants must have input. This will allow for greater competition
and innovation in areas such as cross-margining arrangements and
trading functionalities.

C. Swap Execution Facilities
The CFTC's proposal for SEFs has significant differences both with
the SEC's parallel proposal and proposals in the EU and other G20
jurisdictions. These differences may impair the competitiveness of U.S.
markets, encourage trading elsewhere and restrict the effectiveness of
any comparability-based cross-border regime.

D. Clearing Mandate
The timing and the scope of the clearing mandate for OTC
derivatives in the U.S. should be coordinated with the rest of the G20.
As it currently stands, the clearing mandate for OTC derivatives will
likely take effect in the U.S. prior to those mandates being
established in other jurisdictions, potentially incentivizing swaps
trading by market participants in foreign markets not yet subject to a
clearing mandate. Moreover, eventually, cross-border swap transactions
may be subject to clearing mandates in more than one jurisdiction, with
potentially conflicting requirements. The CFTC should work together
closely with foreign regulators to develop a framework for regulatory
cooperation that avoids such conflicts. For instance, the CFTC should
facilitate the clearing of swaps by U.S. market participants on
clearing organizations outside the U.S. that are subject to comparable
regulation, so as to foster reciprocal treatment from foreign
regulators and promote an efficient, transparent global market.

E. Swap Data Repositories
Dodd-Frank requires Swap Data Repositories (SDRs) to obtain an
agreement for indemnifications from foreign regulators before sharing
information regarding swaps transactions. This requirement is contrary
to existing approaches to information sharing and, in our view, unduly
burdensome. Dodd-Frank also does not grant the CFTC express authority
to exempt a comparably regulated foreign SDR, which is inconsistent
with proposals in the EU and elsewhere. Left unaddressed, these issues
will contribute to regional fragmentation of global information
collection and impede the CFTC's exercise of its regulatory
responsibilities under Dodd-Frank.
While we would support statutory changes to address these SDR
concerns, we also believe that the CFTC could address them through its
rulemaking and interpretive authority. The CFTC could, for instance,
address the indemnification issue by interpreting the indemnification
provision not to apply where information is provided, either directly
or through the CFTC, pursuant to a CFTC Memorandum of Understanding
with a foreign regulator. The CFTC could also adopt a notice
registration regime for comparably regulated foreign SDRs that fulfills
the statutory mandate without requiring the CFTC to directly regulate
SDRs already regulated abroad.

3. Conclusion
We recognize that the passage of Dodd-Frank has placed enormous
resource burdens on the CFTC, and we commend the CFTC and its staff on
their proactive and timely efforts to nevertheless implement the many
required rulemakings under Dodd-Frank. As a globally integrated company
whose operations are often subject to overlapping regulatory regimes
and requirements, we are particularly concerned about a number of CFTC
proposed rules that would impede appropriate cross-border market access
by U.S. or foreign persons as well as those that may thwart the
development of comparability-based mutual recognition or exemption
regimes. We have highlighted a number of these concerns today in this
testimony.
Going forward, we strongly believe that the CFTC should develop its
final rules under Dodd-Frank, as well as utilize its other rulemaking
and interpretative authorities, in light of two primary objectives.
First, the CFTC should not view Dodd-Frank as an opportunity to expand
extraterritorial application of U.S. law--or to establish the need for
resources to administer a global examination and supervisory reach--
unnecessarily, especially in light of the significant resource
constraints the CFTC already faces and the history of successful
comparability regimes. Second, the CFTC should seek actively to
harmonize its derivatives reform rules with the SEC and with regulators
in other G20 countries in order to discourage regulatory arbitrage and
facilitate the development of comparable international regulatory
frameworks and to avoid market fragmentation and other inefficiencies.

The Chairman. Mr. Callahan, thank you very much. I
appreciate that. It was not lost on me when Chairman Chilton,
Commissioner Chilton in fact bragged on the regulated markets
as having had no function properly during the crisis in late
2008. So it does beg the question as to why they are--expansive
work in that regard. Mr. Damgard for 5 minutes. Thank you, sir.
We appreciate you being here.

STATEMENT OF JOHN M. DAMGARD, PRESIDENT, FUTURES INDUSTRY
ASSOCIATION, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Damgard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank--I join Mr.
Callahan in thanking you all, and I thank the Members of the
Committee for having this hearing and inviting me to speak. I
am John Damgard. I am President of the Futures Industry
Association. I am also soybean and corn producer from Illinois.
And on behalf of the FIA, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to appear here today.
I share your concern about extraterritorial impact of the
Dodd-Frank Act and the importance of international regulatory
harmonization. In my testimony today, I will discuss two
specific rulemakings that exemplify these issues, but first I
would like to take a moment to put these issues into a broader
context. It was not so long ago the derivatives markets in
general, and futures markets in particular, were viewed as
secondary to other aspects of modern finance such as trading of
stocks and bonds. That is clearly no longer the case.
Derivatives markets will be as important in the financial
markets of the 21st century as the stock exchanges were in the
20th century preserving our ability to compete in the global
derivatives marketplaces, therefore, critical to our economic
standing in the world.
As the President of the FIA, I can assure you that the
global derivatives marketplace is becoming more and more
competitive every year. Our statistics on trading volume show
that last year North America was outstripped by the Asia
Pacific region in terms of the number of futures and the
options that trade on their exchanges. At the moment, the
largest exchanges in the region draw most of their volume from
domestic customers, but it is only a matter of time before they
open to the outside world, and when they do our markets will be
challenged like never before. I might add that the Dalian
Commodity Exchange is now the largest agricultural futures
market in the world.
In our industry, liquidity is the key to success. Anything
that adds to the cost of doing business on our markets creates
an economic incentive to use an alternative or not any at all.
No matter how well-intended, Dodd-Frank punished the U.S.
futures industry, an industry that had absolutely no
responsibility for the financial crisis and indeed worked
flawlessly throughout the entire period. If Dodd-Frank makes
our markets less efficient and more expensive we run the risk
of pushing another industry off shore.
Let me give two examples of specific rule makings with
adverse extraterritorial impact and on this I agree with Mr.
Callahan. The first example with--relates to the cross border
clearing of swaps. Under Dodd-Frank any non-U.S. clearinghouse
that clears swaps for participants in the U.S. must be
registered with the CFTC as a derivatives clearing
organization. In addition, any firm that is a member of that
foreign clearinghouse must register with the CFTC as an FCM, a
futures clearing if it clears swaps on behalf of U.S.
customers.
Let us think about the practical implications of that
position. Adding these clearing organizations to the
Commission's oversight responsibility will severely strain the
agency's resources and put a substantial and unnecessary
financial and operational burden on FCM's. Some firms and
clearing organizations could well decide it just isn't worth
the trouble. The net effect will be fewer choices for U.S.
customers who need access to clearinghouses for their swaps.
There is also the risk that foreign regulators will follow our
lead and impose burdensome requirements on our firms, an
outcome that none of us would like to see called retaliation.
In our view, the logical solution is to rely on the
successful model now in place in the futures markets. The
CFTC's part 30 rules which govern the offering for sale of
foreign futures to U.S. participants do not require either a
foreign clearing organization or its clearing members to be
registered with the CFTC if they are subject to comparable
regulation in their home country. This approach has worked
extremely well and has facilitated the ability of U.S. FCMs and
their customers to participate in international markets.
The second example is the CFTC's proposed rule for position
limits. I want to emphasize that the CFTC strongly supports
robust large trader reporting requirements which assure that
the CFTC and other regulators have complete visibility into the
activities of the more active traders. Our concern is that the
lack of international harmonization on position limits
threatens to place U.S. markets and market participants at a
severe competitive disadvantage.
Furthermore, the proposed rules do not satisfy the
statutory prerequisites for establishing position limits. No
evidence has been cited by the CFTC to justify position limits
as necessary to diminish, eliminate, or prevent excessive
speculation. Unsupported claims about the effect of speculation
should not be allowed to undermine the price discovering and
risk shifting function of the U.S. derivative markets, or cause
these markets to shift to foreign boards of trade.
Just today, the FIA filed a comment letter requesting that
the CFTC republish the position on the rules with information
on how the agency intends to apply the rule governing
aggregation of positions. If applied as written, this rule will
stifle legitimate use of the markets by investors and end-
users. We urge the CFTC to republish this proposal so that the
public will have appropriate notice and the opportunity to
comment on aggregation of positions.
In closing, I would like to raise a procedural concern.
Chairman Gensler has correctly observed that the proposed rules
fit together in a mosaic. Mosaics however, are nothing more
than chips of colored stone until they have been pieced
together into a work of art. The Commission has shown us the
individual chips, but it hasn't shared its vision of how they
fit together in a comprehensive regulatory scheme. The industry
and the public deserve an opportunity to analyze and comment on
this regulatory mosaic before it is set in concrete and takes
its final form. We therefore recommend that the Commission
provide an additional 60 day comment period after it has
determined how the proposed rules fit together and before it
promulgates these rules. We think a 60 day comment period would
be well within the time table set by the G20. Thank you very
much for my opportunity to appear before you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Damgard follows:]

Prepared Statement of John M. Damgard, President, Futures Industry
Association, Washington, D.C.

Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, Members of the
Subcommittee, I am John Damgard, President of the Futures Industry
Association (FIA). On behalf of FIA, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
When Congress was considering the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act), many in the financial
services industry--and in Congress--cautioned that the extraterritorial
reach of the regulatory structure being established would unnecessarily
interfere with the regulatory programs being established in the
European Union and Asia and would inhibit the ability of U.S. market
participants to compete internationally. As we approach the effective
date of the Dodd-Frank Act, and the regulatory regime contemplated by
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (Commission) in its proposed
rules has come into focus, there is increasing evidence that last
year's hypothetical fears will be this year's reality.

Concern Over the Extraterritorial Scope of the Commission's Rules Is
Increasing
In March, the UK Financial Services Authority (FSA) filed a comment
letter with the Commission objecting to the Commission's proposed rules
prohibiting registered derivatives clearing organizations (DCOs) from
setting minimum capital requirements for swap clearing members higher
than $50 million. While acknowledging that minimum capital requirements
may help assure fair and open access to clearing organizations, FSA
warned that ``impos[ing] them on clearing arrangements for products
that have complex or unique characteristics could lead to increased
risk to the system in the short to medium term.'' FSA has a direct
interest in the Commission's rules affecting DCOs, since two registered
DCOs active in clearing swaps--LCH.Clearnet Ltd. and ICE Clear Europe--
are located in London and are subject to regulation by FSA as
recognized clearing houses. Therefore, the Commission's requirements
for DCOs may conflict with FSA's.
Earlier this month, Paula Dejmek, a Member of the Cabinet of
Michael Barnier, the European Commission's internal market and services
commissioner, speaking at a conference of the Association for Financial
Markets, observed:

We are aware of the extraterritorial application of the Dodd-
Frank Act. We are not happy with it and this is something we
are discussing with our U.S. counterparts, hoping to find
mutually convenient solutions. . . . The issue of regulatory
convergence is extremely important. . . . We have important
questions to address, notably with regard to the mutual open
access to each other's market operators and infrastructures.

International regulators are not the only authorities troubled by
the extraterritorial reach of the Dodd-Frank Act. Just last week,
Senators Schumer and Gillibrand joined 16 Members of the New York House
of Representatives both Democrats and Republicans, including
Congressman Gibson and eight Members of the House Financial Services
Committee, to express their fears that the Commission's proposed rules
imposing margin requirements on uncleared derivatives transactions
between non-U.S. subsidiaries of U.S. entities and non-U.S.
counterparties:

will inevitably result in significant competitive disadvantages
for U.S. firms operating globally. . . . [A]bsent harmonization
between new rules here and abroad, disparate treatment of U.S.
firms will only encourage participants in derivatives markets
to do business with non-U.S. firms. Accordingly, it is
important to strike a balance between implementing the new
safeguards and harming the competitiveness of U.S. financial
institutions vis-a-vis their international counterparts. . . .
Congress . . . included provisions in Dodd-Frank that instruct
regulators . . . to impose regulations extraterritorially
beyond the U.S. only if there is a `direct and significant'
connection with U.S. activities or commerce. These provisions
are intended to protect . . . the competitiveness of U.S.
institutions, which is necessary for a healthy banking system.

We do not underestimate the challenges facing the Commission, and
we recognize that the Commission and its staff are working hard to
comply with the very tight timeframes set out in the Dodd-Frank Act. It
is perhaps understandable, therefore, that the Commission has not
considered fully, and provided guidance on, the intended
extraterritorial scope of the Dodd-Frank Act. As the above examples
indicate, however, the Commission cannot wait any longer.

Guidance on the Extraterritorial Scope of the Commission's Rules Is
Essential
Many provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act do not require implementing
rules and will become effective in less than 2 months. The failure of
the Commission to provide clear guidance on the extraterritorial scope
of the Dodd-Frank Act prior to its effective date, and the resultant
legal and regulatory uncertainty to which market facilities and
participants both here and abroad will be exposed, will require such
participants to incur significant costs to comply with the Dodd-Frank
Act or assume the regulatory risk that they will be found to be in
violation of one or more provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act and, perhaps,
ordered to cease business activities until they are in compliance. No
market facility or participant can afford to take this risk.
One example that I would like to highlight for you today that
directly affects many FIA members are the provisions of the Dodd-Frank
Act requiring any clearing organization, wherever located, that clears
swaps for participants located in the U.S. to be registered with the
Commission as a DCO and the concomitant obligation of any clearing
member clearing swaps on behalf of U.S. participant to be registered as
an FCM.
Section 725 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that it is unlawful for
any clearing organization ``directly or indirectly, to make use of the
mails or any means or instrumentality of interstate commerce to perform
the functions of a derivatives clearing organization with respect to .
. . a swap,'' unless that clearing organization is registered with the
Commission as a DCO. On its face, therefore, this section requires a
foreign clearing organization to be registered as a DCO if it cleared
just one swap for or on behalf of a U.S. participant. This is the case
even if the Commission has not determined that the swap is required to
be cleared.
Section 724 of the Dodd-Frank Act provides that it is unlawful for
any person to accept any money or securities ``from, for, or on behalf
of a swaps customer'' to margin a cleared swap, unless that person is
registered with the Commission as an FCM. Consequently, a clearing
member of a foreign clearing organization that clears swaps, directly
or indirectly, on behalf of one or more U.S. swap participants is
required to be registered with the Commission.
Requiring the registration of such foreign DCOs threatens to: (i)
severely strain the Commission's resources; (ii) impose substantial
financial and operational burdens on FCMs, subjecting FCMs to
duplicative and conflicting laws and regulatory requirements; (iii)
restrict competition among clearing organizations and FCMs; and (iv)
enhance rather than reduce systemic risk.
In his testimony before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on
Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and
Related Agencies in March, Chairman Gensler stated that the Commission
currently oversees 14 registered DCOs and anticipates that the Dodd-
Frank Act will result in an additional six or seven clearing
organizations applying for registration as a DCO. Consequently, the
Commission is requesting a 30 additional staff, in addition to the
current staff of 40, ``to address the significant increase in the
number of DCOs, the more complex nature of the swaps markets and the
Congressional mandate that we annually examine systemically important
DCOs.''
Providing appropriate exemptions from registration to foreign
clearing organizations whose activities do not have ``a direct and
significant connection with activities in, or effect on, commerce of''
the U.S. would relieve the Commission of the cost of overseeing such
foreign clearing organizations and free staff to focus on transactions
that more directly affect U.S. market participants. An exemption would
also permit such clearing organization to offer clearing services to
U.S. participants without having to incur the costs of applying for
registration and, thereafter, meeting duplicative and potentially
conflicting regulatory requirements of the Commission and its home
country regulator.
Importantly for our member firms, an exemption from registration as
a DCO would relieve U.S. FCMs of the difficult choice of complying with
multiple financial and operational requirements attendant to membership
in clearing organizations around the globe or choosing not to offer the
broad range of swaps clearing services to customers. Moreover, such
firms may have to become registered in the home jurisdiction of the
foreign DCO and, potentially, become subject to taxation in multiple
jurisdictions.
As the Subcommittee is aware, one of the principal purposes of the
Dodd-Frank Act is to encourage competition among clearing organizations
and clearing members. Requiring each foreign clearing organization that
clears swaps for or on behalf of U.S. participants to become registered
as a DCO and each clearing member that, directly or indirectly, clears
for U.S. participants to become registered as an FCM will almost
certainly restrict rather than encourage competition. Requiring U.S.
FCMs to become registered with multiple foreign DCOs may also enhance
systemic risk, by exposing such FCMs to the risks of being members of
clearing organizations that are subject to different regulatory regimes
and bankruptcy laws.
As noted earlier, two of the more active swaps clearing
organizations registered with the Commission, ICE Clear Europe and
LCH.Clearnet Ltd., are located outside of the U.S., and we fully expect
that other foreign clearing organizations will elect or be required to
be registered with the Commission as DCOs. Certainly, any foreign
clearing organization that elects to apply for registration as a DCO
should be permitted to apply. However, we do not believe every foreign
clearing organization that clears swaps, directly or indirectly, for or
on behalf of U.S. participants should be required to be registered
simply because it offers clearing services to U.S. participants.

A Successful Model for the Regulation of Foreign DCOs
This does not need to be result. We agree with the New York
Congressional Delegation that the Dodd-Frank Act should not apply to
activities outside of the U.S., i.e., clearing on a foreign clearing
organization, unless such clearing activities have ``a direct and
significant connection with activities in, or effect on, commerce of''
the U.S. We believe the Commission has authority to interpret this
provision to exclude from its jurisdiction certain entities and
transactions that do not have a significant impact on that do not have
a significant impact on U.S. commerce. Moreover, the Commission has
specific authority under the Dodd-Frank Act to exempt a foreign
clearing organization from registration as a DCO, subject to
appropriate conditions, if the Commission determines that the foreign
clearing organization is subject to comparable, comprehensive
supervision and regulation by the appropriate government authorities in
the home country of such organization.
The Commission's Part 30 rules, which govern the offer and sale of
foreign futures and options transactions to U.S. participants, is a
tested, successful model for the regulation of international
transactions that could serve as a starting point for exempting foreign
clearing organizations and other market participants from the
Commission's registration requirements. The Commission's Part 30 rules
were first promulgated nearly 24 years ago in 1987. Under these rules,
foreign clearing organizations are not required to be registered with
the Commission to clear futures contracts executed on foreign exchanges
on behalf of U.S. participants. In addition, a foreign clearing member
is not required to be registered with the Commission as an FCM, if the
foreign clearing carries only a customer omnibus account on behalf of a
U.S. FCM and does not carry an account directly for a U.S. customer.
These rules assure that the accounts of U.S. participants are
carried by U.S. FCMs, subject to the Commission's rules regarding the
protection of foreign futures and options customer funds, as well as
the Commission's sales practice and other requirements to which FCMs
are subject. Customers that trade on non-U.S. markets also receive
prescribed risk disclosure, which assures that they understand the
additional risks of trading outside of the U.S.
Further, the Commission's Part 30 rules provide that a foreign
clearing member may deal directly with FCMs and their affiliates
without having to be registered with the Commission as FCMs. Having
determined that a foreign clearing member is not required to be
registered as an FCM to carry a U.S. FCM's customer omnibus account,
the Commission concluded that registration would not be required to
clear the U.S. FCM's proprietary accounts. The Commission concluded
that U.S. FCMs are able to assess the risks of trading on foreign
markets.
Finally, under the Part 30 rules, the Commission has granted
exemptions from registration to non-U.S. firms that deal with U.S.
customers and that the Commission determines are subject to comparable
regulation in their home country.
When I appeared before you in February, I noted:

Because Congress gave the regulatory agencies, including the
Commission, broad discretion in adopting rules to implement
provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, it is essential that the
Committee on Agriculture, as the Committee of jurisdiction with
respect to matters relating to the [Commodity Exchange Act],
monitor carefully the Commission's implementation of the Dodd-
Frank Act and provide additional guidance when appropriate.

FIA urges the Subcommittee to encourage the Commission to exercise
its interpretative and exemptive authority broadly in order to
facilitate U.S. FCM participation in the development of international
cleared swaps markets. The Commission must act now; if it waits until
the end of the rulemaking process, it will be too late.

Exemptive Relief Will Facilitate Coordination Among International
Regulators
By granting appropriate exemptive relief, we believe the Commission
will facilitate greater coordination among international regulators and
the establishment of consistent standards with respect to the
regulation of swaps. The need for such coordination has been brought
into sharp relief with reports that the European Parliament is
considering amendments to the European Union's European Market
Infrastructure Regulation (``EMIR''), which would effectively prohibit
a third-country clearing organization from providing clearing services
to EU entities, unless the clearing organization was authorized by each
EU member state. Moreover, a third party clearing organization could be
authorized only if the European Commission recognized that the legal
and supervisory arrangements of its home jurisdiction were
``equivalent'' to those contained within EMIR.
If the European Parliament adopts these amendments, it would be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, for U.S. DCOs to offer their
clearing services to entities within the EU. The ``balkanization'' of
derivatives clearing in this way benefits no one, denying market
participants access to clearing, reducing competition and increasing
global systemic risk. Yet, the Commission's ability to challenge these
amendments will be severely constrained if the Dodd-Frank Act is
interpreted to require EU clearing organizations to be registered here
to offer clearing services to U.S. participants.
The Commission has been a leader in developing standards for mutual
recognition among international regulators for more than 20 years. The
Dodd-Frank Act should not be interpreted in a manner that requires the
Commission to surrender this leadership role.

Position Limit Rules Must Be Harmonized
In their letter to Chairman Gensler, the New York Delegation noted:

[A]bsent harmonization between new rules here and abroad,
disparate treatment of U.S. firms will only encourage
participants in derivatives markets to do business with non-
U.S. firms. Accordingly, it is important to strike a balance
between implementing the new safeguards and harming the
competitiveness of U.S. financial institutions vis-a-vis their
international counterparts.

I would like to take a moment to address one aspect of the
Commission's proposed rules with respect to which the lack of
international harmonization threatens to place U.S. markets and market
participants at a severe competitive disadvantage, i.e., position
limits. FIA fully supports a robust large trader reporting system
across markets. It is important that the Commission and other
regulatory agencies and self-regulatory organizations know the identity
of market participants with meaningful positions. However, we cannot
support the proposed position limit rules.
FIA filed extensive comments in response to the proposed rules in
which we argued, among other things, that the proposed rules do not
satisfy the statutory prerequisites for establishing position limits.
Specifically, in publishing the proposed rules for comment, the
Commission cited no evidence for concluding that position limits are
``necessary to diminish, eliminate or prevent'' the burden on
interstate commerce caused by excessive speculation, or that the levels
proposed by the Commission are ``appropriate.''
We also expressed concern over the public policy considerations of
imposing significant new restrictions on the ability of market
participants to trade listed and over-the-counter derivatives without
adequate factual support for those restrictions. The price discovery
and risk-shifting functions of the U.S. derivatives markets are too
important to U.S. and international commerce to be the subject of a
position limit experiment based upon unsupported claims about price
volatility caused by speculative positions.
Equally important, we are concerned that the proposed rules could
cause non-U.S. participants that currently use U.S. futures and
derivatives markets to trade and manage their commercial or financial
risks will shift their trading activities to locations outside of the
U.S., which do not have position limits. As the Subcommittee will
recall, the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Commission, within 12 months of
adopting any position limits to ``conduct a study of the effects (if
any) of the position limits imposed . . . on the movement of
transactions from exchanges in the United States to trading venues
outside the United States.'' Our fear is that, without the necessary
factual predicate, the Commission cannot assure Congress or market
participants that the position limits it sets will not adversely cause
the price discovery and risk allocation functions that U.S. futures
exchanges perform so well to shift to foreign boards of trade.

The Commission's Rules Should Be Published for Additional Comment
FIA has previously expressed to the Subcommittee its concern that
the pace and order in which the Commission has proposed rules to
implement the Dodd-Frank Act were such that meaningful analysis and
comment difficult was difficult, if not impossible. Earlier this month,
the Commission announced that it would reopen the comment period on
many of the proposed rules for an additional 30 days. We appreciate the
Commission's action. However, we are disappointed that the Commission
did not share its views on the many thousands of comments it has
received to date and, more importantly, how the Commission sees these
various rule proposals fitting together to form a comprehensive and
coherent regulatory structure.
Chairman Gensler has correctly observed that the numerous rules the
Commission has proposed form a mosaic, and he has suggested that this
30 day comment period will allow commenters to see the entire mosaic at
once. Mosaics, however, are nothing more than chips of colored stone
until they have been creatively assembled to make a work of art. We
suggest that the Commission's proposals are still just chips waiting
for the Commission to assemble them into a comprehensive regulatory
structure. The industry and the public deserve an opportunity analyze
and comment on the Commission's vision of its regulatory mosaic before
it is set in concrete. We, therefore, recommend that, once the
Commission has determined how these various proposed rules will fit
together, it provide an additional 60 day comment period before
promulgating final rules. We think a 60 day comment period would be
well within the timetable set by the G20.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you today. I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Neugebauer [presiding.] Thank you, and now Mr. Thomas
C. Deas. Mr. Deas.

STATEMENT OF THOMAS C. DEAS, Jr., VICE PRESIDENT AND TREASURER,
FMC CORPORATION; PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF CORPORATE
TREASURERS,
PHILADELPHIA, PA

Mr. Deas. Thank you and I want to thank Chairman Conaway,
Ranking Member Boswell, and Members of the Committee for
allowing me the opportunity to speak with you today on
derivatives regulation. I am Tom Deas, Vice President and
Treasurer of FMC Corporation, and also President of the
National Association of Corporate Treasurers.
FMC and NACT are also part of the Coalition for Derivatives
End-Users representing thousands of companies across the
country that employ derivatives to manage their day to day
business risks. FMC Corporation was founded almost 130 years
ago to provide spray equipment to farmers. Today, in addition
to making agricultural chemicals farmers apply to protect their
crops, our 5,000 employees have worked hard to make FMC the
leading manufacturer and marketer of a whole range of
agricultural specialty and industrial chemicals. FMC has
achieved this longevity by continually responding to our
customer's needs with the right chemistry delivered at the
right price. Along with many other U.S. manufacturers and
agricultural producers, FMC uses over-the-counter derivatives
to hedge the business risks that we incur in a cost effective
way. By managing the risk of foreign exchange rate movements,
changes in foreign interest rates, global energy and commodity
prices we can compete more effectively in the increasingly
global marketplace.
We are very concerned that several of the proposed
derivatives regulations, the aggressive schedule for rule
making could hamper our use of this important risk mitigating
tool and adversely affect our global competitiveness. We
support this Committee's efforts to redress the problems with
derivatives, and I want to assure you that FMC and other end-
users employ OTC derivatives to offset risks not create new
ones.
In the United States, FMC sells more crop protection
chemicals for soybeans than any other crop. Our ability to
continue bringing U.S. farmers new chemistries at the right
price and controlling costs on existing products depends on our
capacity to compete effectively on a world-wide basis. FMC
meets and beats foreign competition in several overseas markets
for our crop protection chemicals.
In Brazil, for example, building on our leading position in
cotton and sugarcane, we offer to sell our products to soybean
farmers there for use at planting time in exchange for an
agreed quantity of soybeans that they pay to us at harvest
time. We can do this because we simultaneously enter into a
custom, over-the-counter derivative that offsets the amount and
timing of the future delivery of soybeans by our customers. In
a developing country like Brazil, farmers do not have FMC's
degree of access to the world-wide financial markets. Our banks
did not require FMC to post cash margin to secure mark-to-
market fluctuation in the value of our derivatives, but instead
priced the overall transaction to take this risk into account.
This structure gives us certainty that we never have to post
cash margin while the derivatives are outstanding.
However, last month U.S. regulators proposed that they, not
end-users and their counterparties, will have the final say
over how much cash an end-user will have to divert to a margin
account where we are concerned it will sit idle, unavailable
for productive uses. In our world of finite limits and
financial constraints, posting a fluctuating cash margin would
be a direct, dollar for dollar subtraction from funds that we
would otherwise use to expand our plants, build inventory to
support higher sales, conduct research and development, and
ultimately grow jobs and sustain our international
competitiveness.
In the Brazilian soybean market, we compete against
international producers based in Germany, Switzerland,
Australia, as well as local Brazilian companies. Because of
significant differences in the way derivatives regulation is
being implemented in Europe and elsewhere outside the United
States, FMC and other U.S. companies could be put at a
competitive disadvantage. Our foreign competitors in the
Brazilian markets will not be subject to margining by their
regulators as we now understand the rules.
International derivatives regulation as we heard from
Commissioner Sommers is on a much slower track than we are
moving in the United States. Unfortunately for American
business, we will be at a relative competitive disadvantage
until such time in the future when and if those rules might
converge. We will also bear higher absolute costs than we did
before the new rules and will be subject to the risk of
regulatory arbitrage. Competitors in countries that are not
pursuing so stringent a new regulatory framework for end-users
will have that advantage.
Although I have focused here on international
competitiveness and margin, end-users are concerned about the
more than 100 new rules, how they will operate when taken
together, whether we can continue to manage our business risks
through derivatives. I noted some of these concerns in my
written testimony and I am happy to discuss them during
questioning. Thank you again for your attention to our
concerns.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Deas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Thomas C. Deas, Jr., Vice President and
Treasurer, FMC Corporation; President, National Association of
Corporate
Treasurers, Philadelphia, PA

Good morning, I am Tom Deas, Vice President and Treasurer of FMC
Corporation and also President of the National Association of Corporate
Treasurers (``NACT''), an organization of treasury professionals from
several hundred of the largest public and private companies in the
country. FMC, NACT, and another organization of which FMC is also a
member, the Agricultural Retailers Association, are part of the
Coalition for Derivatives End-Users (the ``Coalition''). Our Coalition
represents thousands of companies across the United States that employ
derivatives to manage business risks they face every day. Thank you
very much for giving me the opportunity to speak with you today about
derivatives regulation.
I am particularly gratified to appear before this Committee because
support of American agriculture was the very reason for my company's
founding almost 130 years ago. FMC Corporation began operations in the
1880s as a manufacturer of agricultural spray equipment to aid farmers
combating infestations in their fields and orchards. Today in addition
to making agricultural chemicals farmers apply to protect their crops,
our 5,000 employees work hard to ensure that FMC continues to be a
world-leading manufacturer and marketer of agricultural, specialty and
industrial chemicals.
Along with many other U.S. manufacturers and agricultural
producers, FMC uses over-the-counter (``OTC'') derivatives to hedge
business risks in a cost-effective way. We are very concerned that
several of the proposed derivatives regulations and the aggressive
schedule for rulemaking could hamper our use of this important tool and
adversely affect our global competitiveness. I had the valuable
experience of negotiating and executing some of the very first OTC
derivatives--currency swaps--back in 1984. The OTC derivatives market
has grown from its inception at that time to its current size by
offering end-users a degree of customization not available in exchange-
traded derivatives. FMC and other end-users enter into OTC derivatives
customized to match the amount, timing, and where necessary, the
currency, of their underlying business exposures. By matching
derivatives to our business exposures, we create an effective economic
hedge. The value of the derivative moves in an equal, but opposite, way
in relation to the value of the underlying risk we are hedging. Let me
give you a specific example of how proposed derivatives regulation
could hamper my company's ability to compete against foreign producers.
FMC competes very effectively against foreign companies in several
markets for our crop protection chemicals. For example in Brazil, we
have leading positions in sugarcane and cotton. To enhance our product
offering to Brazilian soybean farmers and profitably grow our business
there, we offer to sell our agricultural chemicals for use at planting
time in exchange for an agreed quantity of soybeans at harvest time. We
can do this because we simultaneously enter into a custom OTC
derivative that offsets the amount and timing of the future delivery of
soybeans by our customers. In a developing economy like Brazil, farmers
do not have FMC's degree of access to the worldwide financial markets.
We provide our products to Brazilian farmers on terms that insulate
them from the risk of changes in future commodity prices and foreign
exchange movements in the price of the Brazilian real against the U.S.
dollar. In the Brazilian soybean market, we compete against
international producers based in Germany, Switzerland, and Australia,
as well as local Brazilian companies. Because of significant
differences in the way derivatives regulation is being implemented in
Europe and elsewhere outside the United States, FMC and other U.S.
companies could be put at a competitive disadvantage. Our competitors
in the Brazilian market will not be subject to margining by EU, Swiss,
Australian, or Brazilian regulators. We understand EU regulation is
moving toward legislative enactment sometime this autumn with
regulations not fully effective before the end of 2012. Few of our
large developing-economy trading partners, Brazil included, have
announced any plans for local derivatives regulation.
In January I met with economic development authorities in
Singapore. I can tell you that they are making a vigorous effort to
attract treasury centers from multinational corporations through
targeted incentives and a predictable regulatory framework. They do not
propose to require cash margining of derivative positions for companies
operating there.

Competitive Consequences of End-User Margining
At the time of passage of the Dodd-Frank Act, we understood from
the legislative language as well as from letters and colloquies by the
principal drafters, that end-users would be exempted from any
requirement to post cash margin. However, rules proposed last month
would give the prudential regulators the authority to impose a
framework with many complicated parameters, each of which is subject to
future adjustment, which could result in many end-users--regardless of
their size--having to post cash margin for their derivatives
transactions. This proposal and the uncertainties it creates represent
a real challenge to making business decisions about the future. As
previously mentioned, the European Union regulators have taken a much
slower track to derivatives regulation, but we know their approach thus
far with regard to non-financial end-users is to provide them with a
clear exemption from margining. They have accepted the argument that
end-users, whose derivatives activity comprises less than ten percent
of the total OTC derivatives market, are not significantly contributing
to systemic risk and should be exempt from regulations designed for
swap dealers. At this point, just weeks away from the mid-July
implementation deadline, U.S. end-users still do not know with
certainty what their future cash margin requirements will be. The U.S.
regulators have taken a pair of offsetting transactions that match
completely, and settle with offsetting cash payments at maturity, as
does FMC's soybean sale and hedge, and created a new and unwelcome
uncertainty--that of funding a daily fluctuating cash margin call.
While this may be appropriate for swap dealers making a market in
derivatives or those using derivatives for speculative purposes, its
application to end-users hedging underlying business exposures creates
an imbalance that is economically burdensome to end-users. We have been
encouraged by comments of regulators signaling they may phase
implementation over an extended period. We believe it essential that
such phasing account for the limited resources end-users have to comply
with new requirements. We also believe it essential that regulators
clearly communicate the implementation schedule so that market
participants can have certainty as to the timing of new requirements.
I had the privilege of representing the United States at the most
recent meeting of the International Group of Treasury Associations. I
can tell you that treasurers from more than thirty other countries from
all over the world were sympathetic that we, not they, would be the
first to implement derivatives regulations. Their expectation was that
for a market so large and complex there would be many areas that would
have to be adjusted based on U.S. experience. Unfortunately for
American business, we will be at a relative competitive disadvantage
until such time in the future when the rules might converge. We will
also bear higher absolute costs than we did before the new rules and
will also be subject to the risk of regulatory arbitrage from
competitors in countries not pursuing a stringent new regulatory
framework for end-users.

Cost of End-User Margining
FMC's derivatives are executed with several banks, all of which are
also supporting our company through their provision of credit lines.
None of these banks require FMC to post any form of collateral to
secure their credit support. Our banks also do not require FMC to post
cash margin as collateral to secure mark-to-market fluctuations in the
value of derivatives. Instead they price the overall transactions to
take this risk into account. This structure gives us certainty so that
we never have to post cash margin while the derivative is outstanding.
However, if we are required by the regulators to post margin, we will
have to hold aside cash and readily available credit to meet those
margin calls.
Depending on the extent of price movements, margin might have to be
posted within the trading day as well as at the close of trading.
Because failure to meet a margin call would be like bouncing a check,
and would constitute a default, our corporate treasury would act very
conservatively in holding cash or immediately available funds under our
bank lines of credit to assure we could meet any future margin call in
a timely fashion and with a comfortable cushion.
Adopting more conservative cash management practices might sound
like an appropriate response in the wake of the financial crisis.
However, end-users did not cause the financial crisis. End-users do not
contribute meaningfully to systemic risk because their use of
derivatives constitutes prudent, risk mitigating hedging of their
underlying business. Forcing end-users to put up cash for fluctuating
derivatives valuations means less funding is available to grow their
businesses and expand employment. The reality treasurers face is that
the money to margin derivatives has to come from somewhere and
inevitably less funding will be available to operate their businesses.
FMC and other members of the Business Roundtable estimated that
BRT-member companies would have to hold aside on average $269 million
of cash or immediately available bank credit to meet a three percent
initial margin requirement. Though the rule proposed by regulators is
not specific as to the precise amount of collateral, in our world of
finite limits and financial constraints, any cash margin requirements
represent a direct dollar-for-dollar subtraction from funds that we
would otherwise use to expand our plants, build inventory to support
higher sales, undertake research and development activities, and
ultimately sustain and grow jobs. In fact, the study extrapolated the
effects across the S&P 500, of which FMC is also a member, to predict
the consequent loss of 100,000 to 120,000 jobs. The effect on the many
thousands of end-users beyond the S&P 500 would be proportionately
greater. We would also have to make a considerable investment in
information systems that would replicate much of the technology in a
bank's trading room for marking to market and settling derivatives
transactions.

Exemption from Margining for Foreign Exchange Transactions
End-users welcomed the determination last month by the Secretary of
the Treasury that most foreign exchange (``FX'') forward transactions
would not be considered derivatives subject to regulation under Title
VII of the Dodd-Frank Act. However a common type foreign exchange
hedge, technically known as a ``non-deliverable forward'' was not
included in this exemption. This type of transaction is typically used
to hedge currencies that are not freely traded such as the currencies
of Brazil, China, India and those of other rapidly developing economies
that have imposed exchange controls. It is used in the same way as
those FX forwards that were exempted.
The cumulative effect of these regulations could mean that U.S.-
based exporters would be subject to higher risks based on an inability
to hedge efficiently their foreign exchange risk with derivatives. As a
result they could be forced to move production offshore to match their
costs directly with the currencies of their customers.

Summary of End-User Concerns
Let me take a moment to summarize some of our principal concerns
with the implementation of derivatives regulation:

First, we are concerned that the regulations have imposed an
uncertain framework for cash margin on end-user trades,
potentially diverting billions of dollars from productive
investment and employment into an idle regulatory levy.

Second, even if the final regulations clearly exempt end-
users from margin requirements, we still have the risk that the
regulators will require swap dealers to hold excessive capital
in reserve against uncleared over-the-counter derivatives--with
the cost passed on to end-users as they manage their business
risks. We believe that swap dealers' capital requirements
should be appropriate to the actual loss experience of the
specific type of derivative. The unintended consequence of
punitive capital requirements could be for some end-users to
cease hedging risks and for others to use foreign markets.

Finally, we are concerned that regulators will make
customized derivatives prohibitively expensive through margin
and increased capital requirements, with the effect of forcing
us into standardized derivatives from common trading facilities
that will not provide the exact match we seek with our
underlying business exposures. It is the customization
available with OTC derivatives that is so valuable to us and
makes the derivatives effective in hedging our exposures.

I know many people who suffered through the financial turmoil of
2008 are tempted to label all derivatives as risky bets that should be
curtailed. However, I hope these examples of prudent use of derivatives
by my company and other end-users who form the backbone of our
country's economy have demonstrated the wisdom of the end-user
exemptions that we believe to have been the legislative intent.
I will note that in general those charged with the responsibility
of drafting derivatives regulations have been very forthcoming and open
in soliciting input from end-users. We appreciate being involved, but
we have only weeks until the deadline for finalizing these rules. The
end-user exemption we thought was clear is now uncertain and several
important rules required by July have not been finalized. Inadequate
time has been allowed for us to understand and comment on how the rules
will operate together. We support fully efforts to extend the statutory
date by which rules must be promulgated until the remaining
uncertainties can be clarified and we can be assured the rules will
operate effectively in this very complicated cross-border market. We
also support legislation to create a true exemption from margin
requirements that would apply to all end-users. The consequences of
getting derivatives regulation wrong will be borne by American business
and ultimately our fellow citizens.
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to respond to any
questions you may have.

Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Deas. And now Ms. Miller.

STATEMENT OF SARAH A. ``SALLY'' MILLER, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, INSTITUTE OF INTERNATIONAL BANKERS, NEW YORK, NY

Ms. Miller. Mr. Chairman, Members of the Subcommittee, my
name is Sally Miller and I am the Chief Executive Officer of
the Institute of International Bankers. I am pleased to be here
today to testify on Title VII of Dodd-Frank and the need to
harmonize global derivatives reform.
The Institute represents internationally headquartered
financial institutions from over 35 countries. Our members
include international banks that operate branches and agencies
and bank and broker-dealer subsidiaries in the United States.
Our members have more than $4.5 trillion of total assets in the
U.S. They employ more than 250,000 U.S. citizens and permanent
residents. Our members also include eight of the 14 largest
international derivatives dealers. Our members support Title
VII's objectives of reducing systemic risk and increasing
transparency. Together, we have developed a proposal on the
cross-border application of Title VII. Our members are not
looking for a free pass. We are not seeking a competitive
advantage over U.S. firms. Instead, we have sought to assist
global regulators to develop a workable regime for supervising
U.S. and foreign firms that operate global swap businesses.
Before I get into the details of our proposal, it is
important to note that foreign and U.S. firms alike seek to
minimize the number of legal entities through which they
conduct swap dealing activities. This increases efficiency and
decreases risk by permitting the dealer and its counterparties
to net and offset their exposures.
It also allows counterparties to transact with a more
creditworthy entity and for foreign firms that entity is
usually located and supervised outside of the U.S. U.S.-based
personnel may however have relationships with U.S. customers.
Our proposal would apply the following four principles.
First, we are not asking for an exemption from swap dealer
registration. Anytime that swap dealing activities occurs
directly with U.S. customers or from within the U.S., a U.S.-
registered swap dealer would be involved.
Second, U.S. clearing trading, reporting, business conduct,
and similar requirements should apply to transactions with U.S.
persons or to transactions that are entered into from the
United States. All transactions with foreign persons entered
into abroad, however, should be subject to the relevant foreign
rules rather than U.S. rules.
Three, where they determine it to be comparable, U.S.
regulators should leverage effective foreign supervision of
foreign firms, capital and other entity-wide requirements. U.S.
regulators would still retain their full enforcement authority.
And four, foreign regulators should be encouraged to adopt
comparable regulations and open access further to U.S. firms.
In particular, we want to encourage the EU's recent proposal
for recognizing the equivalent third country regimes. We
believe that these principles will maintain the liquidity of
the U.S. derivatives market and the preeminence of the U.S. as
a leading international financial center. These principles
would also allow U.S. and foreign dealers to access U.S. and
foreign markets on the same terms without imposing an
artificial business structure.
If U.S. regulators were to require foreign dealers to
conduct their U.S. swap activities through separate U.S.
subsidiaries, U.S. customers and foreign dealers would face
additional costs. The significant negative impacts on capital,
netting, and risk management resulting from trading swaps
through multiple U.S. and non-U.S. legal entities could also
reduce U.S. market liquidity.
I would also like to take this opportunity to discuss
briefly Section 716 or the Swaps Push Out Provision. Section
716's exceptions for FDIC insured banks do not extend to
uninsured U.S. branches or agencies of foreign banks. When
Dodd-Frank was enacted Members of Congress recognized that this
oversight was unintentional. Left uncorrected, this error will
conflict with the U.S. policy of providing parity of treatment
between foreign and U.S. banks.
This is because Section 716 will prevent foreign banks from
conducting bank permissible businesses and managing their risk
through U.S. branches. It will also cause serious disruptions
as foreign banks are forced to move possibly off shore, entire
portfolios currently booked in their U.S. branches. We strongly
support extending 716's exception to U.S. branches and agencies
of foreign banks. However, we recognize that this would be an
imperfect solution.
It would still require some swap activities to be pushed
out of both U.S. and foreign banks and accordingly we would
support further efforts to prevent the adverse impacts on
capital, netting, and risk management that will otherwise
result from forcing swap activities to be conducted across
multiple legal entities. Thank you for the opportunity to
appear here before you today. I would be happy to answer any
questions you might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Miller follows:]

Prepared Statement of Sarah A. ``Sally'' Miller, Chief Executive
Officer, Institute of International Bankers, New York, NY

Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, Members of the
Subcommittee:

My name is Sally Miller and I am the Chief Executive Officer of the
Institute of International Bankers. I am pleased to be here today to
testify on Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act and the need to harmonize global derivatives reform. The
Institute and its members support Dodd-Frank's objectives of reducing
systemic risk and increasing transparency in the OTC derivatives
markets. We also support the commitments of the G20 leaders to setting
high, internationally consistent requirements for OTC derivatives and
avoiding overlapping regulations.
Consistent with these principles, we have worked with our members
to develop a proposal on the cross-border application of Title VII. Our
goals are four-fold; to be (1) faithful to the statute, (2) protective
of U.S. customers, (3) sensitive to the challenges faced by regulators
in supervising foreign entities and activities, and (4) supportive of
international harmonization.
We believe that, under our proposal, Title VII can be applied
fairly to all derivatives dealers in a way that does not cause undue
disruption and increased costs to customers and the overall financial
system.

Background
Before describing our proposal in more detail, I would like to
provide some background on the Institute and our members. The Institute
represents the interests of internationally headquartered financial
institutions from over 35 countries. Our members include international
banks that operate branches and agencies and bank and broker-dealer
subsidiaries in the United States.
Our members play an important role in the U.S. economy and its
markets:

The U.S. operations of our members have more than $4.5
trillion in total assets;

Our members employ more than 250,000 U.S. citizens and
permanent residents;

Our members include eight of the 14 largest international
derivatives dealers; and

Many of our members use derivatives extensively in
connection with their U.S. lending activities.

As a general matter, the international framework for the
supervision of cross-border banking activities is based on
considerations of comity and appropriate allocation of supervisory
responsibilities across home and host country supervisors. As applied
in the United States, this framework is reflected in the longstanding
policy of national treatment, i.e., there should be parity of treatment
between U.S. banks and international banking firms that operate in the
United States, and the understanding that international banking firms
are subject to primary supervision by their home country authorities
with U.S. authorities, primarily the Federal Reserve Board, as host
country supervisors, exercising appropriate oversight of international
banking firms' U.S. operations. Accordingly, the U.S. banking and non-
banking operations of our members, like their U.S. counterparts, are
subject to extensive U.S. regulation and supervision by the Federal
banking agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, as appropriate.

Swap Dealer Registration and Regulation
Foreign banks and U.S. banks alike seek to minimize the number of
legal entities through which they conduct swap dealing activities and,
where possible, to use a single legal entity to transact with swap
counterparties globally. This increases efficiency and decreases risk
by permitting the bank and its counterparties to net and offset their
exposures. It also allows counterparties to transact with a more
creditworthy entity, which for foreign banks is usually located and
supervised outside the U.S. The personnel who have relationships with
U.S. customers or manage U.S.-related portfolios on behalf of their
head office are often, however, located inside the U.S.
Our proposal, which would apply Title VII to this and other common
ways in which international derivatives dealers operate, has been
guided by the following considerations:

(1) We have sought to be faithful to the statute; we are not asking
for an exemption from swap dealer registration. Any time that
swap dealing activities occur directly with U.S. customers or
from within the U.S., a U.S.-registered swap dealer would be
involved. Additionally, the personnel interacting with U.S.
customers would be employed by a U.S. registrant subject to
supervision and examination by the CFTC and the SEC.

(2) We have sought to protect U.S. customers. Under our proposal,
U.S. regulations that apply to particular transactions, such as
customer business conduct standards, would apply to
transactions entered into with a U.S. counterparty or from
within the U.S. Transactions entered into with foreign
counterparties from abroad would, of course, be subject to the
rules of the relevant foreign jurisdictions, rather than U.S.
rules.

(3) We have sought to be sensitive to the resource constraints of
U.S. regulators. Under our proposal, U.S. regulators could
leverage effective foreign supervision while retaining their
full enforcement authority. So, if U.S. regulators determine
that home country capital and other similar entity-wide
regulations are sufficiently comparable to U.S. regulations,
then compliance with those regulations would constitute
compliance with U.S. requirements, and failure to comply would
be treated as noncompliance with U.S. requirements enforceable
by U.S. regulators. This is consistent with the Federal Reserve
Board's current proposal for swap dealer capital requirements.

(4) We have sought to support and encourage international
harmonization. We believe that our proposal would encourage
foreign regulators to adopt regulations comparable to the U.S.
and to open access further to U.S. banks. In particular, we
believe it would be consistent with the approach of recognizing
equivalent third country regimes that is currently under
consideration by the EU.

We believe that this proposal will help maintain the preeminence of
the U.S. as a leading international financial center by maintaining the
liquidity of the U.S. derivatives market. By contrast, if Title VII
were to effectively require foreign banks to conduct their derivatives
dealing activities in the U.S. through separately incorporated
subsidiaries, U.S. customers and foreign banks would face
inefficiencies and additional costs of transacting in derivatives
through multiple legal entities. The significant negative impacts on
capital, netting and risk management resulting from conducting
derivatives trading through multiple U.S. and non-U.S. legal entities
could also reduce the liquidity available to U.S. market participants.

Swaps Push-Out and Swap Dealer Definition
I would also like to discuss two other provisions of Title VII,
specifically Section 716 of Dodd-Frank, also known as the ``swaps push-
out'' provision, and the definition of ``swap dealer'' under Section
1(a)(49) of the Commodity Exchange Act. Although Section 716 contains
exceptions for FDIC-insured banks, those exceptions do not extend to
uninsured U.S. branches or agencies of foreign banks. When Dodd-Frank
was enacted, Members of Congress recognized that this oversight was
unintentional. Left uncorrected, it will, contrary to U.S. policy,
prevent foreign banks from conducting bank-permissible businesses and
managing risks through their U.S. branches. It also will cause serious
market and business disruptions as foreign banks are forced to assign
and re-document entire portfolios booked in their U.S. branches.
While we strongly support extending Section 716's exceptions to
U.S. branches and agencies, we recognize, however, that this would be
an imperfect solution, since it would still require some swap
activities to be ``pushed-out'' of both domestic and international
banking entities. Accordingly, we would support further efforts to
prevent the adverse impacts on capital, netting and risk management
that will otherwise result from forcing derivatives activities to be
conducted across multiple legal entities.
Finally, we would support revisions to the definition of ``swap
dealer'' that would allow branches and agencies of international banks,
like FDIC-insured depository institutions, to enter into swaps with
customers as an adjunct to their loan origination activities without
having to register as a swap dealer. Branches and agencies of
international banks are significant credit providers in this country.
Indeed, the U.S. operations of international banks account for
approximately 25% of all U.S. commercial and industrial loans. To
permit these institutions to enter into swaps with their customers only
as a registered dealer puts foreign banking institutions at a
competitive disadvantage to U.S. firms and, more importantly, could
discourage further lending in this country by foreign banking
institutions.
In conclusion, we believe that the U.S. branches and agencies of
foreign banks should be treated the same as U.S. banks with respect to
the swap push-out safe harbor and the ``loan origination'' exclusion
from the definition of ``swap dealer''. More generally, and of equal
importance, we believe that our proposed framework will assist global
regulators to develop a rational and workable supervisory regime for
those U.S. and foreign banking operations that operate global swap
businesses.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I would
be happy to answer any questions you might have.

Attachments

January 10, 2011

Elizabeth M. Murphy,                 David A. Stawick
Secretary,                           Secretary,
Securities and Exchange Commission,  Commodity Futures Trading
Commission,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Re: Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants, RIN 3038-
AC95; \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 75 Fed. Reg. 71379 (Nov. 23, 2010) (the ``CFTC Registration
Proposal'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further Definition of ``Swap Dealer,'' ``Security-Based Swap
Dealer,'' ``Major Swap Participant'' and ``Eligible Contract
Participant,'' RIN 3235-AK65.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 75 Fed. Reg. 80174 (Dec. 21, 2010) (the ``Joint Definitions
Proposal'' and, together with the CFTC Registration Proposal, the
``Proposed Rules'').

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Secretary Murphy, Secretary Stawick:

The Institute of International Bankers (the ``Institute'')
appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the Securities and
Exchange Commission (the ``SEC'') and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (the ``CFTC'' and, together with the SEC, the
``Commissions'') with respect to the Proposed Rules. The Institute and
its members support the efforts of the Commissions and their
counterparts in other jurisdictions to enhance the resiliency of the
financial system, reduce systemic risk and increase transparency in the
OTC derivatives markets. Given the truly global nature of the OTC
derivatives markets, the Institute believes that, to accomplish these
objectives, the Commissions must establish, in the near-term, an
appropriate framework for U.S. regulation of the cross-border swap
activities of foreign banks.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ For convenience, unless otherwise specified, references in this
letter to ``swaps'' are intended to refer to both swaps and security-
based swaps.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While such a framework must of course be consistent with the
Commissions' statutory mandates under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform
and Consumer Protection Act (``Dodd-Frank'') and appropriately
protective of U.S. markets and customers, the Institute emphasizes that
it must also take into account the various ways in which cross-border
swap activities are conducted, inherent limitations on the Commissions'
ability to effectively oversee extraterritorial activities, and the
legitimate interests of regulators outside the U.S. in discharging
their responsibilities as the primary supervisors of foreign banks.
In light of these considerations, the Institute respectfully
proposes to the Commissions below a framework for global supervision of
cross-border swap activity by foreign banks. The proposed framework is
designed to (i) allocate to the Commissions the regulation of swap
activity conducted with U.S. counterparties, (ii) allocate to home (or
non-U.S. host) country authorities the regulation of swap activity
conducted with counterparties located outside the U.S., and (iii)
establish an appropriate allocation of regulatory responsibilities for
registration, transaction-specific and non-transaction-specific
supervision. In recognition of the structural diversity of the swap
markets, this letter provides an overview of how this framework would
be applied to a variety of common transaction paradigms.
The Institute believes that this proposed framework is best-suited
to accomplishing Dodd-Frank's objectives while minimizing the potential
for overlapping and inconsistent requirements. As a result, this
framework would reinforce continued cross-border regulatory
cooperation, promote efficient use of supervisory resources, prevent
fragmentation of the derivatives markets along regional lines, and
avoid the concomitant adverse consequences for systemic risk,
transparency and economic efficiency. We believe that the proposed
framework is consistent with the purposes of Dodd-Frank and within the
scope of the Commissions' interpretive and definitional authority
thereunder.

Summary
Sections 731 and 764 of Dodd-Frank require swap and security-based
swap dealers (collectively, ``Swap Dealers'') and major swap and
security-based swap participants (collectively, ``MSPs'') to register
with the CFTC and the SEC. Sections 721 and 761 of Dodd-Frank generally
define a Swap Dealer as any person who (i) holds itself out as a dealer
in swaps; (ii) makes a market in swaps; (iii) regularly enters into
swaps with counterparties as an ordinary course of business for its own
account, or (iv) engages in any activity causing the person to be
commonly known in the trade as a dealer or market maker in swaps.
Sections 721 and 761 generally define MSPs, in turn, to include persons
whose swap positions exceed thresholds established for the ``effective
monitoring, management, and oversight of entities that are systemically
significant or can significantly impact the financial system of the
United States'' or whose ``outstanding swaps create substantial
counterparty exposure that could have serious adverse effects on the
financial stability of the United States banking system or financial
markets'' (emphases added).
Section 712(d) directs the Commissions, in consultation with the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the ``Board''), to
further define Swap Dealer and MSP. Section 712(d) also provides the
Commissions with broad, flexible authority to adopt such other rules
regarding the Swap Dealer and MSP definitions as the Commissions
determine are necessary and appropriate, in the public interest, and
for the protection of investors.
Sections 722 and 772 of Dodd-Frank, in turn, establish the
territorial scope of each Commission's jurisdiction with respect to
swap activities. For the CFTC, Section 722 provides that the provisions
of the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA'') relating to swaps that were
enacted by Title VII of Dodd-Frank ``shall not apply to activities
outside the United States unless those activities . . . have a direct
and significant connection with activities in, or effect on, commerce
of the United States [or] contravene [CFTC anti-evasion rules].'' For
the SEC, Section 772 provides that ``[n]o provision'' of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (the ``Exchange Act'') added by Title VII of Dodd-
Frank ``shall apply to any person insofar as such person transacts a
business in security-based swaps without the jurisdiction of the United
States, unless such person transacts such business in contravention of
[SEC anti-evasion rules].'' These provisions are consistent with
existing interpretations and statutory provisions setting forth each of
the Commissions' jurisdictions.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, e.g., Statement of Policy Regarding Exercise of [CFTC]
Jurisdiction Over Reparation Claims that Involve Extraterritorial
Activities by Respondents, 49 Fed. Reg. 14721 (Apr. 13, 1984) (whether
a person is required to be registered under the CEA may be determined
by reference to whether (i) the person is based in the U.S., (ii) the
person engages in the prescribed activities with customers in the U.S.
or (iii) the prescribed activities take place or originate in the
U.S.); In the Matter of Sumitomo Corporation, Comm. Fut. L. Rep.   27,
327 (May 11, 1998) (CFTC enforcement action for manipulative copper
trading outside the U.S. that directly affected U.S. prices); Exchange
Act Section 30(b) (providing that the Exchange Act ``shall not apply to
any person insofar as he transacts a business in securities without the
jurisdiction of the United States'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress also recognized the Board's expertise in supervising the
cross-border banking operations of foreign banks when it designated the
Board, in Section 721's ``prudential regulator'' definition and the
capital and margin provisions of Sections 731 and 764, as the
prudential regulator of Swap Dealers and MSPs that are state-licensed
branches and agencies of foreign banks, foreign banks that do not
operate insured branches, and foreign banks that are, or are treated
as, bank holding companies under the International Banking Act of
1978.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Section 721 similarly designates the Office of the Comptroller
of the Currency (the ``OCC'') as the prudential regulator of Swap
Dealers and MSPs that are federally-licensed branches and agencies of
foreign banks. Notably, in exercising supervisory authority over
Federal branches and agencies in matters relating to capital, the OCC
looks to the capital of the foreign bank itself. See 12 CFR  28.14(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a general matter, the international framework for the
supervision of cross-border banking activities is premised on an
allocation of supervisory responsibilities across home and host country
supervisors. The Board's own framework for supervising the cross-border
banking operations of a foreign bank is based on an understanding that
the foreign bank is subject to primary supervision by its home country
authority, with the Board, as a host country supervisor, exercising
appropriate oversight of the bank's U.S. operations.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See Federal Reserve Board, ``Policy Statement on the
Supervision and Regulation of Foreign Banking Organizations'' (Feb 23,
1979), Federal Reserve Regulatory Service 4-835; Federal Reserve Board
Supervisory Letter SR 08-09 re Consolidated Supervision of Bank Holding
Companies and the Combined U.S. Operations of Foreign Banking
Organizations (Oct. 16, 2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of this framework, the Board assesses a foreign bank's
capital adequacy in approving applications by the bank to establish a
U.S. branch or agency or to make a bank or non-bank acquisition in the
United States.\7\ Such assessments require a determination regarding
whether the foreign bank's capital is equivalent to the capital that
would be required of a similarly situated U.S. banking organization.\8\
Similarly, the Board assesses a foreign bank's capital in connection
with a declaration by the bank to become a financial holding company
(``FHC''), which requires that the foreign bank be ``well-
capitalized.'' For these purposes, the Board's assessment is based on
whether the foreign bank's capital is comparable to the capital
required in the case of a similarly situated U.S. banking organization
seeking FHC status, ``giving due regard to the principle of national
treatment and equality of competitive opportunity.'' \9\ In the case of
a foreign bank whose home country supervisor has adopted capital
standards that are consistent with the Capital Accord of the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision, these various determinations are made
on the basis of the bank's capital ratios calculated in accordance with
applicable home country standards.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See 12 U.S.C.  1842(c), 1843(j) and 3105(d)(3)(B) and (j)(2).
\8\ In the case of branches and agencies, the capital adequacy
determination is made by reference to the capital of the foreign bank
since a branch or agency does not have any capital itself. See, e.g.,,
12 CFR  225.2(r)(3)(ii).
\9\ See 12 U.S.C.  1843(l)(3).
\10\ See, e.g., 12 CFR  225.2(r)(3)(i)(A) (bank and non-bank
acquisitions) and 225.90(b)(1) (FHC declarations). In considering
whether a foreign bank that seeks to become an FHC is well-capitalized
in accordance with comparable capital adequacy standards, the Board
also considers the foreign bank's composition of capital, Tier 1
leverage ratio, accounting standards, long-term debt ratings, reliance
on government support to meet capital requirements, anti-money
laundering procedures, and whether the foreign bank is subject to
comprehensive supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by its
home country authorities. See 12 CFR  225.92(e)(1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a result, as the Board is vested with, and will retain,
authority to set and enforce capital and margin standards for foreign
banks and state-licensed U.S. branches and agencies that register as
Swap Dealers, it would be consistent with the Board's long-standing
approach to cross-border banking supervision for it to give appropriate
deference to home country supervisors with respect to capital and
margin oversight in those cases where the Board has determined, or in
the future determines, that the relevant supervisory regime is
consistent with the standards required under Dodd-Frank.\11\ This
approach is also consistent with the international harmonization
provisions contained in Section 752 of Dodd-Frank.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Sections 731 and 764 of Dodd-Frank require the Board's capital
requirements for Swap Dealers and MSPs to ensure the safety and
soundness of the Swap Dealer or MSP and be appropriate for the risk
associated with the noncleared swaps held by the Swap Dealer or MSP. In
the Institute's view, home country capital requirements deemed
comparable by the Board in accordance with its longstanding approach to
cross-border banking supervision would clearly satisfy these standards,
especially as deference to those requirements would facilitate
consolidated supervision by home country authorities. For similar
reasons, the Institute also views this approach as warranted for non-
U.S. entities for which the Commissions are responsible for setting
capital and margin requirements, such as foreign broker-dealers and
investment firms that are also subject to comparable requirements
supervised by home country authorities. Such an approach would help to
ensure that the Commissions and the prudential regulators establish and
maintain comparable capital and margin requirements, as required by
Sections 731 and 764 of Dodd-Frank.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, the Swap Dealer/MSP provisions of Dodd-Frank must be
interpreted in light of generally applicable principles of statutory
construction. In particular, as reaffirmed by the Supreme Court in its
recent Morrison v. National Australia Bank decision, it is a ``long-
standing principle of American law that legislation of Congress, unless
a contrary intent appears, is meant to apply only within the
territorial jurisdiction of the United States.'' \12\ The presence of
the territorial limitations in Sections 722 and 772 should not be
regarded as indicating a contrary Congressional intent to apply Title
VII of Dodd-Frank extraterritorially, except in the limited
circumstances expressly addressed by Sections 722 and 772.\13\ This is
especially the case given that, under principles of statutory
construction, Congress is deemed to have been on notice of the Morrison
decision when it enacted Dodd-Frank and Congress chose to enact
language in Section 772 that is modeled on the language in Section
30(b) of the Exchange Act interpreted by the Court in Morrison.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ 130 S. Ct. 2869 (2010) at 2877. Notably, in applying Morrison
in the context of security-based swaps to hold that the Federal
securities laws do not permit recovery of losses from swap agreements
that reference securities traded on a foreign exchange, the U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of New York recently
emphasized ``Morrison's strong pronouncement that U.S. courts ought not
to interfere with foreign securities regulation without a clear
Congressional mandate.'' Elliot Associates, L.P. v. Porsche Automobil
Holding SE, No. 10 Civ. 532 (HB) (S.D.N.Y. Dec. 30, 2010) at 13. The
Institute urges the Commissions to apply the same principle to Title
VII, i.e., to avoid applying the normative regulatory provisions of
Title VII in a manner that would unduly interfere with the regulation
of foreign banks by their home country authorities.
\13\ See id. at 2882-83 (applying the same analysis to the
analogous language in Section 30(b) of the Exchange Act).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, as the CFTC has noted, even where the Commissions may
have jurisdiction, considerations of international comity should play
an important role in determining the appropriate scope for the
Commissions' oversight of extraterritorial activities under Federal
statutes.\14\ In the particular context of Title VII of Dodd-Frank, the
Commissions must take into account the nature and structuring of the
interactions between swap counterparties located within and outside the
U.S., the extent to which other regulatory regimes substantially
parallel U.S. law, and the extent to which non-U.S. regulators are
better positioned to effectively supervise the activities conducted,
and the institutions domiciled, in their jurisdictions.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ CFTC Registration Proposal at 71382 (citing Hartford Fire
Insurance Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764 (1993)).
\15\ See 1 Restatement (Third) of Foreign Relations Law of the
United States  402-403 (1987), cited in CFTC Registration Proposal at
71382.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These legal considerations underscore the very real practical
considerations that the Commissions must address. Globally, there are a
number of paradigms under which swap activity is conducted. To achieve
the benefits of reduced risk and increased liquidity and efficiency
associated with netting and margining on a portfolio basis, foreign
banks (like their U.S. domestic counterparts) typically seek to
transact with swap counterparties globally, to the extent feasible,
through a single, highly creditworthy entity. In many cases, however,
the personnel who have relationships with U.S. customers or who manage
the market risk of the foreign bank's swap portfolio are located
regionally, outside the jurisdiction in which the foreign bank is
domiciled. In some cases, entities other than the foreign bank (such as
a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate) transact with local customers in
order to satisfy unique customer documentation, insolvency, tax,
regulatory, or other considerations.
Additionally, the swap and other activities of most foreign banks
are already subject to comprehensive prudential supervision and
regulation by home country authorities, who, of necessity, serve as the
primary supervisors of those activities. Authorities in those
jurisdictions likewise also often permit U.S. banks to deal in
derivatives with institutional customers in those jurisdictions without
becoming subject to host country licensing or registration
requirements.\16\ The European Commission (``EC'') has proposed for
comment and is in the process of considering revisions to the Markets
in Financial Instruments Directive (among others) that would allow it
to negotiate mutual recognition frameworks with non-EU countries that
would result in ``exemptive relief for investment firms and market
operators based in jurisdictions with equivalent regulatory regimes
applicable to markets in financial instruments.'' \17\ The Institute
strongly urges the Commissions to work cooperatively with authorities
in the EU and other jurisdictions, consistent with the principles
articulated by the G20,\18\ in implementing frameworks for cross-border
access, based on home country supervision that is determined to be
equivalent to that of the host jurisdiction(s).\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See, e.g., FSA PERG 2.9.15-17 (overseas person exclusion).
\17\ Public Consultation: Review of the Markets in Financial
Instruments Directive (MiFID) (Dec. 8, 2010) at Section 8.3 (Dec. 8,
2010), available at http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/consultations/
docs/2010/mifid/consultation_paper_en.pdf. The EC also noted that it
considers it necessary to establish an EU-wide regime for access by
non-EU market participants to EU financial markets ``in order to create
a real level playing field for all financial services actors in the EU
territory.'' Id.
\18\ Consistent with declarations by the G20, both the proposed
European Market Infrastructure Reform (``EMIR'') and the amendment to
Japan's Financial Instruments and Exchange Act enacted in May 2010
provide for mandatory clearing and enhanced public and regulatory
transparency requirements for OTC derivatives. See Derivatives Reform:
Comparison of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act to International
Legislation, presentation prepared by the CFTC Staff for the Global
Markets Advisory Committee (Oct. 5, 2010), available at http://
www.cftc.gov/ucm/groups/public/@newsroom/documents/speechandtestimony/
gmac_100510-cftc2.pdf. A further proposed compromise version of EMIR
was published by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers on December
7, 2010, and is available at http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/
en/10/st17/st17615.en10.pdf.
\19\ To the extent that the Commissions believe that further
legislative authorization would facilitate the implementation of such
frameworks, the Institute strongly urges the Commissions to pursue such
authorization.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accordingly, the Commissions should establish a framework for
cross-border swap activities that preserves and leverages the strengths
of existing market practices and home country supervision and
regulation. Such a framework would have the salutary benefits of
facilitating cross-border liquidity and access of counterparties to
both domestic and offshore markets. The Commission should likewise
avoid a framework that is duplicative, inefficient (for supervisors and
market participants) and would result in unrealistic extraterritorial
supervisory responsibilities for the Commissions and potential
fragmentation of the derivatives markets. In this regard, we note that
any inefficiencies associated with an inappropriate U.S. framework are
likely to be compounded to the extent that any such framework engenders
reciprocal approaches abroad.
Specifically, the Institute respectfully recommends that the
Commissions use the interpretive and definitional authority granted to
them under Title VII of Dodd-Frank to provide certain clarifications
discussed in Part I below regarding the nature of the connections to
the U.S. that would require a non-U.S. person to register as a Swap
Dealer or MSP. The Institute further recommends that the Commissions
use that authority to establish a framework for Swap Dealer and MSP
registration and regulation that addresses the following transaction
paradigms:

(a) Transactions Directly with a Foreign Bank. As discussed in Part
II.A below, a foreign bank that transacts in swaps in a dealing
capacity directly (or through U.S. introducing brokers and/or
broker-dealers) from abroad with U.S. customers without
intermediation by a U.S.-registered Swap Dealer should be
subject to registration with the Commissions as a Swap Dealer,
should be required to comply with Dodd-Frank's business conduct
standards in connection with such activity, should be required
to comply with home country capital and margin standards as
deemed comparable by the Board in accordance with its
longstanding approach to cross-border banking supervision (as
described above), and should otherwise be subject to home
country standards and supervision;

(b) Transactions Intermediated by a Registered U.S. Branch, Agency,
or Affiliate. As discussed in Part II.B below, a foreign bank
subject to home country capital requirements deemed comparable
by the Board in accordance with its longstanding approach to
cross-border banking supervision that transacts in swaps
indirectly with U.S. customers through the intermediation of a
U.S.-registered Swap Dealer acting as agent of the foreign bank
should not itself be required to register as a Swap Dealer in
the U.S. where the U.S.-registered Swap Dealer acting as agent
takes responsibility for complying with Dodd-Frank's business
conduct and other transaction-specific requirements as though
it were the swap counterparty;

(c) Transactions with a U.S. Branch, Agency, or Affiliate Acting as
Principal in a Dealer Capacity. As discussed in Part II.C
below, a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate of a foreign bank
that, acting as a principal in a dealer capacity, transacts in
swaps with counterparties located within and outside the U.S.
should be required to register as a Swap Dealer in the U.S. and
to comply with Dodd-Frank's business conduct and other
regulatory standards (including capital and margin requirements
as applied by the Board or the OCC, as applicable, in the case
of a U.S. branch or agency) \20\ in connection with all of its
swap activity conducted from the U.S., but the foreign bank
itself should not need to register and be subject to regulation
as a Swap Dealer; and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ As discussed above in the text accompanying note 8, the
capital of a U.S. branch or agency is assessed by reference to the
capital of the foreign bank.

(d) Inter-Branch or Inter-affiliate Transactions. As discussed in
Part II.D below, swap transactions between a registered U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate and an unregistered foreign bank
(or between a registered foreign bank and its unregistered U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate) conducted for the purpose of
allocating market risk arising from swap dealing activities
should not require the participating unregistered entity to
register as a Swap Dealer or MSP, and such transactions should
also not be subject to Dodd-Frank's mandatory clearing,
execution, margin, or counterparty business conduct
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
requirements.

Regardless of which of these transaction paradigms applies, this
proposed regulatory framework would ensure that (i) the Board would be
able to make a determination as to the comparability of the foreign
bank's capital in accordance with its longstanding approach to cross-
border banking supervision and, in appropriate circumstances, defer to
home country capital requirements and prudential supervision and (ii)
responsibility for compliance with Dodd-Frank's mandatory clearing,
execution, counterparty business conduct, margin, segregation, and
record-keeping requirements would lie with a Commission registrant.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ In recommending this proposed framework, the Institute has
sought to focus on certain core interpretive, definitional and other
issues that arise in relation to cross-border swap activities. There
are naturally other issues relating to the Swap Dealer and MSP
definitions and other aspects of Dodd-Frank (including Section 716)
that are relevant to internationally headquartered banks but are beyond
the scope of this comment letter. For instance, the Institute urges the
Commissions to apply the de minimis exception to the Swap Dealer
definitions to foreign banks in a manner consistent with Sections 722
and 772 of Dodd-Frank, such as by excluding swaps with counterparties
located outside the U.S. from the calculation of any relevant threshold
based on size of positions or number of counterparties. The Institute
also would like to call the CFTC's attention to the exclusion from the
Swap Dealer definition for an insured depository institution that
offers to enter into a swap with a customer in connection with
originating a loan with that customer. Consistent with the longstanding
U.S. principle of national treatment and equality of competitive
opportunity with respect to foreign banks' U.S. operations, the CFTC
should exercise its authority under Section 712(d) of Dodd-Frank to
make that exclusion available to uninsured branches and agencies of
foreign banks on the same terms that it is available to U.S. banks that
are insured depository institutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Discussion

I. Overall Scope of Swap Dealer and MSP Registration
In order to address the application of Swap Dealer or MSP
registration and other requirements to particular transaction
paradigms, the Commissions must first determine the nature of the
connections to the U.S. that could require a non-U.S. person to
register as a Swap Dealer or MSP.
In this regard, the Institute agrees with the CFTC that a person
should not be required to register as a Swap Dealer if its only
connection to the U.S. is the use of a U.S.-registered swap execution
facility, derivatives clearing organization, or designated contract
market in connection with its swap dealing activities, or its reporting
of swaps to a U.S.-registered swap data repository.\22\ The Institute
urges the SEC to adopt a similar interpretation with respect to
security-based swaps, consistent with its approach to foreign
securities broker-dealers under the Exchange Act. The Institute
similarly does not regard the reference to a U.S. underlier or
reference entity in a swap conducted outside the U.S. by counterparties
located outside the U.S. as a sufficient connection to the U.S. to
subject either counterparty to U.S. Swap Dealer registration
requirements, and we urge the Commissions to adopt such an
interpretation.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ CFTC Registration Proposal at 71382.
\23\ The Institute acknowledges that the reference to a U.S.
underlier or use of a U.S. execution venue could be relevant to the
Commissions' exercise of so-called ``effects'' jurisdiction under
appropriate circumstances. (``Effects'' jurisdiction generally refers
to a U.S. regulator's authority to regulate or prosecute conduct
outside the U.S. that has a certain ``effect'' within the U.S. that is
subject to regulation or prohibition.) The extent of the Commissions'
effects jurisdiction is beyond the scope of this comment letter. We
merely note that determinations with respect to the non-regulation or
non-registration of certain activities or persons outside the U.S. do
not imply limitations on the scope of the relevant Commission's effects
jurisdiction.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similarly, neither the manner in which a swap is executed nor the
underlier or reference obligation for the transaction should have any
bearing on MSP registration, since neither factor is relevant to
whether a non-U.S. person's swap activities give rise to the
exceptional risks to the U.S. financial system that are the basis for
MSP registration. Rather, the analysis of whether a non-U.S. person
should register as an MSP should turn upon the scope and nature of its
swap positions with unaffiliated U.S. counterparties (including U.S.
clearinghouses, to the extent positions in cleared swaps are relevant
to the determination of whether an entity is an MSP), and the related
credit exposures to which they give rise.
Solicitation of or negotiation with counterparties located outside
the U.S. by U.S.-based personnel employed by a separate U.S. branch,
agency, or affiliate acting as agent for a non-U.S. person should also
not subject a non-U.S. person to Swap Dealer registration. Dodd-Frank
contemplates separate registration regimes, where appropriate, for
persons who act in such an introducing capacity--introducing broker
registration for swaps, and broker-dealer registration for security-
based swaps. Similarly, swap portfolio management activities by a U.S.
agent or U.S. advisor of a non-U.S. person are best addressed by
requiring the agent or advisor, where appropriate, to register as
either a commodity trading advisor (for swaps) or investment adviser
(for security-based swaps), and should not subject the non-U.S. person
to MSP registration unless the non-U.S. person's swaps are with
unaffiliated U.S. counterparties (including U.S. clearinghouses, as
noted above).\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ The Institute notes that whether registration as an
introducing broker, broker-dealer, commodity trading advisor, or
investment adviser is required under the relevant provisions will, in a
given case, of course depend on the facts and circumstances of the
activities conducted by U.S. personnel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It bears noting, in this regard, that different branches and
agencies of a foreign bank should not be treated as the same legal
``person'' for purposes of Swap Dealer designation. As noted above,
Dodd-Frank's ``prudential regulator'' definition distinguishes between
a state or federally-licensed branch or agency of a foreign bank, on
the one hand, and a foreign bank that does not operate an insured
branch, on the other. These distinctions suggest that Congress intended
to take an approach to Swap Dealer designation that is consistent with
the traditional approach of Federal banking regulation, which likewise
distinguishes between the U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank and
the foreign bank's branches and agencies outside the U.S.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See Section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978 (12
U.S.C. 3101(b)) (distinguishing between an ``agency,'' a ``branch,''
and a ``foreign bank'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the extent that a U.S. branch or agency of a foreign bank or the
foreign bank itself chooses to register as a Swap Dealer, Dodd-Frank
provides the Commissions with authority to designate and regulate only
those branches or agencies that transact with U.S. customers.
Specifically, Dodd-Frank's Swap Dealer definitions provide that a
``person may be designated as a [swap/security-based swap dealer] for a
single type or single class or category of . . . activities and
considered not to be a [swap/security-based swap dealer] for other
types, classes, or categories of . . . activities'' (emphases
added).\26\ Accordingly, in circumstances where it is appropriate to
require registration, the Commissions should designate as a Swap Dealer
only the particular U.S. or non-U.S. branch or agency of the foreign
bank involved in the execution of swaps with U.S. customers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ See Sections 1a(49)(B) of the CEA and 3(a)(71)(B) of the
Exchange Act, each as amended by Dodd-Frank.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, the Institute strongly believes that swaps with a non-
U.S. affiliate of a U.S. person should not give rise to Swap Dealer or
MSP registration requirements for that non-U.S. affiliate's
counterparties located outside the U.S. Although, as noted by the CFTC,
market participants are able to transfer swap-related risks within
affiliated groups,\27\ the Commissions should encourage effective
group-wide risk management, not discourage it through unnecessary
registration requirements. Moreover, just as the Commissions would
expect to regulate the swap activities of a U.S. affiliate of a non-
U.S. person, the swap activities of a non-U.S. affiliate of a U.S.
person with counterparties located outside the U.S. are more properly
the subject of regulation by authorities in the relevant non-U.S.
jurisdiction. A contrary result would be inconsistent with Sections 722
and 772 of Dodd-Frank, which do not contain any language suggesting
that the territorial limits on the Commissions' jurisdictions with
respect to swap activities are subject to an exception in the case of a
non-U.S. affiliate of a U.S. person. Furthermore, no financial
regulatory statute adopts such an approach to extraterritoriality,
since it would effectively prevent U.S. market participants (including
corporate end-users) from accessing non-U.S. markets through their non-
U.S. affiliates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ CFTC Registration Proposal at 71382.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions should also clarify that a non-U.S. person would
not be subject to Swap Dealer or MSP registration requirements simply
by virtue of contacting a U.S.-domiciled professional fiduciary that
acts for a counterparty located outside the U.S., since that
counterparty would not expect U.S. Swap Dealer or MSP requirements to
apply to swap transactions with a non-U.S. person merely because its
account is managed by a U.S.-resident fiduciary. This clarification
would be consistent with the SEC's existing approach in the context of
foreign broker-dealer registration.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ See Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Hamilton (avail. Nov. 22, 1995,
revised Jan. 30, 1996).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the Commissions should clarify that a non-U.S. person will
not be deemed to be acting as a Swap Dealer within the U.S. solely on
the basis of swaps it enters into with U.S.-registered Swap Dealers
(including U.S. branches and agencies that are registered) from outside
the U.S. This clarification is necessary to preserve access to non-U.S.
markets by U.S.-registered Swap Dealers. The existence of a U.S.-
registered Swap Dealer on one side of such transactions ensures that
the requirements of Title VII are appropriately satisfied. Moreover,
this clarification is also consistent with the territorial scope
limitations contained in Sections 722 and 772 of Dodd-Frank, since the
relevant activity of the non-U.S. person would take place outside the
U.S.

II. Application to Common Transaction Paradigms
With the foregoing clarifications in mind, the Institute describes
below how its proposed framework for Swap Dealer and MSP registration
and regulation would apply to the four most common paradigms under
which an unregistered U.S. person may have a foreign bank (or its U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate) as its swap counterparty: (a)
transactions directly with a foreign bank acting from abroad without
intermediation by a registered Swap Dealer, (b) transactions with a
foreign bank as principal intermediated as agent by a U.S. branch,
agency, or affiliate that is registered as a Swap Dealer, (c)
transactions with a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate acting as
principal in a dealer capacity, and (d) transactions in which the
market risk from swap dealing activities is allocated by a registered
U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate to the unregistered foreign bank or
by a registered foreign bank to its unregistered U.S. branch, agency,
or affiliate.
The proposed framework is designed to apply to these paradigms in a
complementary fashion to address the structural diversity of the swap
markets in a manner that ensures compliance with Dodd-Frank.
Accordingly, in the case of each paradigm, (i) the Board would be able
to make a determination as to the comparability of the foreign bank's
capital in accordance with its longstanding approach to cross-border
banking supervision and, in appropriate circumstances, defer to home
country capital requirements and prudential supervision and (ii)
responsibility for compliance with Dodd-Frank's mandatory clearing and
execution, customer business conduct, margin, segregation, and record-
keeping requirements would lie with a Commission registrant.
Furthermore, the Commissions have the legal authority to adopt this
framework through interpretation of the extraterritorial application of
Dodd-Frank in light of Sections 722 and 772 and, in some cases, through
exercise of their definitional authority pursuant to Section 712(d).
The Institute emphasizes that it is not suggesting that the
Commissions adopt the proposed framework only for one of the below
paradigms. Providing only one option for Swap Dealer and MSP
registration and regulation fails to recognize the diversity of
business models under which foreign banks operate and would require
many foreign banks (and indeed some U.S. banks) to restructure their
businesses significantly, which would entail material costs and reduced
flexibility for both banks and corporate end-users and other
counterparties. The Institute respectfully recommends that the
Commissions recognize this diversity and, instead, accommodate multiple
dealing structures under appropriate an appropriate regulatory
framework so as to facilitate compliance with Dodd-Frank without
causing undue disruption to the global derivatives markets.

A. Transactions Directly with a Foreign Bank
There may be circumstances in which a foreign bank chooses to
transact in swaps with U.S. customers (as opposed to U.S.-registered
Swap Dealers) directly from abroad without U.S. intermediation. For
instance, the foreign bank may make its personnel in non-U.S. markets
available to execute swap transactions directly with U.S. customers,
since those personnel may have more expertise in the relevant market.
The foreign bank may also make its non-U.S. personnel available to
execute swap transactions with U.S. customers outside U.S. trading
hours. Less commonly, some foreign banks may not have qualified
personnel at a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate. In each case, if the
foreign bank engages in swap ``dealing'' activity (i.e., holds itself
out as a dealer, makes a market, regularly enters into swaps as a
business, or engages in activity causing it to be commonly known as a
dealer or market maker) directly into the U.S. from abroad, then it
would be subject to Swap Dealer registration in the U.S.\29\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ If personnel of a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate of the
foreign bank Swap Dealer also solicited or negotiated with U.S.
customers on behalf of the foreign bank Swap Dealer, then that branch,
agency or affiliate would be subject to introducing broker and/or
broker-dealer registration, as and to the extent applicable. The
branch, agency or affiliate should not separately be subject to Swap
Dealer registration unless it acts other than in an agency capacity,
such as in the paradigms described in Parts II.B and II.C below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is imperative that the Commissions adopt an approach for foreign
banks that choose to register as Swap Dealers which recognizes that,
for reasons of international comity and the necessity of a realistic
regulatory approach, U.S. regulators should only oversee those aspects
of the foreign bank's swap business that directly affect U.S.
counterparties and markets. This would facilitate establishment with
the EU and other G20 jurisdictions of a framework for cross-border
access by third country firms subject to home country supervision that
is determined to be equivalent to that of the host jurisdiction(s).\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ See notes 17-19, supra, and accompanying text.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Institute notes that a foreign bank that registers with one or
both of the Commissions as a Swap Dealer will have the Board as its
prudential regulator.\31\ Accordingly, the Board will be in a position,
in accordance with its longstanding approach to cross-border banking
supervision, to assess the adequacy of the foreign bank's capital in
cases where the Board determines that the foreign bank Swap Dealer's
home country supervisory regime is consistent with the standards
required under Dodd-Frank. In the case of other requirements that apply
across a Swap Dealer's overall business--such as risk management
systems, supervisory policies and procedures, and information
barriers--the Institute suggests that the Commissions similarly defer
to home country regulation and supervision, where comparable. This is
particularly important given that risk management, capital adequacy and
related supervisory processes must be implemented on a consolidated
basis and structured in light of each other in order to be effective.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Section 1a(39) of the CEA, as amended by Dodd-Frank (defining
``prudential regulator'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On the other hand, Dodd-Frank requirements that apply to a
particular transaction, such as mandatory clearing, execution,
counterparty business conduct, margin, and segregation requirements,
should apply to the foreign bank Swap Dealer with respect to those
swaps that involve an unaffiliated U.S. counterparty.\32\ The Swap
Dealer should be permitted to outsource the performance, but not the
responsibility for due performance, of those requirements to a U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Although Dodd-Frank's margin requirements would apply, those
requirements for non-cleared swaps will, for a foreign bank Swap
Dealer, be applied by the Board. It would be consistent with the
Board's long-standing approach to cross-border banking supervision for
it to adopt an approach to margin that is based on deference to home
county standards that it deems to be comparable. This approach would,
in the Institute's view, also be consistent with the standards for
margin requirements mandated by Sections 731 and 764 of Dodd-Frank for
the reasons discussed in note 11, supra.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consistent with Sections 722 and 772 of Dodd-Frank, those
transaction-specific requirements should not, however, apply to swaps
by a foreign bank Swap Dealer conducted from outside the U.S. with
counterparties located outside the U.S., since those transactions will
be subject to non-U.S. regulatory requirements, and such counterparties
will not be looking to U.S. regulatory protections in the context of
such transactions. This approach is consistent with positions taken by
the Commissions under the CEA and the Investment Advisers Act of 1940
(the ``Advisers Act'').\33\ This should also be the case if U.S.-based
personnel employed by a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate of the
foreign bank Swap Dealer are involved, as agents of the foreign bank,
in soliciting or negotiating with the counterparty.\34\ The result
should be the same if U.S. personnel of a U.S. branch, agency, or
affiliate of that counterparty are involved in soliciting or
negotiating with the foreign bank.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ See CFTC Regulations  4.7(a)(2)(xi) (providing a non-U.S.
registered commodity trading advisor with exemptions from certain CEA
requirements with respect to its non-U.S. clients ) and Uniao de Bancos
Brasileiros S.A. (avail. July 28, 1992) (concluding that the registered
foreign advisory subsidiary of a foreign bank need not comply with U.S.
requirements with respect to its non-U.S. clients).
\34\ Those personnel would, however, need to comply with U.S.
requirements applicable to introducing brokers or securities broker-
dealers to the extent that the U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate is so
registered and those personnel are acting as employees or associated
persons of the registered branch, agency, or affiliate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the case of record-keeping and related examination requirements,
the Commissions should permit records for transactions with U.S.
customers to be kept either in the U.S. or, if the Swap Dealer agrees
to provide records to the Commissions upon request, outside the
U.S.\35\ This approach would allow the Commissions to readily examine
records for U.S.-related transactions. Records for other transactions
should be permitted to be kept in accordance with comparable home
country requirements, and the Commissions should examine such records
through information sharing agreements, memoranda of understanding, and
other similar arrangements with home country regulators. These
arrangements should be designed to address concerns that Commission
examination of such records might otherwise pose under non-U.S. privacy
laws.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ This approach is consistent with the CFTC's proposal for
record-keeping by Swap Dealers. See 75 Fed. Reg. 76666, 76669 (Dec. 9,
2010). See also Rule 17a-7 under the Exchange Act (establishing a
similar regime for non-U.S. broker-dealers) and Rule 204-2(j)(3) under
the Advisers Act (establishing a similar regime for non-U.S. advisers).
\36\ See, e.g., Article 29 of the EU's Data Protection Directive,
Directive 95/46/EC (imposing restrictions on transfer of personal data
to non-EU countries).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commissions should also establish a registration and regulatory
framework for swap data repositories that limits the extent to which
U.S. and non-U.S. market participants might be required to comply with
duplicative or inconsistent swap reporting regimes in multiple
jurisdictions or to report the same transactions to both U.S. and non-
U.S. data repositories.

B. Transactions Intermediated by a U.S. Branch, Agency, or Affiliate
Perhaps more commonly, a foreign bank may transact in swaps as a
dealer with U.S. customers through a separate U.S. branch, agency, or
affiliate that intermediates the transactions as agent for the foreign
bank. This is often because, to facilitate strong relationships with
U.S. customers, the personnel who solicit and negotiate with U.S.
customers and commit a foreign bank to swaps are located in the U.S.
Local personnel may also have greater expertise in local markets.
In this paradigm, the Swap Dealer registration analysis should turn
on the status of the intermediating U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate.
In cases where the U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate acting as agent is
registered merely as an introducing broker and/or securities broker-
dealer--and there is no U.S.-resident registered Swap Dealer
responsible for the transactions--then the foreign bank should be
regarded as engaging in swap dealing activity directly into the U.S.
from abroad, and should be subject to registration and regulation as
discussed in Part II.A above.
In contrast, the U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate acting as agent
for the foreign bank may be registered as a Swap Dealer and hold itself
out to U.S. customers as such. In such a case, if the U.S. branch,
agency, or affiliate complies with Dodd-Frank's transaction-specific
mandatory clearing, execution, counterparty business conduct, margin,
segregation, and record-keeping requirements as though it were the swap
counterparty,\37\ then the Commissions should not regard the foreign
bank--which would merely be an offshore ``booking'' center for the swap
transactions--to be acting as a Swap Dealer in the U.S. Accordingly,
the foreign bank should not be required, under these circumstances, to
register with the Commissions as a Swap Dealer.\38\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Because the U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate would be acting
solely in an agency capacity, it would not be required to hold capital
against the swap positions. Also, where the intermediating Swap Dealer
registrant is a U.S. branch or agency of the foreign bank, the Board
should defer to comparable home country margin requirements for non-
cleared swaps, as discussed in note 32, supra.
\38\ The Institute notes that this approach would be consistent
with the CFTC's interpretive position that a foreign futures commission
merchant (``FCM'') may, without registration as an FCM or exemption
under CFTC Regulations Part 30, carry customer omnibus accounts for
U.S. customers intermediated through a U.S.-registered FCM. See CFTC
Interpretive Letter 87-7 (Nov. 17, 1987). It would also be consistent
with the SEC's territorial approach to broker-dealer registration. See
SEC Release No. 34-27017 (Jul. 11, 1989).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a policy matter, this approach would address the objectives of
Dodd-Frank. Because a U.S.-registered Swap Dealer would take part in
the swap and be responsible for compliance with Dodd-Frank and CFTC/SEC
rules, the transaction would be subject to oversight by the Commissions
and the U.S. customer would be protected by Dodd-Frank's business
conduct requirements and anti-fraud and anti-manipulation provisions.
With respect to counterparty credit risk, there would be no risk as
between the U.S. customer and the foreign bank for a cleared swap
because the U.S. customer would face the CFTC-registered FCM or SEC-
registered broker-dealer acting as clearing member of the derivatives
clearing organization or securities clearing agency, not the foreign
bank. The foreign bank would be required to post margin as and to the
extent required by the rules of the relevant derivatives clearing
organization or clearing agency. Also, for swaps cleared in the U.S.,
the U.S. customer's margin would be protected by a CFTC-registered FCM
or SEC-registered broker-dealer or security-based swap dealer, as
appropriate.\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ The Institute also recommends that the Commissions adopt an
approach to cross-border swap clearing that is consistent with the
CFTC's approach for foreign FCMs in the futures markets. See, e.g.,
CFTC Interpretive Letter 87-7, supra note 38 (providing a framework for
intermediation by a U.S.-registered FCM) and CFTC Regulations  30.10
(providing a framework for exempting a foreign FCM subject to
comparable home country regulation).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the case of a non-cleared swap, the U.S.-registered Swap Dealer
would, as noted above, comply with Dodd-Frank's margin and segregation
requirements, which would mitigate some measure of credit risk between
the U.S. customer and the foreign bank. Although the Institute
recognizes that the U.S. customer would still have some residual
uncollateralized credit exposure to the foreign bank, the Commissions
should address that risk by requiring the U.S.-registered Swap Dealer,
as a condition for intermediating non-cleared swaps with U.S. customers
as agent for an unregistered foreign bank, to obtain a determination
from the Board that the foreign bank is subject to home country capital
standards that are consistent with the standards required under Dodd-
Frank.\40\ Indeed, in a case where the U.S. registered entity
intermediating the transaction is a U.S. branch or agency of the
foreign bank, then, as a practical matter, the Board will have already
made that determination because the Board assesses the capital of a
U.S. branch or agency by reference to the capital of the foreign bank
itself.\41\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\40\ The Commissions could adopt this requirement pursuant to their
respective general authorities under Section 4s(b)(4) of the CEA and
Section 15F(b)(4) of the Exchange Act, each as amended by Dodd-Frank,
to adopt rules regarding Swap Dealers and MSPs, including limitations
on activity. Alternatively, they could adopt this requirement pursuant
to their definition authority under Section 712(d) of Dodd-Frank as a
condition to an exclusion from the Swap Dealer and MSP definitions for
the foreign bank.
\41\ See note 8, supra.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This framework would ensure that a U.S. customer that transacts in
swaps with an unregistered foreign bank would be in the same position
with respect to its residual uncollateralized credit risk to the
foreign bank it would have been in if the foreign bank were registered.
This is because, under the framework suggested above, the foreign bank
that is the swap counterparty to the U.S. customer would be subject to
capital requirements and prudential supervision that the Board has
determined to be appropriate, which is all that Dodd-Frank requires or
seeks to achieve.\42\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ The Institute notes that Title VII of Dodd-Frank anticipates
that some degree of non-cleared swap activity will continue to take
place, and so it is implicit that Dodd-Frank does not require the
elimination of all credit risk of U.S. swap customers to Swap Dealers.
Rather, Dodd-Frank addresses that risk by requiring that Swap Dealers
be subject to capital requirements and prudential supervision.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, applying the same analysis, where (a) a U.S.-
registered Swap Dealer intermediates transactions with U.S. customers
as agent for the foreign bank and complies with Dodd-Frank's
transaction-level requirements as though it were the swap counterparty
and (b) the foreign bank is subject to home country capital
requirements determined by the Board to be consistent with Dodd-Frank,
the swap positions of the foreign bank with those U.S. customers and
the related credit exposures to which they give rise would not, in the
Institute's view, pose the exceptional risks to the U.S. financial
system that are the basis for the MSP definitions. Accordingly, a
foreign bank should not be subject to MSP registration in these
circumstances.
As a legal matter, the Commissions could adopt this approach as an
interpretation of the limited extraterritorial application of the Swap
Dealer and MSP registration requirements contained in Sections 731 and
764 and use their general rulemaking authority for Swap Dealers and
MSPs to apply any additional conditions to the U.S.-registered Swap
Dealer acting as agent for the unregistered foreign bank.
Alternatively, the Commissions could use the broad authority granted to
them by Section 712(d) to adopt rules regarding the Swap Dealer and MSP
definitions that would conditionally exclude a foreign bank subject to
home country capital standards deemed comparable by the Board from
those definitions if its only swaps with U.S. customers are executed
through a U.S.-registered Swap Dealer acting as agent. Indeed, in the
context of the MSP definitions, the Commissions have already suggested
that Section 712(d) gives them the flexibility to adopt conditional or
unconditional exclusions.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Joint Definitions Proposal at 80202-03.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

C. Transactions with a U.S. Branch, Agency, or Affiliate Acting as
Principal in a Dealer Capacity
There are also circumstances under which a U.S. branch, agency, or
affiliate of a foreign bank may choose to transact in swaps as a dealer
with counterparties located within and outside the U.S. as principal
and acting in a dealer capacity, such as when it has existing,
documented relationships with those counterparties or when those
customers prefer, for insolvency, tax or other reasons, to transact
with a U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate. In those cases, the U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate would register with the Commission(s) as a
Swap Dealer and comply with Dodd-Frank's business conduct and other
regulatory standards in connection with all of its swap activity
conducted from the U.S.\44\ However, consistent with Sections 722 and
772 of Dodd-Frank, the foreign bank itself should not be subject to
registration or regulation as a Swap Dealer or MSP simply by virtue of
its relationship with the registered U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ In the case of a U.S. branch or agency that registers as a
Swap Dealer, the Board or the OCC, as applicable, should look to the
capital adequacy of the foreign bank in determining whether the branch
satisfies Dodd-Frank's capital requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
D. Inter-affiliate or Inter-branch Transactions
In order to centralize risk management, a foreign bank's U.S.
branch, agency, or affiliate that is registered as a Swap Dealer may
use swap transactions to allocate some or all of the market risk
arising from its swap dealing activities to the foreign bank through
back-to-back transactions or other similar arrangements. Similarly, a
foreign bank that is registered as a Swap Dealer may use swap
transactions to allocate the market risk arising from its swap dealing
activities to an unregistered U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate so that
personnel employed by that U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate can manage
that risk. By way of example, such arrangements can be used so that a
foreign bank's U.S. dollar interest rate portfolio is managed centrally
by expert personnel in the U.S. In each case, the participating
unregistered entity should not be required to register as a Swap Dealer
or MSP.
As noted by the Commissions in the Joint Definition Proposal, swaps
between persons under common control simply represent an allocation of
risk within a corporate group, and may not involve the interaction with
unaffiliated persons that is a hallmark of the elements of the Swap
Dealer definitions that refer to holding oneself out as a dealer or
being commonly known as a dealer.\45\ The Commissions also recognized
that such swaps may not pose the exceptional risks to the U.S.
financial system that are the basis for the MSP definitions.\46\ This
is particularly the case where, as here, there are bona fide commercial
reasons for the registered U.S. branch, agency, or affiliate or
registered foreign bank to structure transactions through back-to-back
or similar inter-affiliate or inter-branch arrangements. Since those
arrangements would, in each case, involve a registered entity, there
should be no concern that they could be used to evade Swap Dealer or
MSP requirements.\47\ Accordingly, such transactions should not give
rise to Swap Dealer or MSP registration requirements.\48\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\45\ Joint Definitions Proposal at 80183.
\46\ Id. at 80202.
\47\ Transactions between persons under common control that are
designed to evade Swap Dealer or MSP requirements should, if necessary,
be addressed by appropriate Commission anti-evasion rules.
\48\ In the Institute's view, the MSP definition should not be
interpreted to encompass an affiliate of a named counterparty to a swap
that provides a guarantee of the named counterparty's obligations. This
is particularly the case where the affiliate providing the guarantee is
a foreign bank or other non-U.S. entity, since risk held by a non-U.S.
entity is more properly the subject of regulation by non-U.S.
authorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, the Institute urges the Commissions to consider
which, if any, of Dodd-Frank's other swap-related requirements should
be applicable to such inter-affiliate or inter-branch risk management
transactions. Application of Dodd-Frank's mandatory clearing,
execution, or margin requirements to such transactions would in some
instances completely prevent, and in others seriously reduce the
efficiency of, those transactions--thereby undermining Dodd-Frank's
objective of mitigating systemic risk. Additionally, requirements
intended to protect customers, such as Dodd-Frank's business conduct
requirements, also plainly are not necessary in the case of inter-
affiliate or inter-branch transactions.
* * * * *
The Institute appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments
in connection with the Commissions' Proposed Rules. Please do not
hesitate to contact the undersigned at [Redacted] with any questions or
if we can be of assistance to the Commissions.
Sincerely,

Sarah A. Miller,
Chief Executive Officer,
Institute of International Bankers.

CC:

Jennifer J. Johnson,
Secretary,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

ATTACHMENT 1

Institute of International Bankers:
Proposed Framework for Swap Dealer Registration and Regulation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
In order to assist the agencies in structuring their swap dealer registration and regulatory frameworks for foreign banks, and to ensure that the
agencies' frameworks do not give rise to market disruption by failing to accommodate the structuring alternatives that must be available to foreign
firms, we have summarized below a registration and regulatory framework that we believe appropriately applies sound principles of home/host country
regulation in the context of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act.1
The paradigms outlined in this matrix represent the principal (although not the only) structuring paradigms that foreign firms employ to structure
their cross-border swap and security-based swap (hereinafter, ``swap'') business with U.S.-domiciled counterparties. Individual banks often use
different structural paradigms for swaps involving different asset categories, and individual variations on these pure paradigms are not uncommon. No
single paradigm would suffice to meet the needs and circumstances of all foreign banks and we do not believe that it is necessary or desirable to
impose any single paradigm on foreign banks-whether the bank is ultimately U.S. owned or non-U.S. owned. This matrix illustrates how supervision and
oversight of swap dealers can be established under each of the paradigms in a manner that is compliant with the provisions and objectives of Title VII.
We also note that, as an integral part of this framework, it is critical that the relevant U.S. and home country regulators agree upon an
appropriate framework for examination, direct supervisory responsibility and access to information that is consistent with the allocation of applicable
host/home country law.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Direct Contacts by Foreign  U.S. Branch Personnel, on   U.S. FCM/Broker-Dealer      U.S. Swap Dealer           U.S. Affiliate Deals in
Bank Personnel              an Agency Basis, Solicit,   Affiliate Personnel, on     Affiliate Personnel, on    Swaps as Principal
Negotiate and Commit to     an Agency Basis, Solicit,   an Agency Basis,
Swaps that are ``Booked''   Negotiate and Commit to     Solicit, Negotiate and
to the Foreign Bank         Swaps that are ``Booked''   Commit to Swaps that are
to the Foreign Bank         ``Booked'' to the
Foreign Bank
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Facts           Employees of the foreign    Employees of a U.S.         Employees of a U.S.         Employees of a U.S. swap   Personnel employed by a
bank resident outside the   branch, acting as agent     futures commission          dealer affiliate, acting   U.S. affiliate contact
U.S. contact U.S. persons   for the foreign bank        merchant (``FCM'')/broker-  as agent for the foreign   U.S. persons to deal in
to deal in swaps that the   principal, solicit,         dealer affiliate, acting    bank principal, solicit,   swaps for the account of
foreign bank enters into    negotiate and commit to     as agent for the foreign    negotiate and commit to    the U.S. affiliate. Some
as principal. Certain       swaps that are booked to    bank principal, solicit,    swaps that are booked to   or all of the risk
market risks, such as       the foreign bank. Certain   negotiate and commit to     the foreign bank.          arising from this swap
risks relating to swaps     market risks, such as       swaps that are booked to    Certain market risks,      activity might be backed-
involving U.S.              risks relating to swaps     the foreign bank. Certain   such as risks relating     to-back to the foreign
underliers, may be risk     involving U.S.              market risks, such as       to swaps involving U.S.    bank.
managed on an agency        underliers, may be risk     risks relating to swaps     underliers, may be risk
basis (subject to           managed on an agency        involving U.S.              managed on an agency
specified parameters) by    basis (subject to           underliers, may be risk     basis (subject to
personnel of an affiliate   specified parameters) by    managed on an agency        specified parameters) by
or branch located in the    personnel of an affiliate   basis (subject to           personnel of an
U.S., or certain market     or branch located in the    specified parameters) by    affiliate or branch
risks may be hedged         U.S., or certain market     personnel of an affiliate   located in the U.S., or
through inter-branch or     risks may be hedged         or branch located in the    certain market risks may
inter-affiliate swaps.      through inter-branch or     U.S., or certain market     be hedged through inter-
inter-affiliate swaps.      risks may be hedged         branch or inter-
through inter-branch or     affiliate swaps.
inter-affiliate swaps.
Registration    The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would      The U.S. affiliate, since   The U.S. affiliate would   The U.S. affiliate would
(Commodity     register in the U.S. as a   register in the U.S. as a   it is engaged in            register as a swap         register as a swap
Exchange Act    swap dealer, but            swap dealer, but            soliciting and accepting    dealer.                    dealer.
(``CEA'')      registration and            registration and            orders for swaps on        The foreign bank           The foreign bank
4s(a)(1)/       regulation (other than      regulation (other than      behalf of the foreign       ``booking entity'' would   affiliated with the U.S.
Securities      with respect to entity-     with respect to entity-     bank, would register as     either register in the     swap dealer would not be
Exchange Act    wide prudential             wide prudential             an introducing broker or    U.S. as a swap dealer      subject to U.S.
of 1934         regulation requirements     regulation requirements     securities broker (or, if   solely with respect to     regulation, including in
(``SEA'')      identified below) would     identified below) would     it is registered as an      its role as the            cases where:
15F(a)(1))      be limited to the U.S.-     be limited to the U.S.      FCM/broker-dealer,          contractual counterparty
facing activities of the    branch activities.          otherwise qualify).         on U.S. customer-facing
branch/separately           Foreign branches would     The foreign bank would       swaps or, as a condition
identifiable department     not be subject to U.S.      register in the U.S. as a   to not registering, be
or division that is         regulation.                 swap dealer, but            required to be subject
involved in the execution                               registration and            to and comply with home
of swaps with U.S.                                      regulation (other than      country standards
persons. Other branches/                                with respect to entity-     determined by the FRB
divisions would not be                                  wide prudential             and the Commissions, as
subject to U.S.                                         regulation requirements     applicable, to be
regulation.                                             identified below) would     comparable to U.S.
be limited to the U.S.-     capital, risk
facing activities.          management, and other
prudential requirements
(in which case the
foreign bank would
undertake to notify the
FRB and the Commissions
of any violations of or
material changes to
those home country
standards, which could
constitute a basis for
revoking the exception
from registration).

Capital         The FRB would be            The FRB would be            The FRB would be            The U.S. swap dealer
(CEA  4s(e)/  responsible for the         responsible for the         responsible for the         affiliate would comply
SEA  15F(e))   foreign bank's capital,     foreign bank's capital,     foreign bank's capital,     with U.S. capital
but would defer to          but would defer to          but would defer to          requirements, as
comparable home country     comparable home country     comparable home country     established by the
standards.                  standards.                  standards.                  Commissions. Under these
Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with       requirements, the U.S.
home country standards      home country standards      home country standards      swap dealer affiliate
would constitute a          would constitute a          would constitute a          would not be required to
violation of FRB            violation of FRB            violation of FRB            hold capital against the
requirements by the         requirements by the         requirements by the         market and credit risk
foreign bank.               foreign bank.               foreign bank.               arising from positions
booked in the foreign
bank so long as either:

The U.S. swap dealer
Margin          The FRB would be            The FRB would be            The FRB would be            Foreign banks would agree  The U.S. swap dealer
(CEA  4s(e)/  responsible for the         responsible for the         responsible for the         to comply with U.S.        affiliate would comply
SEA  15F(e))   foreign bank's margin       foreign bank's margin       foreign bank's margin       requirements applicable    with U.S. margin
requirements, but would     requirements, but would     requirements, but would     to the affiliate for       requirements, as
defer to comparable home    defer to comparable home    defer to comparable home    transactions               established by the
country standards.          country standards.          country standards.          intermediated by the       Commissions or the
Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with       affiliate.                 relevant prudential
home country standards      home country standards      home country standards                                 regulator.
would constitute a          would constitute a          would constitute a
violation of FRB            violation of FRB            violation of FRB
requirements by the         requirements by the         requirements by the
foreign bank.               foreign bank.               foreign bank.
With respect to the FCM/
broker-dealer, Commission
rules for FCMs/broker-
dealers would apply.
Financial and   Since these requirements    Since these requirements    Since these requirements    The U.S. swap dealer       The U.S. swap dealer
Operational     are integrally related to   are integrally related to   are integrally related to   affiliate would comply     affiliate would comply
Records         capital adequacy and        capital adequacy and        capital adequacy and        with Commission            with Commission
(CEA          overall safety and          overall safety and          overall safety and          requirements.              requirements.
4s(f)(1)/SEA    soundness, the              soundness, the              soundness, the             For the limited
 15F(f)(1))    Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     registration foreign
2               to comparable home          to comparable home          to comparable home          bank swap dealer, if
country standards.          country standards.          country standards.          any, the Commissions
Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with       would defer to
home country standards      home country standards      home country standards      comparable home country
would constitute a          would constitute a          would constitute a          standards, and failure
violation of Commission     violation of Commission     violation of Commission     to comply with home
rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        country standards would
bank.                       bank.                       bank.                       constitute a violation
With respect to the FCM/     of Commission rules by
broker-dealer, Commission   the foreign bank.
rules for FCMs/broker-
dealers would apply.
Risk            Since these requirements    Since these requirements    Since these requirements    The U.S. swap dealer       The U.S. swap dealer
Management      are integrally related to   are integrally related to   are integrally related to   affiliate would comply     affiliate would comply
Procedures      capital adequacy and        capital adequacy and        capital adequacy and        with Commission            with Commission
(including      overall safety and          overall safety and          overall safety and          requirements, but these    requirements, which
Business        soundness, the              soundness, the              soundness, the              should be flexible         should be flexible
Continuity/     Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     enough to accommodate      enough to accommodate
Disaster        to comparable home          to comparable home          to comparable home          group-structured           group-structured
Recovery)       country standards.          country standards.          country standards.          systems, policies and      systems, policies and
(CEA         Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with       procedures and different   procedures and different
4s(j)(2)/SEA    home country standards      home country standards      home country standards      organizational             organizational
 15F(j)(2))    would constitute a          would constitute a          would constitute a          structures that comport    structures that comport
violation of Commission     violation of Commission     violation of Commission     with home country          with home country
rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        standards that are         standards that are
bank.                       bank.                       bank.                       comparable in objective    comparable in objective
With respect to the FCM/     to U.S. standards.         to U.S. standards.
broker-dealer, Commission  For the limited
rules for FCMs/broker-      registration foreign
dealers would apply.        bank swap dealer, if
any, the Commissions
would defer to
comparable home country
standards, and failure
to comply with home
country standards would
constitute a violation
of Commission rules by
the foreign bank.
Conflicts of    Where comparable (i.e.,     Where comparable (i.e.,     Where comparable (i.e.,     The U.S. swap dealer       The U.S. swap dealer
Interest        reasonably designed to      reasonably designed to      reasonably designed to      affiliate would comply     affiliate would comply
(including      achieve the same            achieve the same            achieve the same            with Commission            with Commission
Information     objectives), the            objectives), the            objectives), the            requirements, which        requirements, which
Barriers)       Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     Commissions would defer     should be flexible         should be flexible
(CEA          to home country             to home country             to home country             enough to accommodate      enough to accommodate
4s(j)(5)/SEA    standards.                  standards.                  standards.                  group-structured           group-structured
 15F(j)(5))   Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with      Failure to comply with       systems, policies and      systems, policies and
home country standards      home country standards      home country standards      procedures and different   procedures and different
would constitute a          would constitute a          would constitute a          organizational             organizational
violation of Commission     violation of Commission     violation of Commission     structures that comport    structures that comport
rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        rules by the foreign        with home country          with home country
bank.                       bank.                       bank.                       standards that are         standards that are
comparable in objective    comparable in objective
to U.S. standards.         to U.S. standards.
Position        The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would     The U.S. swap dealer
Limits/         comply with Commission      comply with Commission      comply with Commission      comply with Commission     affiliate would comply
Monitoring of   requirements, but these     requirements, but these     requirements, but these     requirements, but these    with Commission
Trading         should be flexible enough   should be flexible enough   should be flexible enough   should be flexible         requirements, which
(CEA         to accommodate group-       to accommodate group-       to accommodate group-       enough to accommodate      should be flexible
4s(h)(1)(C)     structured systems,         structured systems,         structured systems,         group-structured           enough to accommodate
and (j)(1)/     policies and procedures     policies and procedures     policies and procedures     systems, policies and      group-structured
SEA           and different               and different               and different               procedures and different   systems, policies and
15F(h)(1)(C)    organizational structures   organizational structures   organizational structures   organizational             procedures and different
and (j)(1))     that comport with home      that comport with home      that comport with home      structures that comport    organizational
country standards that      country standards that      country standards that      with home country          structures that comport
are comparable in           are comparable in           are comparable in           standards that are         with home country
objective to U.S.           objective to U.S.           objective to U.S.           comparable in objective    standards that are
standards.                  standards.                  standards.                  to U.S. standards.         comparable in objective
to U.S. standards.
Diligent        The branch/division that    The U.S. branch would       The foreign bank, in        The U.S. swap dealer       The U.S. swap dealer
Supervision     is involved in the          establish a system for      conjunction with the U.S.   affiliate would            affiliate would
(CEA          execution of swaps with     supervision of compliance   FCM/Broker-dealer           establish a system for     establish a system for
4s(h)(1)(B)/    U.S. persons would          with applicable U.S.        affiliate, would            supervision of             supervision of
SEA            establish a system for      requirements, including     establish an integrated     compliance with            compliance with
15F(h)(1)(B))/  supervision of compliance   designation of              system for supervision of   applicable U.S.            applicable U.S.
Chief           with applicable U.S.        supervisory personnel,      compliance with             requirements, including    requirements, including
Compliance      requirements, including     but requirements should     applicable U.S.             designation of             designation of
Officer (CEA    designation of              be flexible enough to       requirements, including     supervisory personnel,     supervisory personnel,
 4s(k)/SEA    supervisory personnel,      accommodate group-          designation of              but requirements should    but requirements should
15F(k))         but requirements should     structured systems,         supervisory personnel at    be flexible enough to      be flexible enough to
be flexible enough to       policies and procedures     the foreign bank, but       accommodate group-         accommodate group-
accommodate group-          and different               requirements should be      structured systems,        structured systems,
structured systems,         organizational structures   flexible enough to          policies and procedures    policies and procedures
policies and procedures     that comport with home      accommodate group-          and different              and different
and different               country standards that      structured systems,         organizational             organizational
organizational structures   are comparable in           policies and procedures     structures that comport    structures that comport
that comport with home      objective to U.S.           and different               with home country          with home country
country standards that      standards.                  organizational structures   standards that are         standards that are
are comparable in          The foreign bank would       that comport with home      comparable in objective    comparable in objective
objective to U.S.           designate the U.S. branch   country standards that      to U.S. standards.         to U.S. standards.
standards.                  as responsible for          are comparable in
The foreign bank would       complying with these        objective to U.S.
designate the branch/       requirements. Examination   standards.
division involved in the    for compliance would
execution of swaps with     occur at the U.S. branch
U.S. persons as             where the relevant
responsible for complying   customer-facing activity
with these requirements.    occurs.
Examination for
compliance would occur at
the branch/division where
the relevant customer-
facing activity occurs.
Business        U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     The U.S. swap dealer       U.S. requirements would
Conduct         apply directly to           apply to all transactions   apply directly to           affiliate would comply     apply to all
Standards       transactions with U.S.      (with U.S. and non-U.S.     transactions with U.S.      with, and be responsible   transactions (with U.S.
with            persons, but would not      persons) executed by U.S.   persons, but would not      for, U.S. requirements     and non-U.S. persons)
Counterpartie   apply to transactions       branch personnel, and       apply to transactions       as though it were the      executed by the U.S.
s               with persons domiciled      would not apply to          with persons domiciled      counterparty.              swap dealer affiliate.
(CEA         abroad.                     transactions executed       abroad.                    Examination for
4s(h)(3), (4)  The foreign bank would       with non-U.S. persons by   The foreign bank would       compliance would occur
and (5)/SEA     designate the branch/       foreign bank personnel      outsource the               at the U.S. affiliate
 15F(h)(3),   division involved in the    located outside the U.S.    performance, but not        where the relevant
(4) and (5))    execution of swaps with    The foreign bank would       responsibility for due      customer-facing activity
U.S. persons as             designate the U.S. branch   performance, of those       occurs.
responsible for complying   as responsible for          requirements to the U.S.
with such U.S.              complying with such U.S.    FCM/broker-dealer
regulations applicable to   regulations applicable to   affiliate. Examination
its transactions with       its transactions with       for compliance would
U.S. persons. Examination   U.S. persons. Examination   occur at the U.S.
for compliance would        for compliance would        affiliate where the
occur at the branch/        occur at the U.S. branch    relevant customer-facing
division where the          where the relevant          activity occurs.
relevant customer-facing    customer-facing activity   With respect to the FCM/
activity occurs. No U.S.    occurs.                     broker-dealer, Commission
examination of or                                       rules for FCMs/broker-
enforcement relating to                                 dealers would apply.
conduct associated with
non-U.S. transactions.
Back Office/    U.S. requirements that      U.S. requirements that      U.S. requirements that      The U.S. swap dealer       The U.S. swap dealer
Documentation   apply to particular         apply to particular         apply to particular         affiliate would comply     affiliate would comply
Standards       transactions/               transactions/               transactions/               with Commission            with Commission
(CEA  4s(i)/  counterparties (e.g.,       counterparties (e.g.,       counterparties (e.g.,       requirements, which        requirements, which
SEA  15F(i))   acknowledgement,            acknowledgement,            acknowledgement,            should be flexible         should be flexible
3               confirmation, trading       confirmation, trading       confirmation, trading       enough to accommodate      enough to accommodate
relationship                relationship                relationship                group-structured           group-structured
documentation) would        documentation) would        documentation) would        systems, policies and      systems, policies and
apply to transactions       apply to transactions       apply to transactions       procedures and different   procedures and different
with U.S. persons, but      with U.S. persons, but      with U.S. persons, but      organizational             organizational
should be flexible enough   should be flexible enough   should be flexible enough   structures that comport    structures that comport
to accommodate group-       to accommodate group-       to accommodate group-       with home country          with home country
structured systems,         structured systems,         structured systems,         standards that are         standards that are
policies and procedures     policies and procedures     policies and procedures     comparable in objective    comparable in objective
and different               and different               and different               to U.S. standards.         to U.S. standards.
organizational structures   organizational structures   organizational structures
that comport with home      that comport with home      that comport with home
country standards that      country standards that      country standards that
are comparable in           are comparable in           are comparable in
objective to U.S.           objective to U.S.           objective to U.S.
standards.                  standards.                  standards.
The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would      The foreign bank would
designate the branch/       designate the U.S. branch   outsource the
division involved in the    as responsible for          performance, but not
execution of swaps with     complying with these        responsibility for due
U.S. persons as             requirements. Examination   performance, of those
responsible for complying   for compliance would        requirements to the U.S.
with these requirements.    occur at the U.S. branch    FCM/broker-dealer
Examination for             where the relevant          affiliate. Examination
compliance would occur at   customer-facing activity    for compliance would
the branch/division where   occurs.                     occur at the U.S.
the relevant customer-                                  affiliate where the
facing activity occurs.                                 relevant customer-facing
No U.S. examination of or                               activity occurs.
enforcement relating to
conduct associated with
non-U.S. transactions.
Trading         U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     The U.S. swap dealer       U.S. requirements would
Records         apply directly to           apply to all transactions   apply directly to           affiliate would comply     apply to all
(CEA  4s(g)/  transactions with U.S.      (with U.S. and non-U.S.     transactions with U.S.      with, and be responsible   transactions (with U.S.
SEA  15F(g))   persons, but would not      persons) executed by U.S.   persons, but would not      for, U.S. requirements     and non-U.S. persons)
apply to transactions       branch personnel, and       apply to transactions       as though it were the      executed by the U.S.
with persons domiciled      would not apply to          with persons domiciled      counterparty.              swap dealer affiliate.
abroad.                     transactions executed       abroad.                    Examination for
The foreign bank would       with non-U.S. persons by   The foreign bank would       compliance would occur
designate the branch/       foreign bank personnel      outsource the               at the U.S. affiliate
division involved in the    located outside the U.S.    performance, but not        where the relevant
execution of swaps with    The foreign bank would       responsibility for due      customer-facing activity
U.S. persons as             designate the U.S. branch   performance, of those       occurs.
responsible for complying   as responsible for          requirements to the U.S.
with such U.S.              complying with such U.S.    FCM/broker-dealer
regulations applicable to   regulations applicable to   affiliate. Examination
its transactions with       its transactions with       for compliance would
U.S. persons. Examination   U.S. persons. Examination   occur at the U.S.
for compliance would        for compliance would        affiliate where the
occur at the branch/        occur at the U.S. branch    relevant customer-facing
division where the          where the relevant          activity occurs. Books
relevant customer-facing    customer-facing activity    and records relevant to
activity occurs. No U.S.    occurs.                     compliance with respect
examination of or                                       to all activities
enforcement relating to                                 conducted by the U.S.
conduct associated with                                 affiliate on behalf of
non-U.S. transactions.                                  the foreign bank swap
dealer would be
accessible in the U.S.
With respect to the FCM/
broker-dealer, Commission
rules for FCMs/broker-
dealers would apply.
Segregation     U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     U.S. requirements would     The U.S. swap dealer       U.S. requirements would
Requirements    apply directly to           apply to all transactions   apply directly to           affiliate would comply     apply to all
(CEA  4s(l)/  transactions with U.S.      (with U.S. and non-U.S.     transactions with U.S.      with, and be responsible   transactions (with U.S.
SEA  3E(f))    persons, but would not      persons) executed by U.S.   persons, but would not      for, U.S. requirements     and non-U.S. persons)
apply to transactions       branch personnel, and       apply to transactions       as though it were the      executed by the U.S.
with persons domiciled      would not apply to          with persons domiciled      counterparty.              swap dealer affiliate.
abroad.                     transactions executed       abroad.                    Examination for
The foreign bank would       with non-U.S. persons by   The foreign bank would       compliance would occur
designate the branch/       foreign bank personnel      outsource the               at the U.S. affiliate
division involved in the    located outside the U.S.    performance, but not        where the relevant
execution of swaps with    The foreign bank would       responsibility for due      customer- facing
U.S. persons as             designate the U.S. branch   performance, of those       activity occurs.
responsible for complying   as responsible for          requirements to the U.S.
with such U.S.              complying with such U.S.    FCM/broker-dealer
regulations applicable to   regulations applicable to   affiliate. Examination
its transactions with       its transactions with       for compliance would
U.S. persons. Examination   U.S. persons. Examination   occur at the U.S.
for compliance would        for compliance would        affiliate where the
occur at the branch/        occur at the U.S. branch    relevant customer-facing
division where the          where the relevant          activity occurs.4
relevant customer-facing    customer-facing activity
activity occurs. No U.S.    occurs.
examination of or
enforcement relating to
conduct associated with
non-U.S. transactions.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1 While this framework is, for convenience, described with reference to a foreign bank, the same framework would also apply to a foreign, non-bank
financial institution, except that the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'') and the Securities and the Exchange Commission (the ``SEC''
and, together with the CFTC, the ``Commissions''), rather than the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the ``FRB''), would be
responsible for capital and margin requirements.
2 U.S. regulators would, in consultation with home country regulators, establish an allocation for the exercise of examination authority and access to
financial, operational, and other supervisory information.
3 To the extent that the Commissions adopt portfolio compression requirements pursuant to these provisions, we would regard those requirements, like
risk management requirements, as integrally related to capital adequacy and overall safety and soundness. Accordingly, under this framework, the
Commissions would defer to comparable home country standards designed to address the same objectives as the Commissions' portfolio compression
requirements, and failure to comply with home country standards would constitute a violation of Commission rules.
4 As discussed above, books and records relevant to compliance with respect to all activities conducted by the U.S. affiliate on behalf of the foreign
bank swap dealer would be accessible in the U.S.

ATTACHMENT 2

April 11, 2011
Regulation and Supervision of U.S. Branches and Agencies of Foreign
Banks by U.S. Banking Authorities and the Application of U.S.
Regulatory Capital Requirements to Such Banks
Banking organizations headquartered outside the United States
(``foreign banks'') conduct a substantial portion of their banking
activities in the United States through branch offices of the bank \1\
pursuant to licenses granted either by New York or one of the other
states or, if the foreign bank so chooses, by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (``OCC'').\2\ In the aggregate, U.S.
branches of foreign banks hold over $2 trillion of assets, accounting
for approximately 15% of total banking assets in the United States.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Strictly speaking, foreign banks may establish ``branches'' and
``agencies'' in the United States, the principal difference between the
two types of offices being that a ``branch'' is authorized to accept
deposits from U.S. persons but an ``agency'' is not. Foreign banks
conduct principally wholesale banking activities through their branches
and agencies. The deposits of branches are not insured by the FDIC
(with the exception of eight foreign banks that are permitted, pursuant
to ``grandfather'' authority granted under Federal banking law, to
maintain FDIC-insured branches subject to the same limits on deposit
insurance coverage applicable to all other FDIC-insured depository
institutions (according to the Federal Reserve data referenced in note
2 below, these grandfathered insured branches have less than $30
billion total assets in the aggregate)).
\2\ According to the information most recently published by the
Federal Reserve (reported as of September 30, 2010), there are 199
state-licensed foreign bank branches and agencies, 106 of which are
licensed by the New York State Banking Department. According to
information most recently published by the OCC (reported as of February
28, 2011), there are 51 Federal branches and agencies, 35 of which are
located in New York.
\3\ According to the Federal Reserve data, state-licensed branches
and agencies in the aggregate have total assets of approximately $1.89
trillion (of which $1.81 trillion is held by branches), and Federal
branches and agencies have total assets of approximately $140 billion
(almost all of which is held by branches).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The discussion below summarizes key aspects of how U.S. branches of
foreign banks are regulated and supervised in the United States as
separately licensed offices of the banks, focusing in particular on the
key role the Federal Reserve plays in this process. This brief review
is followed by a discussion of how the Federal Reserve, in applying
U.S. capital requirements to foreign banks that maintain U.S. branches,
gives appropriate deference to home country standards while providing
sufficient flexibility to ensure compliance with U.S. regulatory
capital requirements in a manner that is consistent with national
treatment.
The U.S. Bank Regulatory Approach to U.S. Branches as Separately
Licensed Offices of Foreign Banks
U.S. branches are not separately capitalized entities, but their
operations are separately examined by U.S. banking authorities and
assigned supervisory ``ROCA'' ratings.\4\ In addition, U.S. branches
maintain separate books and records in accordance with U.S. regulatory
requirements and file with U.S. regulators quarterly reports of their
assets and liabilities (``Call Reports'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The ``ROCA'' rating system consists of separate assessments of
a branch's risk management, operations, compliance and asset quality,
as well as an overall composite assessment of the branch.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In general, U.S. branches are limited to the same types of
activities as are permissible for their U.S. domestic bank
counterparts. Inasmuch as foreign banks' U.S. branches do not have
their own capital, restrictions on such activities that are based on
capital (for example, lending limits) are applied to branches by
reference to the foreign bank's capital, as calculated under its home
country standards.
U.S. regulators have the authority to take over and oversee the
liquidation of the operations of U.S. branches. These proceedings are
undertaken pursuant to so-called ``ring-fencing'' provisions whereby
the assets of the branch are distributed first to satisfy the claims of
creditors that have done business with the branch, with the balance, if
any, then distributed to the appropriate authority in the foreign
bank's home country.
Federal Reserve Regulation and Oversight of U.S. Branches of Foreign
Banks
The Federal Reserve plays an especially important role in the
regulation and oversight of foreign banks and their U.S. branches.
Foreign banks seeking to enter the U.S. market through a branch are
required to obtain the Federal Reserve's prior approval (as well as
approval from the appropriate Federal or state licensing authority). In
reviewing an application to establish a branch, the Federal Reserve
takes into account, among other considerations, the financial and
managerial resources of the foreign bank, and the Federal Reserve may
impose such conditions on its approval as it deems necessary.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See generally, 12 U.S.C. 3105(d).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A key consideration in acting on an application to establish a U.S.
branch is whether the foreign bank is subject to ``comprehensive
supervision or regulation on a consolidated basis by the appropriate
authorities in its home country.'' \6\ In addition, in the case of an
application by a foreign bank that ``presents a risk to the stability
of the United States financial system,'' the Federal Reserve may
consider ``whether the home country of the foreign bank has adopted, or
is making demonstrable progress toward adopting, an appropriate system
of financial regulation for the financial system of such home country
to mitigate such risk.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See 12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(2)(A).
\7\ This factor was added by Section 173(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act,
codified at 12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(3)(E).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Federal Reserve considers a variety of factors in determining
whether a foreign bank satisfies the ``comprehensive consolidated
supervision'' (``CCS'') requirement.\8\ In the event the Federal
Reserve is unable to find that a foreign bank meets the CCS
requirement, the Federal Reserve nevertheless may permit the bank to
establish a U.S. branch if it determines that ``the appropriate
authorities in the home country of the foreign bank are actively
working to establish arrangements for the consolidated supervision of
such bank.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The relevant provisions of the Federal Reserve's Regulation K
(12 CFR 211.24(c)(1)(ii)) provides that in making a CCS determination,
the Federal Reserve shall assess, among other factors, the extent to
which the foreign bank's home country supervisor:

(A) Ensures that the foreign bank has adequate procedures for
monitoring and controlling its
activities worldwide;

(B) Obtains information on the condition of the foreign bank and
its subsidiaries and offices
outside the home country through regular reports of examination,
audit reports, or otherwise;

(C) Obtains information on the dealings and relationship between
the foreign bank and its
affiliates, both foreign and domestic;

(D) Receives from the foreign bank financial reports that are
consolidated on a worldwide
basis, or comparable information that permits analysis of the foreign
bank's financial condi-
tion on a worldwide, consolidated basis;

(E) Evaluates prudential standards, such as capital adequacy and
risk asset exposure, on a
worldwide basis.

\9\ See 12 U.S.C. 3105(d)(6)(A)(i)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Federal Reserve has the authority to examine each foreign
bank's U.S. branch. In exercising this authority the Federal Reserve
seeks to coordinate with the appropriate state or Federal authority to
the extent possible to reduce burden and avoid unnecessary duplication
of examinations, and it may request that its examination be conducted
simultaneously with that of the other appropriate examining
authority.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See generally, 12 U.S.C. 3105(c)(1).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Federal Reserve also has the authority to order a foreign bank
to terminate the activities of its state-licensed branch upon its
determination, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing and notice
to the appropriate state bank supervisor, that there is reasonable
cause to believe that the foreign bank, or any of its affiliates, has
committed a violation of law or engaged in an unsafe or unsound banking
practice in the United States.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See 12 U.S.C. 3105(e)(1)(B). In addition, in the case of a
foreign bank that ``presents a risk to the stability of the United
States financial system,'' the Federal Reserve may order the bank to
terminate the activities of its state-licensed branch if the Federal
Reserve finds that ``the home country of the foreign bank has not
adopted, or made demonstrable progress toward adopting, an appropriate
system of financial regulation for the financial system of such home
country to mitigate such risk.'' (This latter authority was added by
Section 173(b) of the Dodd-Frank Act, codified at 12 U.S. C.
3105(e)(1)(C).) In the case of a Federal branch, the Federal Reserve is
authorized to recommend to the OCC that it terminate the license of the
Federal branch on the basis of the same types of concerns that can
trigger termination of a state-licensed branch's activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Reserve Regulation and Oversight of Foreign Banks' U.S.
Operations--Application of Capital Requirements to Foreign
Banks That Maintain U.S. Branches
The Federal Reserve exercises broad regulatory and oversight
authority over not only the operations of foreign banks' U.S. branches,
but also their overall U.S. operations, both banking and non-
banking.\12\ Consistent with the international framework for the
supervision of cross-border banking activities, this approach reflects
the understanding that foreign banks are subject to primary supervision
by their home country authorities, with the Federal Reserve, as a host
country supervisor, exercising appropriate oversight of their U.S.
operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ See, e.g., ``Consolidated Supervision of Bank Holding
Companies and the Combined U.S. Operations of Foreign Banking
Organizations,'' Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Letter 08-9
(October 16, 2008).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A foreign bank that maintains a U.S. branch is treated as a bank
holding company and as such is subject to the requirements of the Bank
Holding Company Act (``BHC Act''), including its activity restrictions,
``in the same manner and to the same extent that bank holding companies
are subject to such provisions.'' \13\ Dating to the International
Banking Act of 1978, the policy of national treatment has been the
guiding principle for implementing these requirements. This principle
calls for ``parity of treatment between [foreign and U.S. banks] in
like circumstances,'' \14\ but it is recognized that parity of
treatment does not mean identical treatment. Instead, national
treatment is accomplished by applying the requirements applicable to
U.S. banking organizations in a manner that appropriately takes into
account the differences resulting from foreign banks' operating in the
United States through U.S. branches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See 12 U.S.C. 3106(a).
\14\ S. Rep. No. 1073, 95th Cong. 2d Sess. 2, reprinted in 1978
U.S. Code Cong. and Admin. News 1421, 1422.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The practical consequences of implementing the national treatment
principle are well illustrated by the approach taken by the Federal
Reserve when applying U.S. regulatory capital requirements to foreign
banks that maintain U.S. branches. This approach recognizes that (i) a
U.S. branch does not maintain its own capital and (ii) the foreign bank
itself is subject to capital requirements prescribed by its home
country authority. In the case of a foreign bank whose home country
applies capital standards consistent with those adopted by the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (the ``Basel Committee''),\15\ the
bank's capital as calculated under those standards is accepted as the
starting point for the U.S. regulatory assessment.\16\ In the case of
banks that are subject to Basel II's requirements, this assessment
takes into account any transitional provisions implemented by the home
country. If a foreign bank's home country has not adopted capital
standards consistent with the Basel Committee's standards, then the
foreign bank, rather than being able simply to utilize the ratios
calculated under the home country standard as the basis for the U.S.
regulatory assessment, is subject to a finding by the Federal Reserve
that its capital is equivalent to the capital that would be required of
a U.S. banking organization.\17\ That finding, however, is based on the
assessment of the home country standards and does not call for the
foreign bank to calculate its capital using U.S. standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ In its 2010 survey of countries around the world to measure
the progress that has been made with respect to implementation of the
revised international capital accords adopted by the Basel Committee in
2006 (``Basel II'') the Financial Stability Institute found that 112 of
the 133 countries responding to the survey have implemented or are
currently planning to implement Basel II. See ``2010 FSI Survey on the
Implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Framework,'' Occasional
Paper No. 9 (August 2010).
\16\ See, e.g., 12 CFR 225.2(r)(3)(i)(A).
\17\ See, e.g., 12 CFR 225.2(r)(3)(i)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thus, the analysis of a foreign bank's capital properly takes as
its starting point the standards of the bank's home country and then
undertakes to assess how those standards compare to the standards
applicable to U.S. banking organizations under U.S. requirements. This
approach neither gives complete deference to home country capital
requirements nor requires a foreign bank strictly to abide by each of
the U.S. requirements or to calculate its capital pursuant to U.S.
rules.
The purpose of the analysis is not to force the foreign bank to
conform its capital to U.S. requirements, but instead to determine
whether the foreign bank's capital as calculated under its home country
requirements is sufficiently equivalent or comparable to that
applicable to a similarly situated U.S. banking organization.
Consistent with national treatment, this approach recognizes that for
U.S. regulatory purposes there is no need to ascertain whether home
country requirements are identical to those of the United States. This
approach provides the Federal Reserve flexibility in making
determinations regarding foreign banks' capital without imposing on
foreign banks any requirement to apply U.S. standards in calculating
their capital ratios.
For example, one of the requirements applicable to a U.S. bank
holding company that elects to operate as a financial holding company
(``FHC''), and thereby engage in the expanded securities underwriting
and dealing, merchant banking, insurance and other non-bank financial
activities that are permissible for FHCs under the BHC Act (as amended
by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act), is that each of its insured depository
institution subsidiaries be maintained in a ``well capitalized''
condition.\18\ To be well capitalized, each such subsidiary must have
risk-based tier I and total risk-based capital ratios equal to at least
6% and 10%, respectively. In the case of determining whether a foreign
bank that maintains a U.S. branch is well capitalized for FHC purposes,
Section 4(l)(3) of the BHC Act requires the Federal Reserve to apply
``comparable'' standards, ``giving due regard to the principle of
national treatment and equality of competitive opportunity.'' \19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See 12 U.S.C. 1843(l)(1)(A). Section 606(a) of the Dodd-Frank
Act added the new requirement that the bank holding company itself also
satisfy the FHC ``well capitalized'' requirement. As discussed in the
text below, in the case of a foreign bank that is treated as a bank
holding company because it maintains a U.S. branch the FHC well
capitalized requirement already applies to the foreign bank itself.
\19\ See 12 U.S.C. 1843(l)(3).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In implementing the provisions of Section 4(l)(3) with respect to a
foreign bank whose home country has adopted risk-based capital
standards consistent with those prescribed by the Basel Committee, the
Federal Reserve requires the foreign bank to meet the 6%/10% minimum
risk-based capital requirement applicable to domestic FHCs, but this
determination is based on the bank's risk-based capital ratios as
calculated under its home country standards.\20\ In addition, the
foreign bank's capital must be comparable to the capital required for a
U.S. bank owned by an FHC.\21\ If the foreign bank's home country has
not adopted capital standards consistent with those of the Basel
Committee, then the bank must obtain a determination from the Federal
Reserve that its capital (as calculated under home country standards)
is otherwise comparable to the capital that would be required of a U.S.
bank owned by an FHC.\22\ For purposes of assessing comparability, the
Federal Reserve may consider additional factors, including the
composition of the foreign bank's capital, the ratio of the foreign
bank's tier I capital to total assets (``leverage ratio''), home
country accounting standards, the foreign bank's long-term debt
ratings, its reliance on government support to meet capital
requirements and whether it is subject to comprehensive supervision or
regulation on a consolidated basis.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See 12 CFR 225.90(b)(1)(i) and (ii).
\21\ See 12 CFR 225.90(b)(1)(iii).
\22\ See 12 CFR 225.90(b)(2)
\23\ See 12 CFR 225.92(e).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thus, consistent with national treatment, the approach taken by the
Federal Reserve with respect to assessing the capital of foreign bank
FHCs that maintain U.S. branches gives appropriate deference to home
country standards while providing sufficient flexibility to ensure
compliance with the U.S. ``well capitalized'' regulatory requirement.

Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you and now Mr. O'Connor.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN O'CONNOR, CHAIRMAN, INTERNATIONAL SWAPS
AND DERIVATIVES ASSOCIATION;
MANAGING DIRECTOR, MORGAN STANLEY, NEW YORK, NY

Mr. O'Connor. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman Conaway,
Ranking Member Boswell, and Members of the Subcommittee for
inviting me here today. The issues you are exploring are of
vital interest and concern to financial institutions around the
world and in particular U.S. institutions, the U.S. financial
markets, and to the thousands of U.S. companies who use those
markets to manage their risk and finance their growth.
I would like to focus this morning on three key issues. The
first concerns the applicability of the U.S. regulations to
both U.S. companies and foreign companies. The second relates
to the pace and scope of implementation of Dodd-Frank in the
U.S., and the third centers on key policy differences emerging
between the U.S. and Europe on derivatives regulation. Each of
these issues gives rise to its own specific concerns and all
three have the potential to create competitive disadvantages
for U.S. firms and for the U.S. economy.
Let me say very clearly at the outset, the institution that
I represent today, the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association squarely supports financial regulatory reform.
ISDA's membership includes banks, investment managers,
corporations, pension funds, and governmental entities. ISDA
has worked hard to make the OTC derivatives market safe and
efficient since its founding in 1985.
In the years leading up to the passage of Dodd-Frank and
since then, ISDA and other industry associations have worked
hard to implement a structured improvements--structural
improvements in the global OTC derivatives markets. These
structural improvements have served to significantly decrease
systemic risk in three key areas: reduce counterparty credit
risk, increased transparency, and improved operational
infrastructure. In these and other ways ISDA and market
participants are demonstrating our commitment to build robust,
stable, financial markets and a strong regulatory framework.
So turning to my first point, the issue of
extraterritoriality has become a topic of much concern to
financial market participants. Extraterritoriality refers to
the reach of one's jurisdiction's laws to activities conducted
outside of that jurisdiction, and also to institutions
operating within the jurisdiction but not based in it. To date,
there has been a lack of clarity about how the provisions of
the Dodd-Frank Act, and the rules subsequently issued by the
CFTC and the SEC, pertain to foreign subsidiaries and branches
of U.S. banks and to foreign banks and their subsidiaries in
the U.S.
Recently, U.S. regulators issued rules that included
provisions requiring extraterritorial application of rules
regarding margin requirements. If this expansive approach were
adopted by U.S. regulators with regard to the broader rule sets
it could create serious issues for U.S. competitiveness. In
overseas markets, foreign clients of U.S. firms would be
motivated to transact with foreign financial institutions to
avoid the reach of Dodd-Frank.
The extraterritoriality provisions are inconsistent with
Congressional intent regarding the scope of the new regulatory
framework for derivatives. The Congress included provisions in
Dodd-Frank that explicitly require that regulators impose the
regulations outside the U.S. only if there is a direct and
significant connection with U.S. activities or commerce, or as
necessary to avoid evasion of Dodd-Frank. These provisions were
intended to appropriately balance the protection and safety of
the financial system with the competitiveness of U.S.
institutions which is also necessary for a healthy U.S. banking
system. Clearly the extraterritoriality issue is one that
requires careful and thoughtful deliberation.
That leads me to my second point today. Such deliberation
is extremely difficult to achieve given the scope and pace of
the regulatory reform efforts that are currently underway. The
Commissions have an enormous task on their hands. The volume of
rulemaking is large, very complicated, and there are
significant interdependencies among many of the rules. Many
market participants do not know whether or how or when the new
rules will apply to them. All of this creates great
uncertainty.
The speed of implementation also unintentionally creates
competitive disadvantage for U.S. firms. The fact that U.S.
firms will likely be subject to a new regulatory framework well
before complimentary frameworks are established in other key
jurisdictions is itself a cause for concern. Similarly, there
is a significant amount of uncertainty for the many well-
regulated non-U.S. firms who are members of ISDA and who
operate in U.S. markets.
The Commissions have the flexibility to determine the
effective dates for many of their finalized rules. ISDA has
discussed with the Commissions suggested approaches that would
phase in the implementation of the new rules, and ISDA's
approach is based on a series of key principles that we believe
should govern the implementation schedule. These principles are
outlined in more detail in a letter that we have attached with
our written testimony. We advocate an approach whereby rules
that address systemic risk such as clearing and data
repositories should be implemented first.
My last comments on the scope and pace of implementation is
that given the rush to get the rules out and the complexities
and interactions between the various rules, there should be a
final review of the rules once they are all completed. This
would give market participants the ability to review and
commentate on--comment on the whole rule set. Comments that
were provided earlier in the process might be inappropriate in
the light of later rule proposals.
Turning now to my third and final point, OTC derivatives
market participants are concerned by the potentially divergent
approaches being taken in key regulatory jurisdictions. Much of
the regulatory framework for the EU is still under discussion
and there is significant concern that the EU's approach could
differ significantly from the U.S. approach. Requirements for
the use and structure of execution platforms, capital, and
margin requirements together with business standard rules could
differ substantially between regimes. It is too early to know
for sure what frameworks will be adopted in the EU, but EU
officials have indicated publicly that it is not their
intention to change the structure of the OTC derivative
markets. E.C. is focusing on key systemic issues arising from
the financial crisis that have been identified by the G20 and
the Financial Stability Board, namely credit, counterparty
credit risk, regulatory transparency, and market
infrastructure.
In conclusion, while some differences between jurisdictions
in terms of the details of the rules are inevitable, a far
greater degree of convergence is essential to the long term
health of the global financial system and to the relative
standing of the U.S. financial system and financial systems
globally. We ask the policymakers to avoid introducing rules in
a way that leads to a significant level of divergence between
markets.
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, and Members of
the Subcommittee, thank you for your time today. Let me close
by reiterating ISDA's support for stronger, more robust
financial regulatory frameworks, and safer, more efficient OTC
derivative markets. I would be happy to answer any questions
that you might have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Connor follows:]

Prepared Statement of Stephen O'Connor, Chairman, International Swaps
and Derivatives Association; Managing Director, Morgan Stanley, New
York, NY
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

Thank you for the opportunity to testify today. The issues you are
exploring are of vital interest and concern--not only to U.S. financial
institutions, but more broadly to the U.S. financial markets, and to
the thousands of U.S. companies who use those markets to fund their
growth and manage their risks.
In the time allotted to me this morning, I would like to focus in
particular on three key issues:
The first concerns the applicability of U.S. regulations to both
U.S. companies and non-U.S. companies. The second relates to the pace
and scope of the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act in the U.S. And
the third centers on key policy differences emerging between the U.S.
and EU on derivatives regulation.
Each of these issues gives rise to its own specific concerns, which
I will discuss in more detail. But all three are also inter-related in
that they have the potential to create competitive disadvantages for
U.S. firms and for the U.S. economy.
They could, in effect, create an uneven playing field and they
would do so without making that playing field substantially safer or
better or more robust. Finally, we at ISDA do not believe these issues
address the public policy goals that gave rise to the Dodd-Frank Act
and similar efforts in other jurisdictions.
* * * * *
Let me state very clearly at the outset: both the institution that
I represent today--the International Swaps and Derivatives
Association--and the firm where I have worked for some 23 years--Morgan
Stanley--squarely support financial regulatory reform. What's more, we
have worked actively and engaged constructively with policymakers in
the U.S. and around the world to achieve this goal.
ISDA, in fact, has worked to make over-the-counter (OTC)
derivatives markets safe and efficient since its founding in 1985.
Over the past 3 decades, ISDA has helped to significantly reduce
credit and legal risk by developing the ISDA Master Agreement and a
wide range of related documentation materials, and in ensuring the
enforceability of their netting and collateral provisions. The
Association has also been a leader in promoting sound risk management
practices and processes.
Today, ISDA has more than 800 members from 56 countries on six
continents. These members include a broad range of OTC derivatives
market participants: global, international and regional banks, asset
managers, energy and commodities firms, government and supranational
entities, insurers and diversified financial institutions,
corporations, law firms, exchanges, clearinghouses and other service
providers.
In the years leading up to and since the passage of the Dodd-Frank
Act, ISDA, the major dealers, buy-side institutions and other industry
associations have worked collaboratively to deliver structural
improvements to the global over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets.
These structural improvements, which have helped to significantly
decrease systemic risk, involve three key areas--reducing counterparty
credit risk, increasing transparency, and improving the industry's
operational infrastructure.
To reduce counterparty credit risk, ISDA and the industry have
embraced central clearing of derivatives transactions. Today, the
industry has cleared approximately 50 percent of outstanding interest
rate swaps volume and over $17 trillion of credit default swaps volume.
OTC derivatives have been cleared since 2000, with clearing arising
from the industry proactively working with clearing houses to develop a
better way for managing counterparty.
To improve regulatory transparency, ISDA and market participants
have established trade repositories for interest rate, credit default
and equity swaps and is in the process of doing so for commodity swaps.
These repositories provide global regulators with unprecedented
visibility into risk exposures in the OTC derivatives markets.
To strengthen the industry's operational infrastructure, ISDA and
market participants have worked to standardize and automate middle and
back office processes.
In these and other ways, ISDA and the industry are demonstrating
our commitment to build robust, stable financial markets and a strong
financial regulatory framework. Our work is not done yet. Further
progress lies ahead, and in fact we recognize that there must be a
process of continuous improvement in risk measurement and management.
* * * * *
Let me turn to address the issues that are the main focus of your
hearing today.
In the past few months, the issue of extraterritoriality has become
a topic of much concern to U.S. financial markets participants.
Extraterritoriality refers to the application of one jurisdiction's
laws to activities conducted outside that particular jurisdiction, and
to institutions operating within the jurisdiction but not based in it.
It's about whether and how U.S. laws and regulations apply to non-U.S.
companies doing business with non-U.S. firms, with U.S. banks and/or
their non-U.S. subsidiaries. It is also about how U.S. laws and
regulations apply to non-U.S. dealer firms doing business with U.S.
firms and companies. Ensuring that non-U.S. firms can continue to
provide new sources of capital, liquidity and risk management solutions
for U.S. corporations and U.S. financial markets is an important
consideration.
To date, there has been a lack of clarity about how the provisions
of the Dodd-Frank Act, and the rules subsequently issued by the CFTC
and the SEC, pertain to non-U.S. banks, foreign subsidiaries and
branches of U.S. banks or U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks.
Recently, though, U.S. Federal banking regulators issued rules on
margin requirements that included provisions regarding extraterritorial
application of the margin requirements, at least for swap dealers
subject to prudential regulation. These rules appear to apply the
margin requirements just to the U.S. activities of a non-U.S. swap
dealer with a foreign parent on the one hand but to the global
activities of a non-U.S. swap dealer with a U.S. parent on the other.
By subjecting the non-U.S. activities of non-U.S. swap dealers of
American banks to the margin requirements, these proposed rules
potentially establish a framework that would create significant
competitive issues for swap dealers affiliated with American holding
companies.
U.S. banks are global in nature. Large components of their
businesses are based in foreign countries and generally operated
through subsidiaries or branches. If the framework described above for
margin rules were to be adopted more broadly by U.S. regulators that
could create serious issues for U.S. competitiveness. For instance, if
derivative transactions between an Italian company and the UK
subsidiary of an American bank were subjected to transaction level
Dodd-Frank rules, such as margin rules or rules requiring clearing or
electronic execution, but similar transactions between that German
company and a UK bank without a U.S. parent were not subject to those
same rules, the end result would be that foreign companies would avoid
doing business with swaps dealers affiliated with American companies.
They would instead transact with non-U.S. financial institutions not
covered by the scope of these margin requirements. It could put U.S.
firms at a serious competitive disadvantage.
The extraterritoriality proposals are inconsistent with
Congressional intent regarding the territorial scope of the new
regulatory framework for derivatives. The Congress included provisions
in Dodd-Frank that explicitly instruct regulators to impose the
regulations outside the U.S. only if there is a ``direct and
significant connection'' with U.S. activities or commerce or as
necessary to avoid evasion of Dodd-Frank. These provisions are intended
to appropriately balance the protection of the safety of the financial
system with the competitiveness of U.S. institutions, which is also
necessary for a healthy U.S. banking system.
Similarly disadvantaging foreign institutions and U.S. subsidiaries
of such institutions, through divergent capital requirements or
otherwise, discourages foreign investment in U.S. subsidiaries, which
leads to less jobs and to less competition within our shores. Such
divergent treatment also creates the potential for retaliatory measures
abroad, thus limiting opportunities for U.S. firms to grow overseas.
* * * * *
Clearly, the extraterritoriality issue is one that requires careful
and thoughtful consideration amongst a country's domestic regulators,
as well as regulators and policymakers across jurisdictions.
This leads me to my second point today: such deliberation is
extremely difficult to achieve given the scope and pace of the
regulatory reform efforts that are currently underway.
The volume of rulemakings is very large, they are complicated, and
there are significant interdependencies among many of the rules. Many
market participants do not yet know whether or how or when the new
rules will apply to them. The scale of change required in the swaps
market by the Dodd-Frank Act, including new trading, reporting and
clearing requirements, registrations, compliance regimes, and
documentation requirements cannot be overstated.
All of this creates a great deal of uncertainty. It may also
unintentionally create competitive disadvantage for U.S. firms. The
fact that U.S. firms will be subject to a new regulatory framework well
before a complementary framework is established in other key
jurisdictions is itself a cause for concern. The potential for that
U.S. framework to inadvertently create an uneven playing field for U.S.
firms adds to those concerns.
Similarly, there is a significant amount of uncertainty for the
many well-regulated non-U.S. firms who are members of ISDA and who
operate in U.S. markets. The prospect of complying with two sets of
regulatory regimes is unprecedented and could ultimately lead to
increased costs, decreased liquidity and a reduction in the overall
availability of capital in the U.S. markets.
We believe the CFTC has taken a step toward addressing the need for
market participants to assess the full mosaic of rules by reopening
Title VII comment periods for 30 days. However, simply re-opening the
comment period does not provide any insight on how the extensive prior
comments on the original proposals may have influenced the Commission's
thinking in crafting final rules. The comment period re-opening cannot
replace the value of allowing consideration of how the over 14,000
comments in the Commission's 2011 comment file will be incorporated
into the rules. In order to ensure that the substance of the final
rules work efficiently as a whole, it is essential that market
participants have an opportunity for additional review and comment on
the entire revised set of rules which the Commissions will publish
after evaluating comments received.
In addition to the need for a second or subsequent comment period
on rule proposals, there is also a significant need for a rational,
appropriate phase-in of implementation of the rules across markets and
market participants. The former will be essential so that rules are
appropriately tailored, work in tandem, and avoid unduly impairing
market liquidity or adversely impacting investors. The latter is about
enabling market participants to implement the changes most effectively.
Both issues are, however inter-related: it is not enough to phase-in
implementation if the final rules themselves are unworkable or in
conflict.
As we approach the July deadline for the Commissions to finalize
these mandated rules, it has become increasingly clear to market
participants and the Commissions, as well as legislators, that the
process will require more time than had been contemplated by Dodd-
Frank. As a result, ISDA supports efforts to provide policymakers and
market participants with additional time needed to weigh the individual
and cumulative impact of the proposals, as well as their costs and
benefits. This would help to ensure that U.S. firms are not
unintentionally disadvantaged by any aspects of the proposed
rulemakings.
The Commissions have the flexibility to determine the effective
dates for many of their finalized rules. However, many of the
significant provisions of Title VII are self-executing. That is, they
become automatically effective on July 16 without rulemaking. We have
developed, and have discussed with the Commissions, suggested
approaches that would phase in the implementation of new rules. Our
approach is based on a series of key principles that we believe should
govern the implementation schedule. Our six key principles (outlined in
more detail in the attached letter) are:
First, provide time for market infrastructure and business
operations to implement the final rules to avoid disruption in the
markets. New market infrastructure and technologies, including central
clearing services, data reporting services and trading platforms, will
be required under the new swaps regulatory regime. Unless sufficient
time is allotted for these components to adequately develop, all market
participants (and particularly end-users) will face interruptions in
their ability to access markets.
Second, swap data reporting to regulators should be the first
priority for implementation in order to inform future rulemaking. The
Commissions will have much visibility into all aspects of swap markets
from the data collected by trade repositories. This knowledge will be
essential in developing rules that meet Dodd-Frank's requirements while
still allowing for active and liquid swap markets.
Third, phase-in requirements by type of market participant and
asset class. We believe the Commissions should require clearing,
reporting and electronic execution for the ``better-prepared'' asset
classes first and should provide ample time for the maturation of those
asset classes and products that are not yet at that stage. Better
prepared assets classes would include those with an establish clearing
infrastructure, such as interest rate and credit products.
Fourth, within each asset class and type of market participant,
prioritize reduction of systemic risk. A principal objective of Title
VII of Dodd-Frank is the reduction of systemic risk in the financial
markets. As a result, the Commissions should, within each asset class
and type of market participant, prioritize implementation of
requirements that reduce systemic risk ahead of other requirements.
As an example, Dodd-Frank requires central clearing of swaps to
decrease systemic risk, so clearing should be prioritized in the phase-
in schedule. Other requirements of Title VII, such as electronic
execution and public real-time reporting, should be implemented after
clearing. In fact, implementing these provisions prematurely can
increase systemic risk.
Fifth, allow time for adequate testing by, outreach to and
education of customers and for changes to customer relationships. A
flexible approach to rulemaking and implementation will provide
customers the necessary opportunity to understand these ongoing changes
and their own regulatory obligations.
Sixth, where different regulators will apply different rule sets to
similar transactions, sequence implementation so that effectiveness of
each rule set is coordinated across interrelated applicable rule sets.
We believe that the Commissions and other U.S. regulatory agencies
should anticipate where the rulemaking may overlap, and possibly
conflict, and make every effort to actively coordinate with each other
and with foreign regulators both as to harmonizing the substance of
related regulations and the timing of their implementation.
* * * * *
Turning now to my third and final point: today, OTC derivatives
market participants are concerned by the potentially divergent
approaches being taken in key regulatory jurisdictions.
Much of the derivatives regulatory framework for the EU is still
under discussion. There is a significant concern that the EU's approach
could differ significantly from the U.S. regulators' approach.
Requirements for the use and structure of execution platforms, capital
and margin requirements, and business conduct standards, to name but a
few examples, could differ substantially between regimes. It is too
early to know for sure what frameworks will be adopted in the EU, but
E.C. officials have indicated publicly that it is not their intention
to change the structure of the OTC derivatives markets. The E.C. has
not, of course, completed its rule-making process so we cannot be sure
of what other differences may lie ahead. It appears, however, that the
E.C. is focusing on the key systemic risk issues arising from the
financial crisis that have been identified by the G20 and the Financial
Stability Board--counterparty credit risk, regulatory transparency and
market infrastructure.
* * * * *
In conclusion, while some differences between jurisdictions in
terms of detailed rules are inevitable, a far greater degree of
convergence is essential to the long-term health of the global
financial system and to the relative standing of individual financial
systems.
We ask policymakers to avoid introducing rules in a way that leads
to a significant level of divergence between markets, or that leads to
regulatory overlap or to regulatory conflict.
Each of these approaches carries significant costs. If the U.S. and
the E.C. continue to take divergent approaches, the potential exists
for significant differences to develop in how our markets function and
operate, and ultimately in how well customer needs are met in each.
This could put American firms and American markets at a disadvantage,
including by discouraging continued growth and participation by non
U.S. firms in American financial markets, thereby concentrating risk
and liquidity in far fewer dealers
Duplicative rules will raise costs, ultimately impacting the real
economy, while not serving any regulatory goal. Conflict between
regulatory approaches will lead to regulatory arbitrage and competitive
advantage based not on better strategic decisions or more effective
resource allocation, but on government fiat.
Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell and Members of the
Subcommittee: Thank you for your time today. Let me close by
reiterating ISDA's support for a stronger, more robust financial
regulatory framework and safer, more efficient OTC derivatives markets.
I would be happy to answer any questions that you might have.

Attachment
May 4, 2011

David A. Stawick,                    Elizabeth M. Murphy,
Secretary,                           Secretary,
Commodity Futures Trading            Securities and Exchange Commission,
Commission,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Re: Phase-In Schedule for Requirements for Title VII of the Dodd-Frank
Act

Dear Mr. Stawick and Ms. Murphy:

Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act (``Title VII'' of ``Dodd-Frank'') will fundamentally
transform the swap and security-based swap (collectively, ``Swap'')
markets. As the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (the ``CFTC'') and
the Securities and Exchange Commission (the ``SEC'' and, together with
the CFTC, the ``Commissions'') are acutely aware, Congress sketched out
broad parameters of this new regulatory regime but left to the
Commissions the enormous and delicate task of filling in the details
through rulemaking. Generally, Title VII requires the Commissions to
finalize these mandated rules by July. As we approach that time, it has
become increasingly clear to market participants and the Commissions,
as well as legislators, that finalizing these rules will require more
time than had been contemplated by Dodd-Frank. Fortunately, however,
the Commissions have the flexibility to determine the effective dates
for those finalized rules.
In a series of recent meetings, representatives of the Futures
Industry Association (the ``FIA''), the Financial Services Forum, the
International Swaps and Derivatives Association (``ISDA'') and the
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (``SIFMA'' and
together, the ``Associations'') \1\ have discussed with CFTC Chairman
Gensler, CFTC Commissioner Sommers, CFTC Commissioner Dunn and their
staffs, as well as with the SEC staff, the significant practical
hurdles to implementing this new regulatory structure for Swaps, the
interdependencies of the key portions of that structure and the
Associations' suggested approaches to a phased-in implementation
schedule. Attached are two timelines we provided to the Commissions at
these meetings. In light of those discussions, and at the CFTC's
request, this letter lays out key principles for the development of a
phase-in schedule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Further information on the Associations is available in
Appendix A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our six key principles are:

1. Provide time for market infrastructure and business operations
to implement the final rules to avoid disruption in the Swap
markets. New market infrastructure and technologies, including
central clearing services, data reporting services and trading
platforms, will be required to give effect to the new Swap
regulatory regime. Unless sufficient time is allotted for these
components of market infrastructure and technologies to
adequately develop, all market participants (and particularly
end-users) will face interruptions in their ability to enter
into Swaps to hedge their business risks or manage investments
to meet client objectives.

2. Prioritize data reporting to regulators to inform future
rulemaking. The Commissions should prioritize implementation of
data reporting, including registration of Swap data
repositories (``SDRs''), to regulators ahead of real-time
reporting and other requirements, including public reporting.
The Commissions will learn much about the full range of Swap
markets from the data collected by SDRs. This knowledge will be
essential in developing rules that meet Dodd-Frank's
requirements while still allowing for active and liquid Swap
markets.

3. Phase-in requirements by type of market participant and asset
class. The Commissions should phase in requirements based on
the state of readiness of each particular asset class
(including, where applicable, by specific products within an
asset class) and market participant type. However, the
Commissions should allow and encourage the development of
necessary infrastructure on a voluntary basis for less-
developed asset classes and any interested market participants,
regardless of size, even as these requirements are being phased
in on a mandatory basis for others.

4. Within each asset class and type of market participant,
prioritize reduction of systemic risk. Within each asset class
and type of market participant, the Commissions' top priority
should be to implement requirements that reduce systemic risk,
such as the use of centralized Swap clearinghouses.
Implementation of requirements designed to achieve other goals,
such as trade execution, should be phased in only once clearing
has been successfully implemented. Other requirements for which
SDR-collected data is crucial, such as public real-time
reporting, should follow.

5. Allow time for adequate testing by, outreach to and education of
customers and for changes to customer relationships. Dealers,
major Swap participants, asset managers, technology and systems
providers, and the Commissions will need to engage in a
concerted effort over a period of time to educate their clients
and the market about the changes in business and regulatory
practices that the new rules will require. The Commissions
should provide adequate time for these important tasks as part
of any implementation schedule.

6. Where different regulators will apply different rule sets to
similar transactions, sequence implementation so that
effectiveness of each rule set is coordinated across
interrelated applicable rule sets. Application of provisions of
Title VII to the diversity of Swaps and market participants
will involve the interaction of rules relating to different
asset classes and products as well as differences among rules
imposed by different U.S. regulators and regulators in
different countries. Understanding these interactions and
sequencing implementation of the rules accordingly will create
a more robust regulatory structure.

These principles have been informed by the experience of the firms
represented by the Associations in implementing significant market
reforms, including Europe's move to the Euro currency, development of
new clearing systems, the implementation of MiFID I, changing capital
requirements under Basel rules, equity decimalization, and the
introduction of TRACE, to name a few. Our member firms' experiences in
developing systems, technological connections, policies and procedures,
documentation and other changes in response to these prior changes lead
us to believe that the tasks involved in implementing Title VII are
monumental.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Although not all rules have yet been proposed, it is essential
to address implementation sequencing and phase-in schedules now. It is
worth noting, however, that we and our members are also still focused
on many critical issues raised by Title VII and the rules proposed by
the Commissions so far. These include, by way of example, key
definitions, extraterritorial application, segregation requirements for
customer collateral, margin and capital requirements, and achieving
consistency, to the extent appropriate, between the rules of the two
Commissions and those of international regulators. We will continue to
participate in the public rulemaking process with respect to these and
other issues, even as we suggest appropriate implementation timing for
those rules.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we discuss further in this letter, there are significant
interdependencies among many of the rules, and many market participants
do not yet know whether or how the new rules will apply to them. We
believe the CFTC has taken a positive step toward addressing the need
for market participants to assess the full mosaic of rules by reopening
Title VII comment periods for 30 days.\3\ We are concerned, however,
with the significant possibility that the final rules will differ
substantively from the rules as proposed in ways that present, when
viewed as a whole, important new issues. While these differences may
not rise to the level that would require a re-proposal of the rules
under the Administrative Procedures Act, we nonetheless are concerned
that they may merit reconsideration by market participants and the
public at the time that all rules have been put in final form.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Reopening and Extension of Comment Periods for Rulemakings
Implementing the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
Act, 76 Fed. Reg. 25274 (May 4, 2011) (extending comment period for
rule makings until June 3, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Provide time for market infrastructure and business operations to
implement the final rules to avoid disruption in the Swap
markets.
Title VII requires the development of significant new Swap market
infrastructure, including SDRs, clearinghouses and trade execution
facilities. As a result of strenuous efforts in recent years, key
building blocks for parts of this infrastructure exist for certain
asset classes of Swaps. However, even this existing infrastructure will
need to be significantly changed in response to the Title VII and the
Commissions' final rules. For example, existing data repositories will
need to update their data fields to conform to requirements in the
final rules, and existing Swap clearinghouses will need to make
significant modifications to their models to comply with rules
regarding the protection of customer collateral. Title VII will also
require the development of entirely new trading platforms, such as Swap
execution facilities.
In addition, Title VII requires enormous changes to the business
operations of market participants. Swap dealers and major Swap
participants (``Swap Entities'') will need to conform their reporting,
clearing and trading processes to the final rules, as well as comply
with complex rules relating to position limits, documentation and
record-keeping. These requirements will affect the compliance, legal,
technology, front-office, trading desk, human resources and other
departments within Swap Entities. While some Swap Entities have begun
to organize themselves for implementation of Title VII, such efforts
are very preliminary as no rules have been finalized. The Commissions
must provide sufficient time for all of these steps to proceed in an
orderly manner. The amount of time this will take is highly dependent
on the final form of the rules. In particular, if existing systems are
not easily adaptable to the Commissions' ultimate requirements, more
time will be needed.\4\ Clients will similarly need to make significant
modifications to their businesses, including changes to the
documentation that governs their relationships with Swap Entities. In
many cases, these changes may require board authorization. Since boards
may only meet periodically, this may result in further delay.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Beyond this, the Title VII rules and other financial reform
changes (such as the Basel III regulatory capital standards) are
causing Swap Entities and the organizations of which they are a part to
evaluate the corporate structures that will enable them to provide the
highest degree of service and continuity to clients while effectively
managing risk. Adapting such structures requires additional independent
systems, compliance and documentation implications.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These two types of changes--market infrastructure and business
practices--are interdependent. In the area of clearing, for example,
Swap clearinghouses will need to develop rules that meet the
Commissions' requirements and obtain requisite approval of those rules.
Potential clearing members will need to understand the new rules put
into place by each Swap clearinghouse, determine which Swap
clearinghouses to join as clearing members, negotiate appropriate
documentation, set up technological connections and develop clearing
offerings for their clients. Non-members, including many buy-side
firms, will need to understand the rules put into place by each Swap
clearinghouse, determine which Swap clearinghouses they are comfortable
with, evaluate which Swap clearinghouses clear certain products, choose
clearing members to clear through, negotiate documentation with
clearing members, and create any necessary technological connections
with clearing members. Legal documentation, treatment of collateral,
margin requirements, account setup, and fee negotiations, for example,
between the Swap clearinghouses and their clearing members will take
significant time.
In addition, the amount of time it will take to implement this
infrastructure is highly dependent on market readiness. All end-users
will need to clear their trades at a limited number of Swap
clearinghouses through a limited number of dealers offering clearing
services. If the Commissions do not provide sufficient time for this to
occur, bottlenecks are sure to develop, with asset managers, for
example, unable to process accounts at Swap clearinghouses overwhelmed
with an influx of documentation and applications. The result will be
disruption of trading as these money managers, or similar entities,
will be unable to enter into Swaps that they legally would be required
to clear but operationally cannot.
Allowing sufficient time for infrastructure and business practices
to develop will save unnecessary costs. For example, under Title VII,
SDRs will be required to accept universal, unique identifiers for Swap
market participants and products, and market participants will be
required to incorporate these unique identifiers into their reporting
systems. Systems will be more efficiently designed and implemented if
universal identifiers are developed and instituted prior to the new SDR
reporting requirements. The alternative would require Swap Entities to
redesign reporting systems when unique identifiers were later required.

2. Swap data reporting to regulators should be the first priority for
implementation in order to inform future rulemaking.
SDR reporting to regulators will significantly increase, in the
near term, the information that the Commissions have at their disposal
regarding the Swap markets. Armed with a larger set of data, the
Commissions will be in a better position to adopt rules that achieve
Dodd-Frank's goals while maintaining active and viable Swap markets. As
a result, the Commissions should delay finalizing requirements that
could benefit from the additional knowledge gained from this data until
SDRs have been established and are operational, and enough time has
passed to allow sufficient data collection and analysis.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ To maximize the effectiveness of information gathered across
asset classes from SDR recordation, the Commissions should strive to
harmonize their reporting requirements. Inconsistencies between the
CFTC and SEC reporting requirements will significantly complicate
implementation because swaps and security-based swaps are transacted by
the same business units of our member firms. For example, the same
business unit may trade both single-name CDS, which would be subject to
the SEC's reporting rules, and index CDS, which would be subject to the
CFTC's. In addition, the Commissions should strive to align their
reporting requirements with those of international regulators.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For example, we believe that the rules defining block trades are
extremely important and will have a significant impact on the liquidity
of the Swap markets. Appropriate block trade thresholds, and therefore
public real-time reporting requirements, can only be set after SDR
reporting to regulators has been established and Swap market
transaction data is carefully analyzed.\6\ Any determination of block
trade thresholds before that market data is available to regulators
would be inappropriate. Once the relevant information has been
collected, the Commissions should begin phasing in real-time reporting
requirements slowly, beginning with low block trade thresholds, and
adjust the thresholds as necessary once the impact on the market can be
assessed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The CFTC has proposed a two-part test for determining the block
trade threshold, which is highly dependent on data about swap
transactions. Because SDR reporting will increase the amount of
information available to the Commissions across various markets and
asset classes, we believe such a rule is premature and should not be
adopted absent further data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the interim, in order to provide the public transparency
anticipated by Dodd-Frank without risking significantly decreased
liquidity, the Commissions could require end of day reporting of Swap
notional size to regulators early in the implementation schedule,
provided that all trades above a certain notional threshold would be
reported as ``$X or above.'' After more is known about the Swap markets
through data collection by SDRs, the thresholds could be adjusted
slowly while the effect on market liquidity is studied.
Similarly, it is important for the Commissions to understand the
Swap markets, through analytical data analysis, before adopting
commodity position limits that restrict the Swap positions market
participants can take. Otherwise, the Commissions might unwittingly set
commodity position limits so low as to disallow legitimate and
desirable activity and inadvertently decrease liquidity, thereby
negatively impacting pricing.

3. Phase-in requirements by type of market participant and asset class.
The term ``Swap'' encompasses a wide variety of products in a wide
variety of asset classes. These products have different attributes,
including differing levels of standardization, liquidity and existing
market infrastructure. As a result, some products are more ready for
centralized clearing and electronic execution than others. For example,
certain commodity and interest rate products are already quite liquid
and standardized and have been subject to inter-dealer clearing for
several years. On the other hand, certain foreign exchange, credit and
equity Swaps are less standardized and are generally transacted
bilaterally. We believe that the Commissions should require clearing,
reporting and electronic execution for the ``better-prepared'' asset
classes first and should provide ample time for the maturation of those
asset classes and products that are not yet at that stage.
Sequencing that reflects these differences would allow the
Commissions and market participants to understand and solve the
problems that arise in these relatively less complex, more liquid
products before moving on to more complex, less liquid products. For
example, issues relating to client clearing can be more readily worked
out in the interest rate swap market where inter-dealer clearing
already exists; lessons learned there can then be applied to the
clearing of other Swap categories, which will require new clearing
methodologies even for the inter-dealer market.
In addition, the Commissions' rules under Title VII will affect a
wide variety of market participants, ranging from market makers, to
financial end-users that use Swaps for portfolio risk-management
purposes, to commercial enterprises that use Swaps to hedge business
risks. These market participants vary dramatically in their resources,
market sophistication and rationale for using Swaps. Swap Entities, in
general, have greater resources, access to technology and clearing
infrastructure than their end-user counterparties. Consequently, the
inter-dealer market, which already uses central clearing extensively
for interest rate and credit products, may be able to adjust more
quickly than some other markets to new Title VII requirements.
Much like phased implementation by product, phased implementation
by type of market participant will allow the Commissions and market
participants to use lessons learned from larger market participants
when developing rules applicable to end-users. For example, inter-
dealer clearing within each asset class should be required before
customer clearing, so that the lessons learned from the inter-dealer
experience can be applied to customers before the additional
complications that customer clearing brings, such as the protection of
customer collateral, are fully tackled. This is not to say that the
customer clearing systems should not be built in parallel; the
Commissions should encourage a move to Title VII-compliant activity
across all market participants and products and market participants
should be permitted to clear prior to the required dates if they are
ready and willing to do so. However, the Commissions, for example,
should not require clearing by any end-users until the inter-dealer
experience within each asset class is well-established and understood.

4. Within each asset class and type of market participant, prioritize
reduction of systemic risk.
A principal objective of Title VII of Dodd-Frank is the reduction
of systemic risk in the financial markets. As a result, the Commissions
should, within each asset class and type of market participant,
prioritize implementation of requirements that reduce systemic risk
ahead of other requirements.
As an example, Dodd-Frank requires central clearing of Swaps to
decrease systemic risk. As a result, clearing should be prioritized in
the phase-in schedule. In contrast, other requirements of Title VII,
such as electronic execution and public real-time reporting, should be
implemented after clearing. In fact, implementing these provisions
prematurely can increase systemic risk. For example, implementing
mandatory trade execution with overly narrow block exceptions that have
not been informed by a sufficient amount of analytical data could
significantly decrease Swap market liquidity, making it more difficult
for end-users to manage their risks and potentially adding risk to the
financial system.
However, even systemic risk-reducing changes must be done
carefully; simultaneous changes could lead to errors that
unintentionally result in increased and concentrated systemic risks.
For example, while central clearing has the potential to significantly
reduce systemic risk, the fact that a clearinghouse is the counterparty
to all Swaps it clears means that, if clearinghouse risk management and
control processes are not sufficiently robust, systemic risk could
increase in a cleared environment rather than decrease. As discussed
above, the Commissions should strive to minimize such unintended
consequences by sequencing effectiveness of requirements with ample
time for thoughtful and careful implementation supported by sufficient
analytical data.
The existence of a robust set of cleared swaps is also a
prerequisite for implementation of margin requirements. Initial margin
requirements will be significantly higher for noncleared Swaps
(proposed to cover 99% of movements over a 10 day window) than for
cleared Swaps (which generally seek to cover 95% or 99% of movements
over a 3-5 day range). Implementing these margin requirements for
noncleared Swaps before Swap clearinghouses are operational would force
market participants to post inappropriately high levels of margin to
enter into Swaps that they would otherwise be interested in clearing.

5. Allow time for adequate education of customers and for modifications
to customer relationships, including documentation.
Dealers, major Swap participants, asset managers and the
Commissions will need to engage in a concerted effort over a period of
time to assist customers and other market participants in understanding
the changes in business and regulatory practices that the new rules
will require. Furthermore, key market practices will further evolve as
new market infrastructure is put into place. A flexible approach to
rulemaking and implementation will provide customers the necessary
opportunity to understand these ongoing changes and their own
regulatory obligations.
For example, while dealers and asset managers have been
anticipating Title VII's changes in regulatory structure, they will
face an enormous task of educating their clients that can only commence
once final rules are known and forms of documentation are finalized.
These entities may have thousands of clients with a wide range of
sophistication. For example, asset manager clients include pension
funds and other tax exempt entities. Dealers and asset managers will
each play a role in helping inform their clients not only about Title
VII and the Commissions' rules, but about the rules and changes to
their transactions that will result from the use of new clearinghouses,
trade execution platforms and SDRs.

6. Where different regulators will apply different rule sets to similar
transactions, sequence implementation so that effectiveness of
each rule set is coordinated across interrelated applicable
rule sets.
Swap businesses will, in many cases, be subject to regulation by
both Commissions. Infrastructure providers and market participants will
need to develop systems and procedures to comply with rules from both
Commissions. To the extent there are substantively different rules
applied by the two Commissions, implementation and compliance systems
will need to be designed to track and account for these differences.
In addition, given the global nature of today's financial markets,
it is unclear to what extent foreign regulation, in addition to
regulation by the Commissions, may affect U.S. Swap market
participants. In each case, it would be premature to implement any
requirements where there remains uncertainty as to other potentially
applicable requirements. For example, it is uncertain what would happen
if one of the Commissions and its foreign counterpart both required
that the same transaction be cleared but did not have common permitted
clearinghouses.
We believe that the Commissions and other U.S. regulatory agencies
should anticipate where the rulemaking may overlap, and possibly
conflict, and make every effort to actively coordinate with each other
and with foreign regulators both as to harmonizing the substance of
related regulations and the timing of their implementation. Otherwise,
the development of the Swap markets will be vulnerable to false starts,
significant revisions and inefficiencies, and possible regulatory
arbitrage across, or the flight to, other jurisdictions.
The Associations are grateful for the opportunity to comment to the
Commissions regarding these important issues. Please feel free to
contact the Associations should you wish to discuss this letter.
Sincerely,

Financial Services Forum;
Futures Industry Association;
International Swaps and Derivatives Association;
Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association.

CC:

Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman;
Hon. Bart Chilton, Commissioner;
Hon. Michael Dunn, Commissioner;
Hon. Scott O'Malia, Commissioner;
Hon. Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner;
Commodity Futures Trading Commission.

Hon. Mary L. Schapiro, Chairman;
Hon. Luis A. Aguilar, Commissioner;
Hon. Kathleen L. Casey, Commissioner;
Hon. Troy A. Paredes, Commissioner;
Hon. Elisse B. Walter, Commissioner;
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Credit

Key:

FEU = Financial End User
SDR = Swap Data Repository
CEU = Corporate End User
EOD = End of Day
RTR = Real Time Reporting

b The sequencing is illustrative and for discussion purposes only; it is
dependent on many yet unsettled factors, including, but not limited, to
the substance of final rules. The charts were prepared by the
Associations in response to a request for discussions on approaches to
phasing-in of implementation, not a specific timetable for
implementation.

Interest Rates

Key:

FEU = Financial End User
SDR = Swap Data Repository
CEU = Corporate End User
EOD = End of Day
RTR = Real Time Reporting

b The sequencing is illustrative and for discussion purposes only; it is
dependent on many yet unsettled factors, including, but not limited, to
the substance of final rules. The charts were prepared by the
Associations in response to a request for discussions on approaches to
phasing-in of implementation, not a specific timetable for
implementation.

APPENDIX A

FIA is a principal spokesman for the commodity futures and options
industry. FIA's regular membership is comprised of approximately 30 of
the largest futures commission merchants in the United States. Among
its associate members are representatives from virtually all other
segments of the futures industry, both national and international.
Reflecting the scope and diversity of its membership, FIA estimates
that its members effect more than eighty percent of all customer
transactions executed on United States designated contract markets. For
more information, visit www.futuresindustry.org.
The Financial Services Forum is a non-partisan financial and
economic policy organization comprising the CEOs of 20 of the largest
and most diversified financial services institutions doing business in
the United States. The purpose of the Forum is to pursue policies that
encourage savings and investment, promote an open and competitive
global marketplace, and ensure the opportunity of people everywhere to
participate fully and productively in the 21st-century global economy.
ISDA was chartered in 1985 and has over 800 member institutions
from 54 countries on six continents. Our members include most of the
world's major institutions that deal in privately negotiated
derivatives, as well as many of the businesses, governmental entities
and other end-users that rely on over-the-counter derivatives to manage
efficiently the risks inherent in their core economic activities. For
more information, visit www.isda.org.
SIFMA brings together the shared interests of hundreds of
securities firms, banks and asset managers. SIFMA's mission is to
support a strong financial industry, investor opportunity, capital
formation, job creation and economic growth, while building trust and
confidence in the financial markets. SIFMA, with offices in New York
and Washington, D.C., is the U.S. regional member of the Global
Financial Markets Association. For more information, visit
www.sifma.org.

Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you. And now Mr. Thompson.

STATEMENT OF LARRY E. THOMPSON, MANAGING DIRECTOR AND GENERAL
COUNSEL, THE DEPOSITORY TRUST & CLEARING CORPORATION, NEW YORK,
NY

Mr. Thompson. Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, and
Members of the Subcommittee, I am Larry Thompson, the General
Counsel of The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, DTCC, a
participant owned and governed utility that in 2010 settled
approximately $1.7 quadrillion in securities transactions.
Since 2006, DTCC has developed a Trade Information
Warehouse, a global electronic database that has virtually all
position data on credit default swaps constituting
approximately 2.3 million contracts from around the world with
a notional value of $29 trillion. We share Congress's goal of
ensuring more transparent markets, global regulatory oversight,
and systemic risk mitigation. Today I would like to make three
points.
First, transparent access to comprehensive consolidated
market data for all regulators is the key to mitigate systemic
risk in the global swaps markets. Second, providing
transparency must be a cooperative effort among global
regulators. Finally, the indemnification provisions in Dodd-
Frank could negatively impact global market transparency and
regulatory harmonization.
With respect to our first point, last year market
participants and regulators worldwide agreed on a more
structured and harmonized approach to the reporting and
disclosure of this data under the auspices of the OTC
Derivatives Regulators' Forum which is comprised of nearly 50
regulators and other authorities worldwide including all of the
major regulators and central banks in the U.S. and in Europe.
The Warehouse provides regulators a model for how
comprehensive global CDS data can be made available to offer
greater transparency and more effective management of systemic
risk. Aggregated market data is among the information now
available to global regulators through the Warehouse's direct
online portal. This information is available to regulators to
review through either standard or customized reports to make
the regulatory oversight role more robust and efficient. Today,
over 25 regulators around the world have registered and are
active on the portal.
Our second point highlights the importance of global
regulatory cooperation. The creation of an integrated warehouse
of CDS data was only possible because of such cooperation.
Going forward, it is an absolute necessity that the United
States, the European Union and other major global markets align
their regulatory regimes to limit arbitrage opportunities that
distort markets.
If the result of the global regulatory process does not
ensure regulatory cooperation, data will be fragmented
inevitably resulting in misleading reporting of exposures,
uncertain risk concentration reports, and a decreased ability
to identify systemic risk for both the regulators and
marketplace generally.
Last and most importantly, DTCC remains deeply concerned
about the indemnification provisions of Dodd-Frank, which
require that depositories obtain indemnification from foreign
regulators before sharing information. We believe that this
provision which was entered into the legislation late in the
process without hearings or discussion will significantly
impede global regulatory cooperation. The indemnity requirement
creates the unintended consequence of giving foreign
jurisdiction an incentive to create local repositories in order
to avoid indemnification.
Proliferation of local repositories around the world would
make it difficult to obtain aggregated data for any particular
asset class which in turn will impair market and regulatory
oversight, create inconsistencies in the data, frustrate data
analysis, and increase systemic risk. In addition, foreign
regulators appear unlikely or unable to grant repositories
indemnification in exchange for access to information.
DTCC encourages thoughtful solutions to the potential
negative consequences of the existing indemnification
requirement. Risk mitigation is central to our mission. DTCC
has a unique perspective to share and appreciates the
opportunity to testify before you today. I look forward to
answering any questions that the Subcommittee may have. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Larry E. Thompson, Managing Director and General
Counsel, The Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation, New York, NY

Chairman Conaway, Ranking Member Boswell, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

My name is Larry Thompson. I am General Counsel of The Depository
Trust & Clearing Corporation (``DTCC''). DTCC is a participant-owned
and governed ``utility'' supporting the financial services industry.
Through its subsidiaries and affiliates, DTCC provides clearing,
settlement and information services for virtually all U.S. transactions
in equities, corporate and municipal bonds, U.S. Government securities
and mortgage-backed securities and money market instruments, mutual
funds and annuities. It also provides services for a significant
portion of the global over-the-counter (``OTC'') derivatives market. To
give you some idea of the magnitude of DTCC's involvement in U.S.
capital markets, in 2010, the Depository Trust Company (``DTC'')
settled more than $1.66 quadrillion in securities transactions.
Since 2003, DTCC has been working with financial market
participants and with regulators--our two core constituencies--to
automate the trade confirmation process for credit default swaps
(``CDS''), essentially replacing a manual error-prone process, where
only 15% of all CDS trades were matched, with a process whereby
virtually all CDS trades are matched through an automated system
provided by DTCC.
The result of that effort was DTCC's move in 2006 to create the
Trade Information Warehouse (``TIW'' or ``Warehouse''). The Warehouse
is a centralized, comprehensive global electronic data repository
containing detailed trade information for the global CDS markets. The
TIW database currently represents about 98% of all credit derivative
transactions in the global marketplace. It holds approximately 2.3
million separate contracts with a gross total notional value of $29
trillion and has operations in both the U.S. and the European Union.
I appreciate the opportunity to share DTCC's thoughts on the
harmonization of global derivatives reform. In particular, my comments
today will focus on issues raised by the Dodd-Frank Act's creation of a
swap data repository (``SDR'') system and the international framework
for information data sharing and connectivity among these repositories.
Based on our experience in constructing and managing the world's
first and most comprehensive global derivatives repository, DTCC is
convinced that a properly constructed SDR system will play a
fundamental role to promote more transparent markets for global
regulatory oversight and systemic risk mitigation, protect the public
and help ensure liquid and efficient capital markets.

Summary of Critical Points
DTCC will highlight three points on harmonizing global derivative
reform that focus on the Subcommittee's key agenda items today. Each
point has a fundamental impact on U.S., and global, market
competitiveness:

1. Transparent Access to Comprehensive, Consolidated Market Data for
All Regulators is the Key to Any Attempt to Mitigate Systemic
Risk in the Global Swap Markets
It is critical that regulators worldwide be able to access the core
infrastructure and consolidated asset class databases to protect
against the build up of systemic risk.
Last year, market participants and regulators worldwide agreed on a
more structured and harmonized approach to the reporting and disclosure
of this data under the auspices of the OTC Derivatives Regulators'
Forum (``ODRF''). ODRF is comprised of nearly 50 regulators and other
authorities worldwide including all of the major regulators and central
banks in the U.S. and Europe. Today, through the development of the
Warehouse, DTCC offers these regulators a model for how a comprehensive
global CDS data set can be made available to offer greater transparency
and more effective management of systemic risk. This model was designed
by DTCC with direct input from global regulators through the
cooperative efforts of the ODRF, with over 1,700 participants in the
CDS market from over 50 member countries.
The Warehouse provides comprehensive standard position risk reports
to appropriate authorities worldwide (as well as responding to over 100
ad hoc requests from such authorities last year). DTCC recently
launched an automated portal to provide regulators worldwide with
direct, on-line access to global CDS data registered in the TIW. The
information available in the portal is precisely the aggregated,
current, accurate information that regulators need to monitor and
identify systemic risks to the financial markets, across jurisdictions.
Over 25 regulators around the world have registered and are active
on the portal. This is the first such global regulatory service of its
kind in the financial market place. The portal allows for each
registered regulator to access reports tailored to their specific
entitlements as a market regulator, prudential or primary supervisor,
or central bank. These detailed reports are created for each regulator
to show only the CDS data relevant to the individual regulator's
jurisdiction, regulated entities or currency.
As an example, had the CDS Warehouse system for reporting and
disclosure of data created through these cooperative efforts been
operational in 2008, and applied over the complete global data set
subsequently created, regulators would have had consolidated data and
aggregate risk concentrations sufficient to have had an early warning
of the build-up of American International Group's positions.
To ensure that consolidated asset class data remains readily
available for regulators and provides the information needed to make
decisions about future entities, which acquire positions that are
systemically risky, it is vital that rules are put in place that are
consistent between jurisdictions. Equally as important, these rules
must be implemented in such a way that ensures a consistent
implementation time frame among jurisdictions to prevent potential
arbitrage in inconsistent application of repository rules.
For CDS, the comprehensive global market information that DTCC is
now able to publish includes, among other things, net market-wide
exposures to each CDS index and index tranche, as well as market-wide
exposures to each of the top 1,000 individual corporate and
governmental entities on which CDS are written (top 1,000 ranked by
size of exposure). This allows market participants, regulators and the
public to assess risks, in real-time, on the basis of comprehensive
data to enable them to develop much more informed views. The published
data also indicates which broad category of market participants holds
what positions in relation to important areas of the market, such as
overall exposure to sovereign debt, corporate debt and other broad
categories, although not in such detail as would threaten to disclose
the identity of position holders.
Had this global and sector-based market information been available
and published in the run-up to the 2008 crisis, much of the exposure
uncertainty that contributed to market instability at the time, at
least in the CDS market, might have been mitigated.

2. Providing Transparency is a Cooperative Effort Among Global
Regulators
The creation of an integrated warehouse of CDS data would not have
been possible without the substantial and unprecedented degree of
global regulatory cooperation achieved through the ODRF and the OTC
Derivatives Regulators Supervisors Group (``ODSG'').
This process worked because the entity operating the repository, in
this case DTCC, is not a traditional commercial entity. By removing
commercial concerns from what is and should remain primarily a
regulatory and supervisory utility support function, the Warehouse was
to able provide a central place for data to be reported and for
regulators to access it for both market surveillance and risk
surveillance purposes, simultaneously helping both the regulators and
market participants.
DTCC believes it is an absolute necessity that the United States,
the European Union and the other major global markets align their
regulatory regimes to limit arbitrage opportunities that distort
markets. As the Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'') and
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'') continue to work
through the Dodd-Frank Act rulemaking process, DTCC urges both
Commissions, in their regulation of SDRs, to aim for regulatory comity
as has already been achieved by the ODRF and as may be further agreed
to by such other international bodies as the Committee on Payment and
Settlement Systems (``CPSS'') and the International Organization of
Securities Commission (``IOSCO'').
As an industry-governed utility, with buy-side firms, sell-side
firms and self-regulatory organizations as stakeholders, DTCC has been
able to secure the cooperation of all relevant market participants,
clearers, and trading platforms with any significant volume. This
comprehensive base has made the Warehouse effective.
As discussed at the recent SEC-CFTC joint roundtable on Dodd-Frank
implementation, even representatives of buy-side firms recognize the
importance for consolidated reporting of swap information to a central
location for systemic risk oversight purposes over the life of a
transaction. Participants from firms such as Loomis, Sayles & Company
and The Vanguard Group, who represent investors around the world, have
encouraged regulators to adopt globally consistent rules.
The global SDR framework which emerges from the Dodd-Frank and
European regulatory processes must ensure that this kind of
comprehensive data, as maintained in the Warehouse for all derivatives
markets on a global basis, is expanded.
If the result of the global regulatory process does not ensure
regulatory cooperation or the cooperation of market participants and
their respective clearers and trading platforms, both the published and
regulator-only accessible data would be fragmented, inevitably
resulting in misleading reporting of exposures, uncertain risk
concentration reports and a decreased ability to identify systemic risk
for both the regulators and the marketplace generally.
Fragmentation of data--either by asset class or jurisdiction--would
leave to regulators the task of rebuilding in multiple instances the
complex data aggregation and reporting mechanisms (including extra-
territorial trades on locally relevant underlyings). That task was one
of the primary reasons that the industry and regulators themselves
created a single place for the CDS data within the TIW.
An important issue that U.S. and global regulators need to address,
particularly as the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act results in the
growth of SDRs globally, is how to best handle data collected by an SDR
where the trade would not be reportable to U.S. regulators under the
statute, by virtue of where it took place or the counterparties
involved.
In this regard, DTCC points to the guidance in a letter from the
ODRF membership \1\ related to global regulator access to TIW data.\2\
The ODRF letter contemplates a U.S. regulator (SEC or CFTC) receiving
data from the TIW that goes beyond the scope of information proposed by
the Dodd-Frank Act or the agencies' proposed rules, such as data
related to overseas transactions entered into by non-U.S. persons on
U.S. underlyings. Today, the TIW routinely provides this transaction
data to U.S. regulators (and conversely, routinely provides data
related to transactions in the U.S. by U.S. persons on European
underlyings to European regulators), as contemplated by the ODRF
regulatory standards. This spirit of cooperation and coordination
between regulators around the world must be preserved and expanded.
Without such cooperation, the SEC's or CFTC's ability to routinely
receive details of purely European transactions written on U.S.
underlyings would be frustrated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Authorities Currently Involved in the OTC Derivatives
Regulators' Forum. Available at: http://www.otcdrf.org/about/
members.htm.
\2\ See letter from OTC Derivatives Regulators' Forum to the
Warehouse Trust Company, dated June 18, 2010. Available at: http://
www.dtcc.com/downloads/legal/imp_notices/2010/derivserv/tiw044.zip.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The role of aggregating SDR information is critical in that it
ensures regulators have efficient, streamlined access to consolidated
data, reducing the strain on limited agency resources. International
financial regulators have identified this approach as a valuable one,
noting that:

``Authorities should ensure that [SDRs] are established that
provide aggregate global coverage of the global derivatives
market and that the data collected can be aggregated so as to
provide a comprehensive view of the market. The establishment
of uniform data standards and functional requirements for data
exchange will be a necessary condition for authorities to have
a timely and consistent global view for assessing and analyzing
the OTC derivatives markets. One beneficial solution would be
to establish a single global data source to aggregate the
information from [SDRs] [emphasis added].'' \3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Financial Stability Board, Implementing OTC Derivatives Market
Reforms. October 25, 2010. Available at: http://
www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_101025.pdf.

Aggregated market data is among the information now available to
global regulators through the Warehouse's direct, on-line portal. This
information is available for regulators to review through either
standard or customized reports to make the regulatory oversight role
more robust and efficient.
The challenge going forward is to bring similar regulatory and
public transparency to other parts of the swap markets.\4\ Given the
need to move expeditiously and to assure the continuation of the
necessary cooperative attitude among multiple regulators, market
participants, clearinghouses and trading platforms worldwide, DTCC
urges that regulatory focus be on expanding the existing cooperative
achievements of providing both regulatory and public transparency to
the swap markets. Such cooperative efforts take some minimal amount of
time to implement safely and soundly (experience suggests a minimum of
24-36 weeks if all participants cooperate). If there is a lack of
cooperation, it could take significantly longer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ There are two other global swap repositories in existence
today, one for OTC equity derivatives operated by DTCC in London and
one for OTC interest rate derivatives operated by TriOptima in Sweden.
These repositories, however, were designed solely as a means to
facilitate certain high-level position reporting by the major global
dealers and do not hold sufficient data to meet the regulatory needs
specified by either the Dodd-Frank Act or the ODRF (including both
market surveillance and risk surveillance), which have superseded the
initial requirements set forth for these entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a user governed and regulated utility servicing most of the
major regulators worldwide, DTCC believes that market participants and
regulators are poised to undertake the significant cooperative effort
necessary to provide complete transparency to these markets as
contemplated by the Dodd-Frank Act.
DTCC encourages the Subcommittee, in exercising its oversight
responsibilities, to focus on removing obstacles to this regulatory
process and to continue to use proven infrastructure in a manner that
distinguishes the SDR function from purely commercial considerations
and jurisdictional quarrels, which could hinder the cooperative
attitude that has made progress possible thus far.

3. The Indemnification Provision in the Dodd-Frank Act Could Negatively
Impact Global Market Transparency and Regulatory Harmonization
Consistent with the need for global regulatory cooperation in
ensuring access to the data necessary to protect against systemic risk,
DTCC is deeply concerned about the indemnification requirements in the
data security provisions of Sections 728 and 763 of the Dodd-Frank Act,
and DTCC has expressed these concerns throughout the regulatory
process.
The Dodd-Frank Act requires that repositories obtain
indemnifications from foreign regulators before sharing information.
There was no legislative history behind this provision, which was
incorporated very late in the legislative process, nor was the
indemnification requirement considered in the hearing process. The
resulting language was not subject to the necessary extensive
discussion and consideration prior to the enactment of the Dodd-Frank
Act, and its negative ramifications were not made clear. DTCC believes
that the indemnification provision will significantly impede global
regulatory cooperation.
The indemnity requirement creates the unintended consequence of
giving foreign jurisdictions an incentive to create local repositories
in order to avoid indemnification. Proliferation of local ``national''
repositories around the world would make it very difficult to obtain
aggregated data for any particular asset class, impair market and
regulatory oversight, create inconsistencies in data, frustrate data
analysis and increase systemic risk.
Foreign regulators appear unlikely or unable to grant DCOs or SDRs
indemnification in exchange for access to information. Accordingly,
regulators may be less willing to access the aggregated market data or
establish the development of local repositories, resulting in a
reduction of information consumption, domestically and internationally,
which jeopardizes market stability.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the European Parliament is poised to adopt
retaliatory legislation this week (24th May) as part of the European
Commission's proposed Regulation on `OTC Derivatives, clearing houses
and trade repositories,' known as ``EMIR'' (European Market
Infrastructure Regulation). Should this amendment survive the
``trialogue'' \5\ process, U.S. regulators, like the CFTC and the SEC,
will be required to indemnify EU SDRs and EU regulators in order to
access data held in EU-based repositories (e.g., equity derivatives and
interest rates repositories).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Trialogue is the three-way negotiation on the final form of the
regulation undertaken between the European Parliament, the Council of
the EU and the European Commission.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The underlying legislative intent of the Dodd-Frank Act could
therefore be subverted by the legislative language, preventing the
exchange of information between regulators and frustrating efforts to
identify and mitigate international financial risk and fragment
regulatory oversight on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis.
DTCC encourages thoughtful solutions to the potential negative
consequences of the existing indemnification requirement. While
``technical correction'' legislation would surely deal with this issue,
given the pace at which swap data repositories will advance over the
next several months around the world and the potential for retaliatory
legislation in Europe, DTCC urges the Subcommittee to consider interim
ways to address this situation including, for example, recognizing
regulators who operate in a manner consistent with international
agreements or regulatory forums such as the ODRF, which includes
maintaining the confidentiality of data. Modification to Sections 728
and 763 of the Dodd-Frank Act could include provisions that ``deem''
compliance with those international agreements or regulatory forums as
consistent with the indemnification requirement.
The issue of indemnification has recently gotten the attention of
your counterparts on the Agriculture Appropriations Subcommittee.
Congressman Jack Kingston (R-GA) recently remarked on the House floor
that it is uncertain whether U.S. regulators even have the legal
authority to indemnify EU trade repositories. Congressman Kingston said
the indemnification requirement would likely create ``. . .
fragmentation and information gaps that could meaningfully harm global
safety and soundness. In light of the EU calendar on indemnification,
swift action to prevent the unintended consequences of this
inadequately considered provision of Dodd-Frank is needed.''
Furthermore, Members of Congress are beginning a dialogue with
European legislators, indicating that concerns about the
indemnification provision are being taken seriously in the U.S. and
that there is recognition in the U.S. that this issue must get resolved
in order to avoid the resulting fragmentation of data.

Regulatory Status of Trade Repositories--Global Cooperation
Derivatives markets are inherently cross-border, as participants in
a transaction are often located in multiple jurisdictions. From the
outset, DTCC has recognized that the TIW serves a global function and
the information held by the Warehouse is relevant to regulators in many
locations. DTCC believes it is important to support regulators around
the world and has effectively done so since the end of 2008.
The SDR regime established under the Dodd-Frank Act must recognize
the global characteristics of OTC derivatives markets. For that reason,
Congress rightly directed regulators to undertake international
harmonization, a requirement that should apply fully to the SDR system
and individual SDRs.
DTCC has worked closely with the ODRF and agreed to criteria for
the sharing of data, recognizing the need to have critical data on CDS
accessible across geographic boundaries and regulatory jurisdictions.
DTCC has implemented regulatory disclosure processes using those
criteria and urges the same approach for other asset classes going
forward.
DTCC anticipates that global regulators will increasingly recognize
the overwhelming advantage of identifying risks globally from a central
vantage point, thereby avoiding data fragmentation, which seriously
detracts from the management of systemic risk. As the system for the
use of repositories is developed internationally, it is very important
for the U.S. to facilitate a result that will place U.S. regulators and
foreign regulators on an equal footing in their ability to obtain
information from repositories quickly and without restriction.
Currently, the international perception is that there is inequality to
the benefit of U.S. regulatory agencies with respect to the Dodd-Frank
Act's indemnity provisions, notification and direct access. This
inequality needs resolution.
To promote global market transparency, U.S. standards should be
developed to be compatible with those standards still under development
in other countries, meeting the needs of both U.S. and foreign
regulators. Given that risks to the U.S. financial system can be
impacted by transactions occurring virtually anywhere in the world, it
is essential that the SEC and CFTC's final regulations create SDRs that
meet the immediate needs of U.S. regulators and the long-term need of
global harmonization with the requirements of regulators in Europe and
other major financial markets. This will ensure that meaningful
international data continues to be available to U.S. regulators.
One philosophical and pragmatic question that arises with respect
to global cooperation is whether market data should be collected and
held by the private sector and made available to regulators on a pro-
active and as-requested basis or, alternatively, whether governments
themselves should collect the data and disseminate under treaty and
information-sharing agreements.
The model of each government collecting data lacks some of the
efficiencies of a private sector offering. The industry solution, for
cost and customer connectivity reasons, will be driven to
standardization across jurisdictions and the sharing of infrastructure
to the maximum extent possible. These are not inconsiderable
undertakings (for example the SEC estimate of costs for industry
compliance in the first year was in excess of $1 billion). This
standardization and sharing of infrastructure is positive from a public
policy perspective as it will also support the aggregation of data for
public and regulator use.
The TIW has convincingly demonstrated that global offerings can be
developed in the private sector, providing cost advantages to customers
from a connectivity and common infrastructure perspective, across
jurisdictions. Additionally, key to this model is a sense of
international cooperation and equal footing for all regulators with
respect to the data needed directly in relation to areas of their
regulatory responsibility.

Repositories' Role in Promoting Transparency and Reducing Systemic Risk
By aggregating information, repositories collect and compile all
relevant data in order to assure appropriate market transparency and
effective monitoring of systemic risk. Global repositories have been,
or are being, established for each OTC derivatives asset class, which
can provide regulators in the U.S. and around the world real-time
access to the data necessary to monitor and safeguard financial
markets.
DTCC urges Congress, as well as regulators, to carefully consider
the implications of implementing rules that result in the fragmentation
of information on outstanding contracts into different repositories in
different countries on different continents.
For example, fragmentation of data in multiple national
repositories would mean that if German regulators have to examine a
dozen different trade repositories to determine the positions of
different types of credit default swap contracts that may be
outstanding on German companies, they may never find all of the
contracts, certainly not quickly. Contract records could be scattered
across repositories in the U.S., in Europe, in Japan, in Dubai, in Hong
Kong and elsewhere. Nor is it likely to be apparent to the regulators
what they are looking for, since the offsets to contracts residing in
one database might be residing elsewhere. A contract could easily have
been written between a Swiss financial institution and an Australian
financial institution on an underlying German entity, only to be sold
or assigned to another party located in Brazil. Even if all of the data
is eventually located, an aggregation facility is required to omit
duplicate records, verify and then analyze the disparate data.
All of the information detailed in the above example is currently
collected in the Warehouse globally. Data is published weekly on all of
the contracts held, including a breakdown by currency. Moreover, DTCC
has consistently stated that all interested regulators should have
access to the data they are entitled to access. Accordingly, DTCC has
made such data available as appropriate to the regulators involved in
accordance with the global criteria adopted by the ODRF. All of this
functional transparency will be undermined if regulators move forward
with an approach that does not provide for globally consolidated data.
Global regulators need consolidated reporting across international
markets. International regulatory guidance for derivatives regulation
has recognized that aggregated data is vital to provide a comprehensive
view of derivatives markets. For example, last October, the Financial
Stability Board suggested that a beneficial solution to the needs of
regulators throughout the world would be the establishment of ``a
single global data source to aggregate the information from [SDRs].''
A system for SDR reporting around the world should be implemented
promptly--but it must contain mechanisms to facilitate prompt
consolidation and to avoid fragmentation if it is be effective in
providing meaningful market surveillance for regulators and risk
surveillance for markets.

Importance of Unique Legal Entity Identifier (``LEI'')
DTCC believes that precise and accurate identification of legal
entities engaged in financial transactions is critically important to
private markets and government regulation.
The need for a universal LEI is clear. The current inability of
regulators to quickly, confidently and consistently identify parties to
transactions across all markets hinders their ability to evaluate
systemic risk and take appropriate corrective steps. Going forward,
regulators will be charged with gathering data originating from markets
and processing systems that are geographically dispersed, and assessing
the risks to specific firms and to the financial markets more
generally.
There would be significant reporting benefits to the creation of a
standardized, common system to identify legal entities across
geographies and markets. In the view of DTCC, the universal
standardized LEI is the most effective way--it may be the only
practical way--to ensure data consistency across the industry and
reduce the cost of systemic risk monitoring for regulators. LEI
standardization will allow regulators to conduct analyses across
markets, products, and regions, identifying trends and emerging risks.
DTCC has been actively engaged with other financial industry
participants and regulators in the U.S. and abroad to develop a series
of proposals that have been enhanced in response to the feedback from
these discussions. DTCC has also reached out to several potential
collaborators that could play an important role in developing a global
solution, and DTCC's Board of Directors has approved the commitment of
resources toward the development of such a proposed solution.
DTCC's Avox subsidiary has nearly 10 years of experience in
collecting and validating legal entity information from over 200
jurisdictions, and currently maintains a database of 800,000 legal
entity records. The complexities of establishing and maintaining a
database of this size are considerable, and the vast amount of
knowledge and experience that DTCC can leverage to support the LEI
Utility is unique in the industry.
While DTCC, a participant-owned, at-cost utility, would leverage
its core competencies to collect, validate and make available the LEI
record, DTCC is not itself a registration authority of an international
standard identifier. DTCC has had detailed discussions with the Society
for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (``SWIFT''). SWIFT,
a trusted European-based utility, is a member-owned cooperative used by
more than 9,000 banking organizations, securities institutions, and
corporate customers, and regulators in 209 countries. As a global
Registration Authority, SWIFT has assigned Business Identification
Codes (``BICs''),\6\ an International Organization for Standardization
(``ISO'') standard, to companies for more than 30 years while
developing and refining a robust registration and maintenance process
that is a cornerstone of SWIFT's operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ BIC is an established International Standard (ISO 9362) used by
financial entities around the world as a network address and as an LEI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the industry consultation conducted over the past several
months, the industry has decided to adopt a new standard for a new LEI,
and SWIFT has been named by ISO to be the Registration Authority for
that identifier, meeting industry and OFR requirements.
On June 3, DTCC and SWIFT will be submitting a joint response to
the industry's Global LEI: Solicitation of Interest based on the
industry's Requirements for a Global LEI Solution, issued earlier this
month. The combination of DTCC and SWIFT would create a truly global
solution responsive to the needs of global firms and regulators alike.
For the heightened protection of data required to support the LEI
Utility, DTCC and SWIFT can establish a governance structure that can
provide the opportunity for regulators and financial institutions
across jurisdictions to have input into how it is operated. DTCC's own
governance offers an example of how this can be accomplished, with
DTCC's Board comprised of both industry experts and non-industry
members representing the interests of the public and the broader
markets.

Conclusion
Generally, the Dodd-Frank Act established an appropriate framework
for the further development and use of repositories in the United
States and internationally. DTCC recommends that regulators work
closely with their global counterparts to ensure consolidated
repositories can provide accurate and timely market information.
Congress must review the Dodd-Frank Act's indemnification requirement
and take corrective action as the existing language prevents the
Commissions from reaching a global solution. The indemnification
requirement could create substantial problems for U.S. regulators by
giving foreign jurisdictions the incentive to establish separate
repositories that operate on a local or national basis, rather than an
international standard.
International coordination and cooperation is critical to achieving
the level of transparency necessary to mitigate systemic risk in swaps
markets. DTCC urges that legislators and regulators focus on the use of
consolidated repositories, or single repositories by asset class, to
counter the risk of fragmentation. Finally, it is critical that in
implementing the Dodd-Frank Act, regulators build on existing systems
and processes to address the policy goals of the Act. Building on
existing systems will result in the most cost-efficient, effective and
immediate solutions.
As stated at the beginning of this testimony, risk mitigation is
central to DTCC's mission. As regulators and legislators across the
globe write the rules under which the OTC derivatives markets will
operate, DTCC is actively engaged in the dialogue. DTCC has a unique
perspective to share and appreciates the opportunity to testify before
you today.
I look forward to answering any questions the Committee may have.

Overview of DTCC
As stated above, DTCC is a user-owned market utility. Through its
subsidiaries, it provides clearing, settlement and information services
for virtually all U.S. transactions in equities, corporate and
municipal bonds, U.S. Government securities and mortgage-backed
securities transactions and money market instruments and for many OTC
derivatives transactions. DTCC is also a leading processor of mutual
funds and annuity transactions, linking funds and insurance carriers
with their distribution networks. DTCC does not currently operate a
clearing house for derivatives. However, DTCC owns a 50% equity
interest in New York Portfolio Clearing, LLC (``NYPC''), which has been
granted registration as a derivatives clearing organization (``DCO'')
by the CFTC.
DTCC has three wholly-owned subsidiaries which are registered
clearing agencies under the Exchange Act, subject to regulation by the
SEC. These three clearing agency subsidiaries are DTC, National
Securities Clearing Corporation (``NSCC'') and Fixed Income Clearing
Corporation (``FICC''). DTCC is owned by its users and operates as a
not-for-profit utility with a fee structure based on cost recovery.
DTC currently supports the launch of new securities issues and IPOs
and provides custody and asset servicing for 3.6 million securities
issues from the United States and 121 other countries and territories,
valued at almost $36 trillion. In 2010, DTC settled more than $1.66
quadrillion in securities transactions, which is equivalent to the full
value of the annual U.S. Gross Domestic Product every 3 days. NSCC
provides clearance and settlement, risk management, central
counterparty trade guarantee services and the netting down (reducing
the total number of trade obligations that require financial settlement
by an average of 98% per day) for all cash equity transactions
completed by the 50+ exchanges and alternative trading platforms
(``ECNs'') operating in U.S. capital markets. FICC provides clearance
and settlement, risk management and central counterparty trade
guarantee services and netting (for most securities) in the U.S.
Government securities markets and for agency-backed securities in the
mortgage backed securities markets.
Thus, DTCC, through its subsidiaries, processes huge volumes of
transactions--more than 30 billion a year--on an at-cost basis.

Overview of the Trade Information Warehouse
Since 2003, DTCC has been working with the industry--and with
regulators--to automate the trade confirmation process for CDS,
essentially replacing the manual error prone process where virtually
none of the CDS trades were matched in an automated environment with a
process where virtually all CDS trades are matched through a system
that DTCC launched in 2004. The automated capture of initial trade
details associated with a CDS contract or assignment was critical to
the eventual creation of DTCC's Trade Information Warehouse.
In November 2006, at the initiative of swap market participants,
DTCC expanded further to launch the TIW to operate and maintain the
centralized global electronic database for virtually all position data
on CDS contracts outstanding in the marketplace. Since the life cycle
for CDS contracts can extend over 5 years, in 2007, DTCC ``back-
loaded'' records in the Warehouse with information on over 2.2 million
outstanding CDS contracts effected prior to the November 2006 date in
which the Warehouse started collecting CDS data. As stated above, the
Warehouse database currently represents about 98% of all credit
derivative transactions in the global marketplace; constituting
approximately 2.3 million contracts with a notional value of $29
trillion ($25.3 trillion electronically confirmed ``gold'' records and
$3.7 trillion paper-confirmed ``copper'' records).
In addition to repository services, which include the acceptance
and dissemination of data reported by reporting counterparties, the
Warehouse provides legal record-keeping and central life cycle event
processing for swaps registered therein. By agreement with its 17,000+
users worldwide, the Warehouse maintains the most current CDS contract
details on the official legal or ``gold'' record for both cleared and
bilaterally-executed CDS transactions. The repository also stores key
information on market participants' more customized CDS swap contracts,
in the form of single-sided, non-legally binding or ``copper'' records
for these transactions, to help regulators and market participants gain
a more clear and complete snapshot of the market's overall risk
exposure to OTC credit derivatives instruments.
DTCC's Warehouse is also the first and only centralized global
provider of life cycle event processing for OTC credit derivatives
contract positions throughout their multi-year terms. Various routine
events, such as calculating payments due under contracts, bilaterally
netting and settling those payments and less-common events, such as
credit events, early terminations and company name changes and
reorganizations, may occur, all requiring action on behalf of the
parties to such CDS contracts. DTCC's Warehouse is equipped to automate
the processing associated with those events and related actions. The
performance of these functions by the Warehouse distinguishes it from
any swap data repository that merely accepts and stores swap data
information.

Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you. I thank the panel. Mr. Thompson
uses a little footnote here. You have let the cat out of the
bag because there is a bumper sticker going around America now
that says, ``Please don't tell Congress what comes after a
trillion.'' You have just let them know that it is a
quadrillion. Keep that a secret, would you?
Mr. Thompson. We will keep it a secret, Congressman.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you. Gosh, great panel. So many
questions. Mr. Damgard, one of the things I think you said is
something that I completely agree with and that is that we have
seen all of the pieces to the mosaic, we just haven't seen the
mosaic. And, particularly the volume of rulemaking that is
coming out across all of these jurisdictions. But particularly
I think the point that you made was after we get all of the
pieces out and we get the mosaic, let's get the art critics to
come in and tell us, you know what the mosaic, whether it is
what we need or not. And I don't know how you harmonize even
when you are having these discussions on these various pieces
of legislation that you are working on--how you harmonize with
these other marketplaces whether it is the Asian markets, the
European markets. This is in a piecemeal basis, where they
haven't seen the finished product, do you want to explain----
Mr. Damgard. Or even with agencies within the United States
Government. I mean, the typical number of comment letters that
we write to proposed rules in a normal year is four or five and
we have a lot of time to consider. And I have since the Dodd-
Frank Act, I think I have signed something in the neighborhood
of 35 to 40 comment letters without a lot of confidence that we
have really been able to anticipate what some of the unintended
consequences are going to be. And I know that the stress is
just as much on the agency.
I think Chairman Gensler set up these, I called them silos,
and he called me at home and said those aren't silos those are
teams. But these silos are so busy with these teams grinding
out proposed regs one after another they hardly have time to
talk to other teams within the agency, much less talk to the
teams that are writing similar rules at the SEC or coordinating
with the Fed in my judgment. And I think that we are going to
see an awful lot of these regs come out that are in conflict
with each other.
Then you bring into consideration whether or not foreign
governments are going to be marching in line with us. I mean, I
love listening to Mr. Chilton. You know Mr. Chilton talks about
Kevin Costner in Field of Dreams and if we do it then everybody
else is going to come our way. I mean, Kevin Costner never
played Pollyanna. This is a really, really competitive world
and if other jurisdictions see opportunities to attract capital
and capital does show up, they are going to take advantage of
that.
I share with everyone here the concern that it is really
important to get this done right, not done so quickly. And I
think the idea of finding out what the Commission thinks makes
the most sense before they go final with these regs. As I said
in my testimony, if they would publish them in their entirety
and give us 60 days which is minimal really. I mean, we did a
cost-benefit analysis on just one. We did a cost-benefit
analysis on account ownership and control which was sort of
obscure comment and it cost us $100,000 which we didn't budget
in our little nonprofit. We believe that the cost-benefit
analysis on all of these things really ought to be looked at
pretty seriously.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, and I have said to Mr. Gensler I
think their agency ought to be doing a cost-benefit analysis,
and to put that analysis out and letting people also comment on
that to verify whether their assumptions are correct.
Mr. Deas, I want to move to you and I think you made a very
important point and I think it is something that other people
may have brought up. But when you are talking about whether I
am going to have to put up margin or not, what you said is the
market price is the fact that I am not putting up margin. And
so I am literally paying my margin in the contract, the
negotiated price for the contract.
Mr. Deas. That is right, Congressman, and it is a price
that we have negotiated and it provides certainty so that we
don't have to put up, make cash payments at the end of the
trading day; or even according to how these rules may operate,
and depending on price movements, potentially within the
trading day. And so in order to make sure that we would always
be able to meet a margin call, corporate treasurers would have
to hold aside more than enough cash to meet those margin calls
and that is more expensive than the price that we get built
into the derivative contract with the bank. And it--and we get
certainty through that arrangement with the bank.
Mr. Neugebauer. And quickly, Mr. O'Connor, when we are
looking at the extraterritorial issues are the regulations very
clear as to what the triggers are, what each jurisdiction has
for market certainty? Your comments on that.
Mr. O'Connor. Yes. I think it is--there has to be absolute
clarity between which jurisdiction has what and the main point
I would make, as you know, U.S. banks have global franchises
these days. A large portion of their earnings arise from
overseas. And if I am a French corporation or an Italian
corporation or a German corporation trading with the U.S.
branch or subsidiary of a U.S.--the local London or Frankfurt
branch of a U.S. bank. When I trade with that entity, the U.S.
entity--my transaction would be subject to margin rules or
clearing or execution on an electronic venue, but I can trade
with a European bank and avoid all of that then that is where
the risk is from an U.S. competitiveness point of view that
those transactions might be missed. And U.S. foreign clients of
U.S. banks might migrate to the overseas banks in those local
jurisdictions.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you. Mr. Kissell.
Mr. Kissell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I, too, was
caught a little bit by quadrillions and so I will leave that
one alone, but that was--that certainly brings about a lot of
interest. I don't have, Mr. Chairman, so much a question as
maybe just kind of a flowing observation that--and listening to
the panelists and I do appreciate your expertise and your
coming to us today. And I know we have been here for awhile and
I appreciate your time. There seems to be a consensus that I
didn't hear anyone say we absolutely don't need to do anything.
There seems to be a consensus that we need some transparency,
some reforms, and obviously there is not agreement across the
board as to what that would be.
I had found through kind of a steady stream throughout a
lot of our hearings that we would consistently hear that we
need to be careful because the markets, and the financial
problems of 2008, these markets performed well. But yet we have
a situation where some of my colleagues referred to earlier
that there is a lot of concern that in the functioning of the
markets while the players come out okay that maybe the
consumers and the price function are affected by issues more
than just simple supply and demand.
So I think that what we are trying to find here is a good
balance so that you guys can perform well and that the
consumers can be protected. And what either Mr. Courtney or Mr.
Welch referred to is trying to find that balance. And I think
that is what we are looking for. One question, and when you
have a large panel sometimes it is hard to pin it down to one
person. A lot of you brought out certain points that need to be
thought out more. Just curious if you presented those in
comments to the right people and if you received any feedback
that makes you think that these will be taken care of. And
anybody if you got--if that is something you want to jump on
that would be fine.
Mr. Damgard. Yes, as the President of the trade association
representing the futures industry, we work very carefully with,
both the Senate and House throughout the deliberations of Dodd-
Frank. We weren't as successful as we wanted to be. But I would
say that, I can imagine the kind of pressure that you must be
in when you go home and people are paying $4.50 for gasoline.
And the temptation of course is to demonize speculators, or the
passive longs.
And when you stop and consider that first of all the Middle
East is out there and they know--they have economists knowing
exactly if gasoline or crude oil gets to be over $110 demand
over here drops off. We have seen the bicycle lanes going up
and down Constitution Avenue. More and more people take public
transportation. All the buses now are fueled by natural gas
which is relatively cheap. And this is the market at work and
the role of the CFTC.
And I wish Mr. Welch was still here, the role of the CFTC
is not to determine that prices should go up or that prices
should go down. They are supposed to look at all the elements
of the market to prevent fraud and manipulation in the market.
And quite honestly they have done an excellent job. And I don't
think anyone here would argue that they couldn't use more
resources because they had been given a much larger mandate.
I agree with Mr. Peterson, maybe the $25,000 stipulation on
entertaining foreigners ought not to have been in the Act. But
I probably wouldn't put that number one. I mean, I think that
some of the--some of them--the concepts of position limits
while they have worked in ag because they are pretty much a
domestic market, it is not clear to anyone that a position
limit in the financial futures market is going to do anything.
And clearly outside the United States there is no appetite for
position limits.
And if you are a firm and you are a global firm and you are
a bank and you are bringing customer business to an exchange 24
hours a day, and one exchange or one environment is going to
impose a big fine on you if you inadvertently increase, go
beyond your position limit, and there are other exchanges out
there and other jurisdictions that don't have that stipulation
because they think they know just exactly how to manage
manipulation in other ways, then quite honestly, as I said
before, capital flows.
Energy markets in London, in Dubai, in Singapore, in Hong
Kong, in Sun, and Shanghai will be available to investors in
the United States. And just because we call it the West Texas
Intermediate, we know that the fuel, that is no longer the home
of where all the fuel is coming from. It is coming from the
Middle East.
Mr. Kissell. Thank you, Mr.----
Ms. Miller. Could I just share a little comment? You asked
about have we met with some of the regulators on their
proposals. We have actually in fact met with the CFTC staff and
the Commissioners and they have been very generous with their
time. And I think they found what was refreshing about our
proposal is that we were not asking for an exemption from
registration when we were dealing with U.S. customers.
But they all admitted that the tough issue was this
extraterritorial impact and we are 60 days out of the rules
becoming effective and I think everybody on this panel would
say we need to take the time to get this right, to look at
comparability of foreign country regulations and let the CFTC
and the SEC leverage the resources of foreign supervisors. So I
think that that is what I would like to leave you with if you
don't mind.
Mr. Deas. And if I might just add a little bit to that. I
mean, ISDA has been engaged with the CFTC and the SEC
throughout this process. I would echo the comments made by my
panel members that they have been open to meetings. Your
question, part of your question was were they listening. I
think the answer is yes generally. For instance, one position
we have been advocating is a phased approach to implementation
so certain asset classes may be more ready than others in terms
of clearing or trade depositories. And there should be phasing
by types of institution as well. So dealers are probably ready
to go sooner than some of the money managers, for instance, who
are members of ISDA who say that they have some of the biggest
money managers in the world have thousands of accounts that
they have to get through the door and fully up to speed in
terms of making decisions or going after clearinghouses and
FCM's, getting documentation in place, et cetera, and they need
a longer time. And I think that that is not falling on deaf
ears.
Mr. Thompson. I would agree with all of the comments of my
panel members. We have spoken to both the CFTC and the SEC as
well as the Treasury about the indemnification issue along with
phasing as well. And generally they agree that indemnification
is a problem, but it is in the statue and they don't have the
solution at this point. We need a solution.
Mrs. Schmidt [presiding.] Thank you. Lively testimony. I
have a question for Mr. Deas. I am going to go back to the
regulation at hand. One justification the prudential regulators
have provided for imposing margin requirements on end-users is
that it simply requires the establishment of a credit support
arrangement, which they claim most end-users already have. Is
this the case? And what would be the impact of a new
requirement that all end-users establish CSA's?
Mr. Deas. Well----
Mrs. Schmidt. We will start with you and anybody else that
wants to answer it.
Mr. Deas. Yes, well, as I mentioned, we do not post any
cash margin. We do not have any credit support and access for
the swap agreements we have entered into with our banks, and as
I mentioned in my testimony, we operate in a world of finite
limits. There is a certain amount of credit capacity that is
available to us. And to use that credit capacity for this
purpose, to put cash or committed credit, to hold it aside to
meet a margin call would be a direct subtraction from funds
that we otherwise employ in our business. And the amount of
credit that we would have to hold aside to do this would be an
amount that--so that--so as not to risk missing any--a margin
all, defaulting on a margin call. It would--we would be very
conservative about that. So it would take away capital from
employment elsewhere in our business and ultimately that would
contract jobs.
Our company is a member of the Coalition for Derivatives
End-Users. We did a study that estimated the amount for
business round table companies, of which FMC is a member, it
would be on average $269 million of cash or committed credit
that the average non-financial member of the business round
table would have to hold aside to meet these margin calls.
And if we extrapolate that to the S&P 500 of which FMC is
also a member, that would result in the loss of 100,000 to
120,000 jobs. And we haven't done the extrapolation across the
broader economy, but here we are on the verge of the biggest
change in financial regulations since 1934 without any of this
cost-benefit analysis being done. I have seen no analysis from
any government department, agency, or Commission that answers
your question.
Mr. O'Connor. I can give some more comment on that and echo
some of Mr. Deas's comments. And the CSA is effectively the
part of the agreement that provides the collateral posting
backwards and forwards, and I would say that generally between
dealers and their clients and the financial end-users that the
CSA is almost universally in place. Whereas, with corporate
end-users I would say generally it was not the case that CSA's
were in place in that market. Banks typically extended credit
to those corporations.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. Ms. Miller, you noted in your
testimony concerns with the push out provision in Dodd-Frank.
How would you propose to resolve this issue?
Ms. Miller. Well, there is a simple way and there is a--
sorry--the simple way would be just to give parity to the
foreign banks and extend the language on insured depository
institutions to foreign branches and agencies doing business
here. But there is some thought that because of the idea of it
would still require foreign banks doing business here as well
as domestic banks to split apart their swaps dealer activity.
And as we have talked--all talked about it, it makes sense to
keep swaps activities in one central location. Another way to
do it would be to completely get rid of section 716 and of
course we would be supportive of that.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. Moving along, Mr. O'Connor, what
expectations if any should there be from real time reporting
requirements and is the EU considering similar real time
reporting requirements as well?
Mr. O'Connor. Thanks. So in terms of the expectations in
the U.S., I think that the expectation is that for transactions
printed between--in the OTC market those would be reported real
time along through some form of tape mechanism like trades that
exist in the bond markets. Those--that reporting would be
applicable to all transactions that were not above a certain
size. Those transactions would be--large transactions would be
subject to block exemptions or block delays. There is
uncertainty now as to where or the degree to which there has
been enough thought about on setting those block levels. So if
the block level is set at such that too many transactions are
captured, that is--can be damaging to liquidity.
With regard to the second part of the question, I think EU
is looking at real time reporting as well. A material
difference in the U.S. and the EU is that the block reporting
delay, which is another aspect so there is a size of trade that
gets you to the block delay and then the question of how long
the delay is, and I think the CFTC has proposed a delay of 15
minutes. In Europe it is a much longer delay. And what that
means is that the liquidity provider, the dealer, can have more
of a chance of hedging his risk before the trade is printed
into the market and other market participants taking advantage
of that information.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. And Mr. Thompson, can you please
provide further explanation of the indemnification provision in
Dodd-Frank and how it would work in a practical matter and why
this is a significant change from current practice, sir?
Mr. Thompson. At the moment, the Trade Information
Warehouse works underneath the guidelines that were set in
place by the OTC Derivatives Regulators' Forum, which
essentially says that each one of the 50 regulators from across
the globe is entitled to the information that they are entitled
to based upon trades that either were done under a reference
entity that they have, or a regulatee that they are
particularly looking at if they--their market regulator. That
would be--and at the moment that works. Those regulators come
in, they make the appropriate statements as to what their
rights are, and the Trade Information Warehouse gives them
those information. And they also keep this information
confidential. They agree to that.
The indemnification provision would essentially have the
regulators coming in and essentially saying to the CFTC and to
the repository that if something happens from a confidentiality
standpoint and you are sued in the U.S. we will stand behind
that lawsuit. We don't believe that there is any foreign
regulator who in fact would subject themselves to any kind of
lawsuit here in the U.S. when they can get the same information
by simply putting in place their own local repository.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. And my final question, Mr.
Callahan, you noted in your testimony that CFTC's current
approval process for foreign boards of trade to operate in the
U.S. has worked well. You also note that this process is
commonly known as no action relief which implies limited
engagement by the CFTC. Can you briefly describe this approval
process so that the Subcommittee may have a better
understanding of what obtaining a ``no action relief'' actually
involves?
Mr. Callahan. Yes, and thank you for your question. Let me
start by saying that I think that the no action relief regime
is kind of poorly named and poorly branded because you are
exactly right. It does imply by its name that there is no
action being taken. Quite the opposite is true. There are over
20 foreign boards of trade currently subject to the no action
regime. It is comprehensive. Our exchange, the London
International Financial Futures Exchange or Liffe went through
this process in 1998. It is comprehensive. There is voluminous
amounts of information and material and data that is sent to
the CFTC.
So between the CFTC and the regulated foreign board of
trade it is a comprehensive process. But as a core part of the
no action regime is the principle of comparability. The CFTC in
their judgment decides that the jurisdiction of the foreign
exchange is a comparable regulated entity. In our case that
would be the DFSA in the UK and that has served I think U.S.
market participants extremely well.
On the Liffe exchange in Europe which is operated by NYSE
Euronext about \1/3\ of the volume on those exchanges in which
products such as Euribor, European Equity and DCE's, about \1/
3\ of the volume comes from U.S. customers so it is a great
benefit to U.S. customers and U.S. investors to have that
access to global markets. So we believe that it has been a
success. Bart Chilton mentioned in his testimony the
coordination with the ICE Exchange in Europe on the cash
settled energy contracts. And I--there again is another great
example of effective use of the no action regime.
Our concern is that the CFTC is a relatively small agency
and the demand on its time and its resources are massive and
only increasing through Dodd-Frank. So to require the re-
registration of 20 foreign boards of trades and then whatever
new ones come in the future, just the process of kind of
redoing that whole exercise again is going to be massively time
consuming and as Edmunds said in their letter to Chairman
Gensler, it is unclear at the end of that huge piece of work
that there is going to be any benefit to end-user customers or
to the broader stability of markets. So sort of a question for
us given scarce resources at CFTC is this really where they
should be focusing their limited time and attention. Thank you.
Mrs. Schmidt. Under the rules of the Committee, the record
of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to
receive additional material and supplementary written responses
from the witnesses to any questions posed by a Member. This
hearing of the Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and
Risk Management is adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:43 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Submitted Letter by Hon. Frank D. Lucas, a Representative in Congress
from Oklahoma

Execution Copy
United States of America Before the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission
Petition by the Electric Trade Associations \1\ for Prompt
Reconsideration of Pending Petitions Under Section 723(c)(1) of
the Dodd-Frank Act
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Electric Trade Associations include the National Rural
Electric Cooperative Association (''NRECA``), the American Public Power
Association (``APPA''), the Large Public Power Council (``LPPC''), the
Edison Electric Institute (``EEI'') and the Electric Power Supply
Association (``EPSA''). This Petition is submitted by the Electric
Trade Associations, and may not represent the views of any particular
member of any one or more of the Electric Trade Associations with
respect to any issue. The Electric Trade Associations are grateful to
the following organizations who have provided assistance and support in
developing this Petition. We are authorized to note the involvement of
these organizations and associated entities to the Commission, and to
indicate their full support of this petition: the Transmission Access
Policy Study Group (an association of transmission dependent electric
utilities located in more than 30 states), ACES Power Marketing and The
Energy Authority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. Requested Commission Action
The ``Electric Trade Associations'' respectfully submit this
petition (this ``Petition'') to the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading
Commission (the ``Commission''). The Electric Trade Associations
urgently request the Commission to reconsider the petitions submitted
by the Electric Trade Associations in September of 2010 pursuant to
Section 723(c) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act of 2010 (the ``Dodd-Frank Act'') (the ``Section
723(c)(1) Petitions''). The Section 723(c)(1) Petitions requested the
Commission to allow the Electric Trade Association's members to
continue to rely on the exemptions set forth in Section 2(h) of the
Commodity Exchange Act (the ``CEA'') for a period of one year after the
Effective Date \2\ of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The date of enactment is July 21, 2010 (the ``Enactment Date'')
and the date of effectiveness is 360 days after the Enactment Date, or
July 16, 2011 (the ``Effective Date'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Electric Trade Associations request the Commission to
reconsider such Section 723(c)(1) Petitions in a prompt manner (as
required by Section 723(c)(2)(A). Concurrently, we request that the
Commission promptly use its available exemptive authority under the CEA
to prevent unnecessary disruptions to our members' ordinary business
practices. The Commission is requested to assure that our members and
all participants (our members' counterparties, without which the
markets would not exist) in the over-the-counter (``OTC'') derivatives
markets for all ``electric power and related commodity and commodity
derivatives transactions'' \3\ can continue to operate under the
existing exemptions and interpretations applicable to such
transactions. The Commission should continue the existing market
structure until such time as the Commission's rules establishing and
regulating new ``swap'' markets in electric power and related commodity
and commodity derivatives transactions are finalized, tested, and all
implementation and transition periods have expired.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ We use this term to mean (a) all non-cleared derivatives
transactions referencing or derived on electric power or related
commodities in which the Electric Trade Associations' members transact
in the ordinary course of their core commercial activities, such as
electric energy, natural gas, other fuels for electric generation
(including coal and fuel oil, but excluding crude oil, gasoline or
refined petroleum products other than fuel oil--these commodities are
not germane to our members' core commercial activities, and the markets
for these commodities and related derivatives are distinguishable from
the markets in which our members participate), (b) those non-cleared
derivative agreements, contracts or transactions referencing or derived
on transmission, transportation, generation capacity or storage
concepts or services related to the energy commodities described in
(a), and (c) those non-cleared derivatives agreements, contracts or
transactions referencing or derived on environmental or emissions
regulations, or renewable energy or other environmental attributes,
applicable to our members' commercial activities. All of these
agreements, contracts and transactions reference or are derived on what
the Electric Trade Associations consider ``non-financial commodities,''
are intrinsically related to our members' core commercial (or non-
financial) activities, and many are subject to the continuing
jurisdiction of regulators other than the Commission.
\4\ The Commission committed to ensure a smooth and seamless
transition to the Dodd-Frank Act's regulatory scheme in its Notice
Regarding the Treatment of Petitions Seeking Grandfather Relief for
Trading Activity Done in Reliance Upon Sections 2(h)(1)-(2) of the
Commodity Exchange Act, 75 Fed. Reg. 56512, on September 16, 2010 (the
``Grandfather Notice'') and in its response(s) to the Electric Trade
Association's Petitions under Section 723(c)(1) in early December of
2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Electric Trade Associations' members regularly engage in
electric power and related commodity and commodity derivatives
transactions to manage the commercial risks associated with their non-
financial enterprise activities. These contracts, agreements and
transactions in electric power and related ``exempt commodities'' may
include, under the pre-Dodd-Frank Act regulatory scheme, ``forward
contracts,'' ``trade options,'' ``swaps,'' transactions executed on
``exempt commercial markets.'' Our members may be ``eligible contract
participants,'' and all are ``eligible commercial entities'' in respect
of the commodities related to the electric industry. Our members also
engage in a wide variety of commercial contracts, agreements and
transactions involving goods and services related to the electric
industry in the various geographic regions of the United States. These
transactions take place between non-financial entities and, in some
cases, with financial entities as well. Some of these transactions have
embedded optionality or ``swap-like'' economic terms.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Since September 2010, the Electric Trade Associations have
requested the Commission to further define the term ``swap,'' as used
in the Dodd-Frank Act, to clearly exclude or exempt by regulation the
types of commercial energy and energy-related transactions in which the
Electric Trade Associations' members engage every day: including
forward transactions in non-financial commodities which by their terms
settle physically, commercial (or ``trade'') options on non-financial
commodities, generation capacity, transmission and transportation
services contracts, full requirements contracts, tolling agreements and
energy management agreements, emissions and renewable energy contracts,
and many ``other specified electricity transactions.'' To date, the
Commission has declined to do so. In fact, in the proposed rules on
``Product Definitions,'' the Commission again asks questions about
electric industry transactions, rather than providing by regulation the
certainty the electric industry has been requesting since September
2010.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many of our members' contracts, agreements and transactions are
executed bilaterally in the OTC markets. Some are executed ``in,''
``on'' or ``through'' the regional transmission ``markets'' established
in various geographic regions of the United States under the
jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (``FERC''),
rather than being executed on a designated contract market or on an
exempt commercial market regulated by the Commission. Since September
of 2010, the Electric Trade Associations and our members have filed
comments in the Commission's rulemakings, and have met with the
Commission and the staff on numerous occasions, to explain the unique
aspects of our transactions and our markets.

II. Urgency of the Request for Reconsideration
In September of 2010, the Electric Trade Associations and our
members, and other market participants in the OTC energy derivatives
markets, submitted hundreds of petitions to the Commission asking for
``grandfather relief'' pursuant to Section 723(c)(1) of the Act. In
December of 2010, the Commission responded to the petitioners and
declined to grant the relief requested. The Commission indicated that
it had not foreclosed the possibility of granting relief in the future
and assured the electric industry and other petitioners of its
commitment to ensure a smooth and seamless transition to the new
regulatory scheme. Since it is now clear that final rules will not be
in place by the July 16, 2011 Dodd-Frank effective date, the Electric
Trade Associations request the Commission to promptly grant their
Section 723(c)(1) Petitions to provide needed regulatory certainty as
outlined below

A. The Commission Should Immediately Reconsider the Section 723(c)(1)
Petitions and Grant the Requested Extension, and Use Its
Exemptive Authority Under the Commodity Exchange Act To Allow
the OTC Markets for Electric Power and Related Commodity and
Commodity Derivatives To Continue Without Disruption
When the Act was enacted in July of 2010, Congress assumed that the
Commission (and other regulators) could have an entirely new market
structure for all ``swaps'' in all asset classes up and running within
360-365 days. In reliance on this unrealistic assumption, the Act
automatically deletes the exclusions and exemptions from the CEA under
which the current OTC derivatives markets operate as of July 16, 2011,
the general effective date of Title VII of the Act (the ``Effective
Date''). As of July 16, 2011, the Act will simply label certain of the
transactions in which our members engage for commercial risk management
purposes as ``unlawful.''
Notwithstanding the efforts of regulators, their staffs, market
infrastructure entities and financial and non-financial market
participants, the comprehensive new market regulatory regime is not yet
in place and will not be in place by July 16, 2011. However, the self-
executing Effective Date deadline looms less than 60 days from today,
and is creating serious regulatory uncertainty.
The Electric Trade Associations, on behalf of our members and all
market participants in the OTC markets for electric power and related
commodity and commodity derivatives, respectfully request that the
Commission promptly grant the grandfather relief requested in the
Section 723(c)(1) Petitions, and ``use its available exemptive
authorities to address such a [now imminent] situation.'' Grandfather
Notice, 75 Fed. Reg. at 56513.\6\ This will allow members of the
Electric Trade Associations to continue their existing business
practices which are focused on providing reliable, affordable power
supply and which also take into account concerns related to price
stability and predictability until such time as new rules are finalized
and implemented. These practices are conducted in accordance with the
requirements and expectations of Federal and state energy regulatory
authorities, as well as existing law.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The Act requires the Commission to act ``in a prompt manner''
to address the Section 723(c)(1) Petitions. See Section 723(c)(2)(A) of
the Act. We respectfully note that the Petitions have now been pending
for over 8 months.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
B. Granting This Petition Does Not Conflict With the Intent of the
Dodd-Frank Act
Allowing the 1 year extension for electric power and related
commodity and commodity derivatives transactions does not contravene
the intent of the Dodd-Frank Act. Rather, the extension is consistent
with the Congressional intent to reduce systemic risk and increase
market transparency for standardized ``swaps'' while preserving access
to cost-effective risk management transactions for non-financial end-
users. The Commission and other regulators still face a monumental
challenge to sequence the final rulemakings, and construct and
implement its brand new ``swap'' markets in a manner that does not
sacrifice the legitimate interests of non-financial ``end-users.''
Section 723(c) of the Dodd-Frank Act, the ``grandfather
provision,'' is a mechanism that offers market participants legal
certainty during the period of implementation and transition to the new
regulatory regime. Granting this petition for relatively minuscule
portion of the global ``swap'' markets that may be represented by
electric power and related commodity and commodity derivatives
transactions will not impede the laudable goals of providing
transparency and reducing risk to the financial system in the global
derivatives markets.

III. Conclusion
The Electric Trade Associations respectfully request that the
Commission promptly reconsider and grant the pending Section 723(c)(1)
Petitions for the period of one year following the Effective Date, and
use its available exemptive authority to prevent disruption in the OTC
markets for electric power and related commodity and commodity
derivatives transactions. The Electric Trade Associations submit that
the Commission should do so to carry out the intent of Section 723(c)
of the Dodd-Frank Act, and to provide legal and regulatory certainty to
our members and American businesses and consumers who rely on our
members to deliver reliable and affordable electric power.

Request for Prompt Reconsideration of Section 723(c)(1) Petitions

Respectfully yours,

National Rural Electric Cooperative  American Public Power Association
Association

Russell Wasson, Director, Tax,       Susan N. Kelly, Senior Vice
Finance and Accounting Policy        President of Policy Analysis and
General Counsel

Large Public Power Council           Edison Electric Institute

Noreen Roche-Carter, Chair, Tax and  Richard F. McMahon, Executive
Finance Task Force                   Director

Electric Power Supply Association

Daniel S.M. Dolan, Vice President,
Policy Research & Communications

CC:

Hon. Gary Gensler, Chairman;
Hon. Michael Dunn, Commissioner;
Hon. Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner;
Hon. Bart Chilton, Commissioner;
Hon. Scott O'Malia, Commissioner;
Richard A. Shilts;
Daniel Berkowitz;
David P. Van Wagner;
Beverly E. Loew.
______

Submitted Letter by Hon. Bart Chilton, Commissioner, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission
May 26, 2011

Hon. K. Michael Conaway,
Chairman,
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities and Risk Management, House
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairman Conaway:

It was a pleasure to testify before your Subcommittee on May 25. It
is clear that, like you, Members of the Subcommittee have a keen
interest in making sure our agency is deliberative and develops the
best regulation regime possible under the expanded authority provided
us by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. I
share those ideals.
In response to your question regarding speculative positions in
energy markets raised at the end of our panel, I submit the attached
document(s) for the record. As you'll see, between June of 2008 and
January 2011, there was a tremendous increase in the number of futures
equivalent contracts held by non-commercial, speculative traders such
as hedge funds, mutual funds, exchange traded funds and swap dealers.
I hope this answers your question. If I can be of further
assistance, please don't hesitate to ask.
Sincerely,

Hon. Bart Chilton,
Commissioner.
Attachment
Speculative Positions in Energy Markets

Source: Office of Commissioner Chilton, CFTC.


