- HEARING TO EXAMINE THE MF GLOBAL BANKRUPTCY

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING TO EXAMINE THE MF GLOBAL BANKRUPTCY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

DECEMBER 8, 2011

__________

Serial No. 112-28

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

_____

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
73-118 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2012
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800; DC
area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104  Mail: Stop IDCC, Washington, DC
20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     Northern Mariana Islands
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Baca, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from California,
prepared statement.............................................     6
Lucas, Hon. Frank D., a Representative in Congress from Oklahoma,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
McIntyre, Hon. Mike, a Representative in Congress from North
Carolina, prepared statement...................................     6
Peterson, Hon. Collin C., a Representative in Congress from
Minnesota, opening statement...................................     3
Prepared statement...........................................     5
Pingree, Hon. Chellie, a Representative in Congress from Maine,
prepared statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Sommers, Hon. Jill E., Commissioner, Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Washington, D.C....................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Supplementary material.......................................   155
Submitted questions..........................................   159
Kobak, Jr., James B., Lead Counsel to James Giddens, Trustee,
Securities Investor Protection Act Liquidation of MF Global
Inc., New York, NY.............................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Corzine, Hon. Jon S., former Chief Executive Officer, MF Global
Inc., New York, NY.............................................    63
Prepared testimony...........................................    65
Submitted questions..........................................   160
Fletcher, John, General Manager, Central Missouri AGRIService
LLC, Marshall, MO; on behalf of National Grain and Feed
Association....................................................   113
Prepared testimony...........................................   114
Duffy, Hon. Terrence A., Executive Chairman, CME Group Inc.,
Chicago, IL....................................................   116
Prepared testimony...........................................   117
Submitted question...........................................   161
Brodsky, J.D., William J., Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
CBOE Holdings, Inc. and Chicago Board Options Exchange, Inc.,
Chicago, IL....................................................   121
Prepared testimony...........................................   124
Roth, Daniel J., President and Chief Executive Officer, National
Futures Association, Chicago, IL...............................   128
Prepared testimony...........................................   130
Luparello, Stephen, Vice Chairman, Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority, Washington, D.C.....................................   132
Prepared testimony...........................................   134
Corcoran, Gerald F., Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive
Officer, R.J. O'Brien & Associates, Chicago, IL; on behalf of
Commodity Markets Council......................................   137
Prepared testimony...........................................   140

Submitted Material

National Pork Producers Council, submitted statement.............   156

HEARING TO EXAMINE THE MF GLOBAL BANKRUPTCY

----------

THURSDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2011

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, DC.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:31 a.m., in Room
1300 of the Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Frank D.
Lucas [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Lucas, Goodlatte, Johnson,
King, Neugebauer, Conaway, Fortenberry, Schmidt, Thompson,
Rooney, Stutzman, Gibbs, Austin Scott of Georgia, Tipton,
Crawford, Roby, Huelskamp, DesJarlais, Ellmers, Gibson,
Hultgren, Hartzler, Schilling, Ribble, Peterson, Holden,
McIntyre, Boswell, Baca, Cardoza, David Scott of Georgia,
Cuellar, Costa, Walz, Kissell, Owens, Pingree, Courtney, Welch,
Fudge, Sablan, Sewell, and McGovern.
Staff present: John Goldberg, Tamara Hinton, Kevin Kramp,
Josh Maxwell, Josh Mathis, Ryan McKee, Mary Nowak, Matt Perin,
John Porter, Debbie Smith, Patricia Straughn, Pelham Straughn,
Lauren Sturgeon, Wyatt Swinford, Heather Vaughan, Suzanne
Watson, Liz Friedlander, Robert L. Larew, C. Clark Ogilvie;
Anne Simmons, John Konya, Merrick Munday, Margaret Wetherald,
and Caleb Crosswhite.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. FRANK D. LUCAS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM OKLAHOMA

The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
to examine the MF Global bankruptcy will come to order.
Thank you for joining us today for this important hearing.
And I would like to thank the Ranking Member and his staff for
their help in pulling this hearing together. I would also like
to thank our witnesses for being here.
Each Member of this Committee understands the importance of
the futures market for farmers and ranchers across the country.
For decades, futures markets have been a trusted tool for
businesses seeking to manage risk. The bedrock of their trust
in these markets is based on the fundamental protections
provided by mandatory segregation of customer funds. This has
supported explosive growth and innovation in futures products
in recent years providing farmers, ranchers, and businesses
throughout the economy with risk-management tools. These tools
allow businesses to reduce the volatility in the price of goods
and services for consumers.
Unfortunately, the very cornerstone of the futures market--
customer funds segregation--has been severely and suddenly
called into question. On October 31, 2011, MF Global filed for
bankruptcy after revealing that a substantial amount of
customer funds were missing. There are now reports that as much
as $1.2 billion may have disappeared. Dozens of my constituents
have been left not only without their property but also without
answers about why and how this happened. I know my colleagues
have all heard similar stories from constituents who now lack
confidence in the system that served them well for many years.
Today, this Committee will examine the bankruptcy of MF
Global. From the start, I would like to make it clear that our
intention is not to sensationalize the events that have
unfolded, and we are not here to simply or haphazardly point
fingers and place blame. We take seriously that we have asked
both the Trustee and the relevant regulatory organizations to
appear before us. And we realize that this inevitably diverts
their time and resources from the most critical objective at
this time--to recover and return to customers the property that
belongs to them.
However, it is critical that this Committee shed light on
the circumstances surrounding the bankruptcy, to insert
additional facts and information into the public domain, and to
dispel much of the confusion and misinformation that exists. A
deeper more comprehensive understanding of the facts will put
all of us in a better position to address this situation and to
begin to restore confidence in the futures markets. This is the
objective of the hearing today.
To that end, last week this Committee took extraordinary
action to compel witness testimony that is essential to
understanding the whole picture and building a comprehensive
record. I assure you, both the Ranking Member and I did not
take this action lightly.
Last, it is important to stress that this hearing is not
simply a check-the-box exercise. This Committee will continue
to monitor the investigation into MF Global's actions and will
work to ensure that customers receive fair treatment throughout
this entire process.
Thank you and I look forward to hearing from our witnesses.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Lucas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Frank D. Lucas, a Representative in Congress
from Oklahoma
Thank you for joining us for this important hearing. I'd first like
to thank the Ranking Member and his staff for their help in pulling
this hearing together. I'd also like to thank our witnesses for being
here.
Each Member of this Committee understands the importance of the
futures markets for farmers and ranchers across the country.
For decades, futures markets have been a trusted tool for
businesses seeking to manage risk. The bedrock of their trust in these
markets is based on the fundamental protections provided by mandatory
segregation of customer funds.
This has supported explosive growth and innovation in futures
products in recent years, providing farmers, ranchers and businesses
throughout the economy with risk management tools. These tools allow
businesses to reduce the volatility in the price of goods and services
for consumers.
Unfortunately, the very cornerstone of the futures markets,
customer funds segregation, has been severely and suddenly called into
question.
On October 31, 2011, MF Global Holdings filed for bankruptcy, after
revealing that a substantial amount of customer funds were missing.
There are now reports that as much as much as $1.2 billion may have
disappeared.
Dozens of my constituents have been left not only without their
property, but also without answers about why and how this happened. I
know my colleagues have all heard similar stories from constituents who
now lack confidence in the system that has served them well for years.
Today, this Committee will examine the bankruptcy of MF Global.
From the start, I'd like to make it clear that our intent is not to
sensationalize the events that have unfolded. And we are not here today
to simply or haphazardly point fingers and place blame.
We take seriously that we have asked both the Trustee and the
relevant regulatory organizations to appear before us. And we realize
that this inevitably diverts their time and resources from the most
critical objective at this time: to recover and return to customers the
property that belongs to them.
However, it is critical that this Committee shed light on the
circumstances surrounding the bankruptcy, to insert additional facts
and information into the public domain and to dispel much of the
confusion and misinformation that exists.
A deeper and more comprehensive understanding of the facts will put
us all in a better position to address this situation and begin to
restore confidence in the futures markets. This is the objective of the
hearing today.
To that end, last week this Committee took extraordinary action to
compel witness testimony that is essential to understanding the whole
picture and building a comprehensive record.
I assure you, both the Ranking Member and I do not take this action
lightly.
Last, it is important to stress that this hearing is not simply a
check-the-box exercise. This Committee will continue to monitor the
investigation into MF Global's actions and will work to ensure that
customers receive fair treatment throughout this process.
Thank you. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today.

The Chairman. And I now turn to the Ranking Member for his
comments.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. COLLIN C. PETERSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM MINNESOTA

Mr. Peterson. Good morning. And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As the Chairman said, today's hearing is to review the
bankruptcy of MF Global, potentially the eighth largest
bankruptcy in history. Given that futures customers--
particularly those in agriculture--were affected by MF Global's
collapse, it is necessary that we hear directly from all those
involved and find out who knew what and when they knew it.
I want to thank the Chairman for working with us to have
this hearing. The Committee has held plenty of hearings about
problems that may or may not occur regarding the implementation
of Dodd-Frank. Given the serious problem that currently exists
for thousands of futures customers of MF Global, I think it is
appropriate that we refocus our attention.
After the bankruptcies of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers,
the subsequent financial collapse in 2008 and the passage of
the historic financial reform legislation, I think it is pretty
amazing that we are in this situation. It appears to me that
nobody has learned a thing from what has gone on here, that
Wall Street is operating as if 2008 never happened.
From all accounts, MF Global was leveraged at 37.5 to 1 at
one point, far higher than either Bear Stearns or Lehman
Brothers when they folded. Ironically, it is very possible that
there is nothing in Dodd-Frank that would have prevented MF
Global's financial collapse. And that is why I think we should
tread very cautiously before rolling back Dodd-Frank's
protections.
Given what happened here, we should probably be talking
about strengthening Dodd-Frank, not weakening it. Three big
financial firm bankruptcies over a 3 year period is not a track
record that should be extended. During the 2008 financial
crisis, futures markets continued to function smoothly. When
Refco and Lehman failed, their regulated commodity customer
accounts were transferred to other futures commission merchants
with no disruption. Wall Street, apparently not content to
sully its own reputation, now has stained our well-run futures
markets by apparently violating the supreme law, which is
protection of customer funds.
The futures industry helps farmers, manufacturers, energy
companies, and a host of other industries mitigate risks so
that they can go about growing, producing, generating, and
making the things that make this country run. We need to get to
the bottom of what happened with MF Global as quickly as
possible in order to restore the confidence that has been
greatly shaken, as the Chairman indicated. We cannot let one
company succeed in undermining an industry that has operated
safely for customers for decades.
Unfortunately, some of my friends on the other side of the
Capitol seem hell-bent and ready to assign blame for MF Global
to the CFTC for what they perceive as failing to do their jobs.
Do we blame the police officer the day after our house gets
broken into? Of course we don't. The futures world operates
with a self-regulatory system of oversight because the CFTC
cannot afford and doesn't have the resources to put a watchdog
into every futures commission merchant. If these Members had
their way, the Commission would get even less funds than they
do now. This blind rush to judgment fails to take into account
how the self-regulatory system works, and in my view,
undermines it.
On a personal note, I find the press accounts expressing
surprise that the Agriculture Committee could approve something
as serious as a Congressional subpoena--unanimously I would say
on a bipartisan basis--quite amusing. The Committee's oversight
of the futures and derivatives market is a responsibility that
I do not take lightly, and I think the Members do not take
lightly either. On these issues the Committee, more often than
not, will work across party lines because when it comes to
matters affecting the financial health and stability of our
country, partisan games have no place. I know that that is not
something that the press is used to seeing from Congress, but
it is how we do things on the Agriculture Committee.
Here at the Agriculture Committee, we are focused on the
facts. It is the facts that will tell us what happened, who
knew about it, and consequently, who was responsible. Only by
uncovering the facts can we prepare ourselves with policy
responses that are necessary to address what happened. And that
is what this hearing is all about.
Again, I want to thank the chair for working with us to
hold today's hearing, and I am hopeful that today's witnesses
will shed light on some of what exactly was happening at MF
Global, and I also want to thank all the witnesses for being
with us today and look forward to the testimony and the
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Peterson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Collin C. Peterson, a Representative in
Congress from Minnesota
Good morning and thank you, Chairman Lucas.
As the Chairman said, today's hearing is to review the bankruptcy
of MF Global, potentially the eighth largest bankruptcy in history.
Given that futures customers, particularly those in agriculture, were
affected by MF Global's collapse it is necessary that we hear directly
from all those involved and find out who knew what, and when they knew
it.
I want to thank Chairman Lucas for granting my request to have this
hearing. The Committee has held plenty of hearings about problems that
may or may not occur regarding the implementation of Dodd-Frank. Given
the serious problem that currently exists for the thousands of futures
customers of MF Global, I think it is appropriate that we refocus our
attention.
After the bankruptcies of Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, the
subsequent financial collapse in 2008, and the passage of historic
financial reform legislation, it is pretty amazing that we're in this
situation. It appears to me that no one has learned a thing; that Wall
Street is operating as if 2008 never happened. From all accounts, MF
Global was leveraged as much as 40 to 1, far higher than either Bear
Stearns or Lehman Brothers when they folded. Ironically, it is very
possible that there is nothing in Dodd-Frank that would have prevented
MF Global's financial collapse. That's why I think we should tread very
cautiously before rolling back Dodd-Frank's protections. Given what
happened here we should probably be talking about strengthening Dodd-
Frank, not weakening it. Three big financial firm bankruptcies over a 3
year period is not a track record that should be extended.
During the 2008 financial crisis, futures markets continued to
function smoothly. When Refco and Lehman failed, their regulated
commodity customer accounts were transferred to other futures
commission merchants with no disruption. Wall Street, apparently not
content to sully its own reputation, has now stained our well-run
futures markets by apparently violating the supreme law--protection of
customer funds.
The futures industry helps farmers, manufacturers, energy
companies, and a host of other industries mitigate risk so they can go
about growing, producing, generating, and making the things that make
this country run. We need to get to the bottom of what happened with MF
Global as quickly as possible in order to restore a confidence that has
been greatly shaken. We cannot let one company succeed in undermining
an industry that has operated safely for customers for decades.
Unfortunately, some of my friends on the other side of the Capitol
seem hell-bent and ready to assign blame for MF Global to the CFTC for
what they perceive as failing to do their jobs. Do we blame the police
officer the day after our house gets broken into? Of course not. The
futures world operates with a self-regulatory system of oversight
because the CFTC cannot afford to put a watchdog into every futures
commission merchant. And, if these Members had their way, the
Commission would get even less funds than they do now. This blind rush
to judgment fails to take into account how the self-regulatory system
works, and in my view, undermines it.
On a personal note, I find the press accounts expressing surprise
that the Agriculture Committee could approve something as serious as a
Congressional subpoena, unanimously on a bipartisan basis, quite
amusing. The Committee's oversight of the futures and derivatives
markets is a responsibility that I do not take lightly. On these
issues, the Committee--more often than not--will work across party
lines because when it comes to matters affecting the financial health
and stability of our country, partisan games have no place. I know
that's not something the press is used to seeing from Congress, but
it's how we do things on the Agriculture Committee.
Here at the House Agriculture Committee, we are focused on the
facts. It is the facts that will tell us what happened, who knew about
it, and consequently, who was responsible. Only by uncovering the
facts, can we prepare ourselves for policy responses that are necessary
to address what has happened. That is what this hearing is all about.
Again, I thank the Chairman for holding today's hearing and am
hopeful that today's witnesses will shed some light on what exactly was
happening at MF Global.

The Chairman. The chair thanks the Ranking Member for his
comments.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so that the witnesses may
begin their testimony and to ensure that there is ample time
for questions.
[The prepared statements of Mr. Baca, Mr. McIntyre, and Ms.
Pingree follow:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Joe Baca, a Representative in Congress from
California
Chairman Lucas and Ranking Member Peterson:

Thank you for convening this hearing to examine the situation
surrounding MF Global's filing for chapter 11 bankruptcy.
I know these are unique circumstances--with the Agriculture
Committee subpoenaing a former Member of Congress as a witness for the
first time in over 100 years.
But with anywhere from $600 million to $1.2 billion in customer
funds completely missing--we all understand the seriousness of this
matter.
I want to recognize our witnesses for being here this morning--and
helping us better understand the circumstances that led to this
financial disaster.
What role did exposure to European sovereign debt play in the
collapse of MF Global?
Will customers who lost funds--through both security and futures
transactions--all be able to recoup lost dollars?
What steps must we take to prevent other brokerage houses from
making the same mistakes as MF Global?
These are just some of the key questions we must answer today.
The American people must have the OVERSIGHT and ACCOUNTABILITY to
ensure that consumers are protected.
And our regulatory agencies--including the SEC and the CFTC--must
be better funded by Congress in order to have the resources necessary
to effectively carry out their duties.
Again, I want to thank the Chairman and Ranking Member for their
leadership on this critical issue.
I look forward to this opportunity to learn about what happened at
MF Global--so we can ensure these missteps are not made again.
Thank you.
______

Prepared Statement of Hon. Mike McIntyre, a Representative in Congress
from North Carolina
This Committee has a duty to protect one of our nation's most
prized assets--its farmers--from the ill effects of financial
institutions and regulatory oversight in New York and Washington. Many
of America's farmers and grain merchandisers have been deeply affected
by the MF Global bankruptcy. That is why we are here today to
investigate the events which led to the suffering incurred by the
clients of MF Global, so that we may hopefully prevent occurrences of
this nature from happening in the future.
The agricultural community is the originator of the derivatives
contract. Farmers, more than most, rely on the sequencing of events as
a part of their business. The derived value from their labor is paid
out in the future, and unsurprisingly, their industry was at the
forefront in utilizing futures contracts as a way to mitigate the risks
of their practices. Farmers hedge responsibly, with purpose, and do so
using sound information based on years of practice and evidence from
the market. They, as a group, are the gold-plated example of how
financial tools should be used responsibly and provide the greatest
example for why financial tools are so necessary in the modern economy.
Producers and agribusinesses that rely on exchange-trading to
manage their risks have been startled by the recent events surrounding
MF Global. Laws are on the books that, if functioning properly, should
prevent customers' accounts from being ensnared in the fallout from
risks taken by companies like MF Global on their own principal. Now, in
unprecedented circumstance, many accounts of farmers and grain
merchandisers have been frozen, and the prospect for the recovery of
their property is uncertain.
MF Global must be held accountable for the suffering that it has
brought on innocent American farmers and agribusinesses. These risky
bets were not placed on the farm; they were placed on Wall Street, and
the financial harm that has resulted from this potentially illegal
activity must be examined. Specifically, we must determine how the
segregated funds were implicated in the trading activities of the firm
and if laws were broken in the process. Whether it is gross
mismanagement or intentional criminal behavior, the sequence of events
must be reviewed carefully so that client funds may be returned to
their rightful owners.
The hard lessons of the financial crisis are still fresh in the
minds of many Americans, and it is now more important than ever that
financial regulators take prudent measures to oversee the American
financial system and protect the innocent from the harm of the few.
Today, MF Global provides more concern about this fact. I will continue
to work with my colleagues in the House of Representatives to find
sensible solutions to the problems associated with the actions of
overzealous investors that threaten the financial security of honest
Americans.
______

Prepared Statement of Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from Maine
Thank you Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Peterson for calling this
hearing to discuss what went wrong at MF Global and what we can do to
avoid these types of failures in the derivatives markets in the future.
It may seem strange for the Agriculture Committee to delve into
this issue, but, in fact, we have oversight over the CFTC and the
derivatives markets for a very good reason. The very derivatives were
futures and options contracts that provided farmers with a tool to
protect themselves if the price of their crops fell before they were
able to harvest or sell. These futures contracts acted as a form of
insurance, allowing farmers, grain elevator operators and others in the
agriculture industry to hedge against unpredictable risks. Soon enough
these contracts were used in other industries to hedge other risks, and
eventually someone saw them as an opportunity to gamble on those risks.
Nevertheless, the origins of the derivatives market were literally
in American soil, in the common sense ideas of American farmers to
protect their livelihoods. It is fitting therefore that we examine the
dangers in our commodities markets and the risks demonstrated by the
failure of MF Global with the common sense approach that the
Agriculture Committee is known for.
Ms. Sommers, on Tuesday the CFTC adopted the so-called ``MF Global
Rule'' which bans the use of customer funds for in-house repo-to-
maturity transactions and re-definies the permitted investments that
FCMs can purchase with customer funds in repo-to-maturity transactions
with third parties. The original list of acceptable investments for
customer segregated funds is spelled out in the Commodity Exchange Act,
and hews to conservative choices such as Treasuries, municipal bonds,
and other products fully backed by the United States or a U.S.
locality.
Beginning in 2000, however, the CFTC used its discretionary
authority under the statute to expand the list of allowable
investments, first allowing the purchase of certificates of deposit,
commercial paper, and interests in government sponsored entities. In
2005, it permitted investments in foreign sovereign debt and in-house
transactions.
Now that the CFTC has rolled back those de-regulatory measures, how
can we as lawmakers ensure that a similar de-regulatory slide does not
happen again?

The Chairman. I would like to welcome our first panel of
witnesses to the table--the Hon. Jill Sommers, Commissioner,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Washington, D.C.; Mr.
James Kobak, Lead Counsel to the Trustee for the Liquidation of
MF Global Incorporated, New York, New York.
Commission Sommers, please begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF HON. JILL E. SOMMERS, COMMISSIONER, COMMODITY
FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION,
WASHINGTON, DC.

Ms. Sommers. Good morning, Chairman Lucas, Vice Chairman
Goodlatte, Ranking Member Peterson, and other Members of the
Committee. Thank you for inviting me here today to discuss the
MF Global Bankruptcy. I understand the severe hardship this
bankruptcy has caused for customers of MF Global. These
customers correctly understood the risks associated with
trading futures and options but never anticipated that their
segregated accounts were at risk of suffering losses not
associated with that trading. Many customers have reached out
to me and my staff directly, and we are doing everything we can
to get as much of their money back to them as quickly as
possible. I have made that my number one priority.
The Commission has dozens of staff members, including
auditors, attorneys, and investigators in New York, Chicago,
and Washington, D.C., working on these issues. I am unable to
discuss matters that might compromise the ongoing enforcement
investigation or parallel investigations by other government
agencies, so I will focus my comments on the bankruptcy cases
pending in New York and on the legal requirements surrounding
the segregation of customer funds held at futures commission
merchants.
As I understand the Securities Investors Protection Act of
1970, or SIPA, the SEC has the authority to refer an entity
registered as a broker-dealer--whether or not such entity is
also registered as an FCM--to the Securities Investors
Protection Corporation, or SIPC, if there is reason to believe
that the entity is in or is approaching financial difficulty.
SIPC may initiate a liquidation proceeding to protect customers
of an insolvent broker-dealer when statutory criteria are met.
In this instance, the liquidation was initiated on October 31
with the support of the CFTC and consent of MF Global. When a
broker-dealer is also a registered FCM, as MF Global was, there
is one dually registered entity and the entire entity gets
placed into liquidation.
Because there is one entity, it is not possible to initiate
a SIPA liquidation of the broker-dealer and a separate
bankruptcy proceeding for the FCM. It is important to note,
however, that when a dually registered BD/FCM is placed into a
SIPA liquidation proceeding, the relevant provisions and
protections of the Bankruptcy Code, the Commodity Exchange Act,
and the Commission's regulations apply to customer commodity
accounts just as they would if the entity were solely an FCM
and not in a SIPA bankruptcy proceeding.
The Commission is no stranger to FCM bankruptcies. Lehman
Brothers and Refco are the two most recent. While the Lehman
Brothers bankruptcy was monumental in scale and the Refco
bankruptcy involved serious fraud at the parent company,
commodity customers did not lose their money at either firm. In
both instances, commodity customer accounts were wholly intact;
that is, they contained all open positions and all associated
segregated collateral. That being the case, customer accounts
were promptly transferred to healthy FCMs, with the commodity
customers having no further involvement in the bankruptcy
proceeding. Unfortunately, that is not what happened at MF
Global because the customer accounts were not intact.
In FCM bankruptcies, commodity customers have priority in
customer property. This includes without limitation segregated
property, property that was illegally removed from segregation
and is still within the debtor's estate, and property that was
illegally removed from segregation and is no longer within the
debtor's estate but is clawed-back into the debtor's estate by
the Trustee. If the customer property as I just described is
insufficient to satisfy in full all the claims of customers,
the Commission regulations allow other property of the debtor's
estate to be classified as customer property to make up any
shortfall. A parent or affiliated entity, however, generally
would not be a ``debtor'' unless customer funds could be traced
to that entity.
For the past few weeks, the Trustee, with the encouragement
and assistance of the CFTC, has transferred nearly all
positions of customers trading on U.S. commodity futures
markets and has transferred approximately $2 billion of
customer property. Tomorrow, we hope the court will approve a
``top-up'' of all commodity customers to at least \2/3\ of
their account values. These transfers demonstrate that
commodity customers are indeed receiving the highest priority
in claims to customer property. We understand that more must be
done.
An FCM is authorized to invest funds that are in customer
segregated accounts. This authorization is found in Section 4d
of the CEA and Commission Regulation 1.25. The Commission
finalized changes to Regulation 1.25 on Monday of this week.
Those changes just reinforce the long-held view of the
Commission that customer segregated funds must be invested in a
manner that minimizes their exposure to credit, liquidity, and
market risks both to preserve their availability to customers
and DCOs. Regulation 1.25 is a general prudential standard
which requires that all permitted investments be, ``consistent
with the objectives of preserving principal and maintaining
liquidity.''
While an FCM is permitted to invest customer funds, it is
important to note that if an FCM does so, the value of customer
segregated account must remain intact at all times. If customer
funds are transferred out of the segregated account to be
invested by the FCM, the FCM must make a simultaneous transfer
of assets into the segregated account. An FCM cannot take money
out of a segregated account, invest it, and then return the
money to the segregated account at some later time. Regulation
1.25 has never allowed a firm to transfer customer money out of
segregated accounts to be used for other purposes.
When a customer opens a trading account at an FCM,
Commission Regulations require that the customer be provided
with a risk disclosure statement that generally centers on
market risk, market volatility, and leverage. We also require
FCMs to notify the Commission immediately of an occurrence of
under-segregation or instances of significant margin calls.
While our current focus is returning as much money as
possible to the customers, we are expending an enormous amount
of effort to locate the missing customer funds and pursue the
enforcement investigation. All of the information we learn
during these aspects of our work will be relevant to the
Commission as it considers ``lessons learned'' and any policy
responses or regulatory changes.
Obviously, the Commission has a great deal of work ahead of
it to get customer funds back where they need to be, to
determine what went wrong with the segregated funds at MF
Global, and to determine whether to prosecute any violations of
the Act, and to determine what needs to be done to prevent a
similar circumstance in the future. Commission staff is
coordinating on these issues with other regulators both
internationally and domestically. We are also closely working
with the SIPA Trustee to provide whatever support he needs to
resolve issues with commodity customer accounts.
I greatly appreciate the continued support of this
Committee as we move forward with this important work. Thank
you and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sommers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jill E. Sommers, Commissioner, Commodity
Futures Trading Commission, Washington, DC.
Good morning Chairman Lucas, Vice Chairman Goodlatte, Ranking
Member Peterson, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting
me today to discuss the MF Global Bankruptcy. I understand the severe
hardship this bankruptcy has caused for customers of MF Global. These
customers correctly understood the risks associated with trading
futures and options, but never anticipated that their segregated
accounts were at risk of suffering losses not associated with trading.
Many customers have reached out to me and my staff directly, and we are
doing everything we can to get as much of their money back to them as
quickly as possible. I have made that my number one priority.
On November 9th, the Commission voted to make me the Senior
Commissioner with respect to MF Global Matters. This authorizes me to
exercise the executive and administrative functions of the Commission
solely with respect to:

The pending enforcement investigation;

The pending bankruptcy case in the Southern District of NY
involving MF Global, Inc. (which is the broker-dealer/futures
commission merchant);

The pending bankruptcy case in the Southern District of NY
involving MF Global Holdings, Ltd. (which is the parent
company); and

Other actions to locate or recover customer funds or
determine the reasons for shortfalls in the customer accounts.

The Commission has dozens of staff members (including auditors,
attorneys, and investigators) in New York, Chicago, and Washington,
D.C. working on these issues. I am unable to discuss matters that might
compromise the ongoing enforcement investigation, or parallel
investigations by any other government agency, so I will focus my
comments on the bankruptcy cases pending in New York and on the legal
requirements surrounding the segregation of customer funds held at
futures commission merchants (FCMs).
Pending Bankruptcy Cases
As I understand the Securities Investors Protection Act of 1970
(SIPA), the SEC has the authority to refer an entity registered as a
broker-dealer (whether or not such entity is also registered as an FCM)
to the Securities Investors Protection Corporation (SIPC) if there is
reason to believe that the entity is in or is approaching financial
difficulty. SIPC may initiate a liquidation proceeding to protect
customers of an insolvent broker-dealer when certain statutory criteria
are met. In this instance, the liquidation was initiated on October
31st, with the support of the CFTC and consent of MF Global. When a
broker-dealer is also a registered FCM, as MF Global was, there is one
dually-registered entity and the entire entity gets placed into
liquidation. Because there is one entity, it is not possible to
initiate a SIPA liquidation of the broker-dealer, and a separate
bankruptcy proceeding for the FCM. It is important to note, however,
that when a dually-registered BD/FCM is placed into a SIPA liquidation
proceeding, the relevant provisions and protections of the Bankruptcy
Code, the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA''), and the Commission's
regulations apply to customer commodity accounts just as they would if
the entity were solely an FCM and in a non-SIPA bankruptcy proceeding.
An obvious point to make is that if a firm is involved in a
bankruptcy proceeding, something must have gone very wrong. Bankruptcy
proceedings can be very complicated and at times, messy. This can be
magnified when the bankruptcy is among the largest in history and there
are serious questions about the location of customer funds. The
Commission is no stranger to FCM bankruptcies. Lehman Brothers and
Refco are the two most recent FCM bankruptcies. While the Lehman
Brothers bankruptcy was monumental in scale, and the Refco bankruptcy
involved serious fraud at the parent company, commodity customers did
not lose their money at either firm. In both instances, commodity
customer accounts were wholly intact, that is, they contained all open
positions and all associated segregated collateral. That being the
case, customer accounts were promptly transferred to healthy FCMs, with
the commodity customers having no further involvement in the bankruptcy
proceeding. Unfortunately that is not what happened at MF Global
because customer accounts were not intact.
In FCM bankruptcies, commodity customers have, pursuant to Section
766(h) of the Bankruptcy Code, priority in customer property. This
includes, without limitation, segregated property, property that was
illegally removed from segregation and is still within the debtor's
estate, and property that was illegally removed from segregation and is
no longer within in the debtor's estate, but is clawed-back into the
debtor's estate by the Trustee. If the customer property as I just
described is insufficient to satisfy in full all the claims of
customers, Part 190 of the Commission's regulations allow other
property of the debtor's estate to be classified as customer property
to make up any shortfall. A parent or affiliated entity, however,
generally would not be a ``debtor'' unless customer funds could be
traced to that entity.
Within the first weeks of the MF Global bankruptcy, the Trustee for
the BD/FCM had, with the encouragement and assistance of the CFTC,
transferred nearly all positions of customers trading on U.S. commodity
futures markets, and transferred approximately $2 billion of customer
property. On November 29th, the Trustee moved to transfer an additional
$2.1 billion back to customers, to be used to ``top up'' all commodity
customers to at least \2/3\ of their account values as reflected on the
books and records of MF Global, Inc. The Bankruptcy Court will hear the
motion on December 9th. If the Court grants the motion we expect the
transfer may be complete in 2 to 4 weeks, given the Trustee's estimate
of the timeframe within which he can complete the administrative
functions necessary to effectuate the transfer. These transfers
demonstrate that commodity customers are indeed receiving the highest
priority in claims to customer property. We understand that more must
be done.
FCM Investment of Customer Funds
An FCM is authorized to invest funds that are in customer
segregated accounts. This authorization is found in Section 4d of the
CEA and in Commission Regulation 1.25 (a brief history of changes to
Regulation 1.25 is found in the attached Appendix). It may be helpful
to draw an analogy to a savings account at a bank. Let's say someone
opens a savings account with $1,000 and the bank agrees to pay 0.25%
interest annually. That $1,000 is not just sitting at the bank waiting
for the depositor to come and get it. The bank invests that money, or
loans it to others, etc., with the goal of earning a rate of return
greater than the 0.25% interest the bank is obligated to pay the
depositor. Very simply stated, if the bank earns a rate of return
greater than 0.25%, that is net revenue for the bank. If the bank earns
a rate of return less than 0.25%, there is a net loss.
Broadly speaking, the investment of customer funds by an FCM is
similar, but there are critical safeguards and restrictions placed on
FCMs. Section 4d of the CEA and Commission Regulation 1.25 list the
only permissible investments an FCM can make with customer funds. The
Commission has been, and continues to be, mindful that customer
segregated funds must be invested in a manner that minimizes their
exposure to credit, liquidity, and market risks both to preserve their
availability to customers and DCOs and to enable investments to be
quickly converted to cash at a predictable value. As such, Regulation
1.25 establishes a general prudential standard by requiring that all
permitted investments be ``consistent with the objectives of preserving
principal and maintaining liquidity.''
While an FCM is permitted to invest customer funds, it is important
to note that if an FCM does so, the value of the customer segregated
account must remain intact at all times. In other words, when an FCM
invests customer funds, that actual investment, or collateral equal in
value to the investment, must remain in the customer segregated account
at all times. If customer funds are transferred out of the segregated
account to be invested by the FCM, the FCM must make a simultaneous
transfer of assets into the segregated account. An FCM cannot take
money out of a segregated account, invest it, and then return the money
to the segregated account at some later time.
Customer Accounts at FCMs
When a customer opens a trading account at an FCM, Commission
Regulations require the customer to be provided with a risk disclosure
statement that generally centers on market risk, market volatility, and
leverage. Pursuant to Commission Regulation 1.55(b)(6), the required
risk disclosure statement must also include the following: ``You should
consult your broker concerning the nature of the protections available
to safeguard funds or property deposited for your account.'' There are
no required disclosures concerning how customer funds can be invested
by an FCM.
Commission Regulation 1.20 requires that accounts holding
segregated funds be titled specifically to identify the contents of the
account as separate from the ownership of the FCM. In addition, FCMs
must obtain letters from their depositories acknowledging that the
depositories cannot exercise any rights of offset to such accounts for
obligations of the FCM.
Commission Regulation 1.12 requires FCMs to notify the Commission
immediately of an occurrence of under-segregation. FCMs also must
notify the Commission of instances of significant margin calls (such as
a margin call to a customer, which if not made, would put fellow
customers at risk if an adequate buffer or ``excess segregation'' was
not in segregated accounts).
A customer is required to post margin to support futures positions.
Generally, a customer deposits more than the minimum initial margin
required for the positions established. The additional funds provide a
buffer so a customer can place trades without posting additional
margin, and lessen the likelihood of repeated margin calls or having
positions liquidated if margin calls are not met on a timely basis. In
addition to customers depositing additional margin, in practice, FCMs
typically maintain significant amounts of their own capital as ``excess
segregated funds.'' By doing this, one customer's deficit due to market
moves or unmet margin calls is covered by the FCM's buffer and does not
result in one customer's funds being exposed to the credit risk of
another customer. FCMs are not obligated to provide excess segregated
funds, but given the legal obligation at all times to have sufficient
funds in segregated accounts to cover all liabilities to customers,
FCMs generally find it wise to have a buffer.
A customer may withdraw excess margin funds or use such funds as
the customer deems appropriate. This would include using the funds for
non-futures related transactions with the FCM. If the excess funds held
by the FCM are used in a manner directed by the customer such that the
funds are not maintained in a futures segregated account, the funds
would not have the protections afforded segregated customer funds under
the Bankruptcy Code and Part 190 of the Commission's Regulations.
Oversight of FCMs
FCMs are subject to CFTC-approved minimum financial and reporting
requirements that are enforced in the first instance by a designated
self-regulatory organization (``DSRO''), for example, the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange or the National Futures Association. DSROs also
conduct periodic compliance examinations on a risk-based cycle every 9
to 15 months. The requirements of DSRO examinations are contained in
Financial and Segregation Interpretations 4-1 and 4-2, which are
specified as application guidance to Core Principle 11 (Financial
Integrity) for Designated Contract Markets. The Commission has proposed
codifying the essential components of these interpretations into an
amended Commission Regulation 1.52.
An examination of segregation compliance is mandatory in each
examination (certain other components need not be included in every
examination). This examination includes a review of the depository
acknowledgement letters and the account titles of segregated accounts
(unless unchanged from the prior examination); verifying account
balances, and ensuring that investment of customer funds is done in
accordance with Commission Regulation 1.25.
Commission Regulation 1.10 requires FCMs to file monthly unaudited
financial reports with the Commission and the DSRO. These reports
include the FCM's segregation and net capital schedules, and any
``further material information as may be necessary to make the required
statements and schedules not misleading.'' Each financial report must
be filed with an oath or attestation, and for a corporation, the oath
must be by the CEO or CFO.
Commission Regulation 1.16 requires FCMs to file annual certified
financial reports with the Commission and the DSRO. The audits require,
among other things, that if a new auditor is hired, that new auditor is
required to notify the Commission of certain disagreements with
statements made in reports prepared by prior auditors. Auditors also
must test internal controls to identify, and report to the Commission,
any ``material inadequacy'' that could reasonably be expected to:
inhibit a registrant from completing transactions or promptly
discharging responsibilities to customers or other creditors; result in
material financial loss; result in material misstatement of financial
statements or schedules; or result in violation of the Commission's
segregation, secured amount, recordkeeping or financial reporting
requirements.
Conclusion
While our current focus is returning as much money as possible to
customers, we are expending an enormous amount of effort to locate the
missing customer funds and pursuing the enforcement investigation. All
of the information we learn during these aspects of our work will be
relevant to the Commission as it considers ``lessons learned'' and any
policy responses or regulatory changes. It is just too early to tell,
however, what responses and/or changes the Commission will find
appropriate.
Obviously, the Commission has a great deal of work ahead of it to
get customer funds back where they need to be, to determine what went
wrong with segregated funds at MF Global, to determine whether to
prosecute any violations of the Act, and to determine what needs to be
done to prevent a similar circumstance in the future. Commission staff
is coordinating on these issues with sister regulators both
domestically and overseas, and is working closely with the SIPA Trustee
to provide whatever support he needs to resolve issues with commodity
customer accounts. I greatly appreciate the continued support of this
Committee as we move forward with this important work.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
Appendix
Under Section 4d of the CEA, customer segregated funds may be
invested in:

obligations of the United States and obligations fully
guaranteed as to principal and interest by the United States
(U.S. Government securities); and

general obligations of any state or of any political
subdivision thereof (municipal securities).

Pursuant to Section 4(c) of the CEA, in December 2000 the
Commission expanded the list of permitted investments by amending
Regulation 1.25 to permit investments in:

general obligations issued by any enterprise sponsored by
the United States (government sponsored enterprise or GSE debt
securities);

bank certificates of deposit (CDs);

commercial paper;

corporate notes;

general obligations of a sovereign nation (to the extent the
FCM holds customer funds denominated in that sovereign nation's
currency); and

interests in money market mutual funds (MMMFs).

In connection with that expansion, the Commission included several
provisions intended to control exposure to credit, liquidity, and
market risks associated with the additional investments, e.g.,
requirements that the investments satisfy specified rating standards
and concentration limits, and be readily marketable and subject to
prompt liquidation.
In February 2004, the Commission adopted amendments to Commission
Regulation 1.25 regarding:

repurchase agreements using customer-deposited securities
and time-to-maturity requirements for securities deposited in
connection with certain collateral management programs of DCOs.

In May 2005, the Commission adopted amendments to Commission
Regulation 1.25 regarding:

standards for investing in instruments with embedded
derivatives;

requirements for adjustable rate securities;

concentration limits on reverse repurchase agreements;

transactions by FCMs that are also registered as securities
brokers or dealers (in-house transactions);

rating standards and registration requirements for MMMFs;

an auditability standard for investment records; and

certain other technical changes.

In 2007, the Commission's Division of Clearing and Intermediary
Oversight (Division) launched a review of the nature and extent of FCM
investment of customer funds in order to further its understanding of
investment strategies and practices and to assess whether any changes
to the Commission's regulations would be appropriate. As part of this
review, all registered Derivatives Clearing Organizations (DCOs) and
FCMs carrying customer accounts provided responses to a series of
questions. As the Division was finalizing its review of materials
submitted by DCOs and FCMs, and conducting follow-up interviews with
them, the market events of September 2008 occurred and changed the
financial landscape such that much of the data previously gathered no
longer reflected current market conditions.
In May 2009, the Commission issued an advance notice of proposed
rulemaking to solicit comment prior to proposing amendments to the list
of permitted investments. The Commission sought comments, information,
research, and data regarding regulatory requirements that might better
safeguard customer segregated funds. It also sought comments,
information, research, and data regarding the impact of applying the
requirements of Regulation 1.25 to 30.7 funds (30.7 refers to funds of
foreign futures and options customers). The Commission received twelve
comment letters--eleven supported maintaining the list of permitted
investments and/or ensuring that MMMFs remained permitted investments;
five focused solely on the topic of MMMFs, providing detailed
discussions of their usefulness to FCMs; and several addressed issues
regarding ratings, liquidity, concentration, and portfolio weighted
average time to maturity.
In October 2010, the Commission proposed changes to the list of
permissible investments, and on December 5, 2011 adopted final rules in
that regard. The final rules, among other things:

retain U.S. agency obligations, including implicitly backed
GSE debt securities, but allow investment in debt issued by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac only as long as they operate under
the conservatorship or receivership of FHFA;

remove corporate debt obligations not guaranteed by the
United States;

eliminate foreign sovereign debt;

eliminate in-house and affiliate transactions; and

impose asset-based concentration limits on various
investments.

The Chairman. Thank you, Commissioner.
Mr. Kobak, you may begin when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF JAMES B. KOBAK, Jr., LEAD COUNSEL TO JAMES
GIDDENS, TRUSTEE, SECURITIES INVESTOR
PROTECTION ACT LIQUIDATION OF MF GLOBAL INC., NEW YORK, NY

Mr. Kobak. Thank you, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member
Peterson, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for inviting
me to testify today about efforts to identify, preserve, and
return assets to former customers of MF Global Inc.
My name is James Kobak, Jr. I am a partner at the law firm
of Hughes, Hubbard, and Reed and lead counsel to James Giddens,
the court-appointed Trustee for MF Global Inc., under the
Securities Investor Protection Act, or SIPA
By statute, the Trustee is the customers' advocate. The
Trustee's staff, which includes legal experts, consultants and
forensic accountants, is focused on looking after the interests
of customers and returning assets to them as quickly as
possible and in a way that is fair and consistent with the law.
The Trustee appreciates the interest of this Committee. We
have been working closely and continuously with the Securities
Investor Protection Corporation, with Commissioner Sommers and
the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, with the Securities
and Exchange Commission, with the Chicago Mercantile Exchange,
and with other industry members and industry groups.
The Trustee and everyone working with him understands the
frustration of many former MF Global Inc., customers. When a
broker-dealer with 36,000 commodity customers fails under the
unprecedented circumstances here, the liquidation is
necessarily complex. The Office of the Trustee has been working
tirelessly with speed and diligence to marshal customer assets
and find ways to return them to customers to the full extent of
our ability under the applicable provisions of SIPA, the
Bankruptcy Code, and CFTC regulations.
We were appointed on the afternoon of October 31. Through
expedited court proceedings beginning in less than 2 days that
have already been approved by the court and with the assistance
and consent of the CFTC, we distributed $2 billion of property.
We have a hearing in bankruptcy court tomorrow where we are
asking the court to approve a transfer of an additional
slightly over $2 billion that should bring all customers with
domestic commodities positions up to an amount slightly in
excess of \2/3\ of the value of their accounts. The customer
claims process is also up and running with claim forms on the
Trustee's website and also sent by mail. Claims are being filed
and reviewed as we speak.
As part of his statutorily mandated duty, the Trustee is
also investigating the extent of and reasons for the shortfall
and what MF Global management should have segregated or
otherwise set aside at depositories for the benefit of
commodity customers. The investigation is ongoing and the
Trustee is not yet in a position to make any definitive
conclusions. However, he has determined that even if he could
recover everything that is presently available at U.S.
depositories, there will be a significant shortfall.
At present, the Trustee believes the shortfall, based on
everything he is looking at across the entire business, may be
as much as $1.2 billion or more. The Trustee felt obligated to
share these preliminary numbers and explain the uncertainty
around them, first to the court supervising the liquidation,
and then to the public through his website. It is the Trustee's
hope that the shortfall number will come down, but no matter
the final amount of the shortfall, under any of the estimates
that have been made, it is significant and substantially
affects the Trustee's ability to make a 100 percent
distribution to former MF Global customers.
Further complicating matters, assets located in foreign
depositories for customers that traded in foreign futures are
or should be under the control of foreign bankruptcy trustees
or administrators. The Trustee is pursuing these assets
vigorously but recovery may be uncertain and may take more
time.
The Office of the Trustee has made every effort to
communicate directly and frequently with customers through his
website, mailings, and frequent meetings with various groups.
In closing, you can be assured that the Trustee and his staff
are fully committed to returning customers' property as quickly
as possible and in a fair and equitable manner that complies
with the law.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kobak follows:]

Prepared Statement of James B. Kobak, Jr., Lead Counsel to James
Giddens, Trustee, Securities Investor Protection Act Liquidation of MF
Global Inc., New York, NY
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members of the
Committee: Thank you for inviting me to testify today about efforts to
identify, preserve and return assets to former customers of MF Global
Inc. My name is James Kobak. I am a partner at the law firm Hughes
Hubbard and Reed and lead counsel to James Giddens, the court-appointed
Trustee for the Securities Investor Protection Act (SIPA) liquidation
of the failed broker-dealer, MF Global Inc. On behalf of the Trustee, I
would like to provide an update on the actions his office is taking to
protect MF Global Inc. customers.
Introduction
On October 31st, Mr. Giddens was appointed as the independent
Trustee for the liquidation of MF Global Inc. by the United States
District Court for the Southern District of New York, on recommendation
from the Securities Investor Protection Corporation, or SIPC. As
empowered by the Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970, when a
brokerage firm must be liquidated due to bankruptcy or other financial
difficulties, SIPC uses a court-appointed Trustee to, within certain
limits, return customers' property as quickly as possible.
A different Trustee has been appointed to oversee the bankruptcy
proceedings of MF Global Holdings Ltd. As counsel for the Trustee
liquidating MF Global Inc., I do not have obligations to the MF Global
holding company, nor do I have firsthand knowledge about the events
that transpired prior to MF Global's bankruptcy.
The Trustee is the customers' advocate. His statutory mandate is to
preserve and recover MF Global Inc. customer assets so that they can be
returned to the rightful owners and to maximize the estate for all
stakeholders. The Trustee's staff, which includes legal experts,
consultants and forensic accountants, is singularly focused on looking
after the interests of customers and returning assets to them as
quickly as possible and in a way that is fair and consistent with the
law.
The Trustee appreciates the interest of this Committee and other
Members of Congress and has been working closely and continuously with
SIPC, Commissioner Jill Sommers and the Commodity Futures Trading
Commission, Chairperson Mary Schapiro and the Securities and Exchange
Commission, along with the staffs of their respective organizations,
and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Distributions to nearly all former MF Global Inc. retail customers,
whether farmers, day traders, or institutional investors, have been
made within weeks of the bankruptcy filing. Through already approved
expedited court filings and additional court filings that will be heard
by the Bankruptcy Court tomorrow, we have laid the ground work for up
to $4.1 billion in customer distributions. The customer claims process,
which we asked the Bankruptcy Court to authorize us to establish on an
expedited basis, is also up and running, with claims forms on the
Trustee's website and also sent by mail.
The goal of the Trustee remains to pay MF Global Inc.'s former
retail commodities and securities customers 100% of the amounts in
their accounts as promptly as permitted by governing regulations.
Ultimate distributions are, of course, dependent upon assets available
and there is no assurance of a 100% return.
Exhaustive efforts to collect funds from U.S. depositories
continue. However, complicating matters, assets located in foreign
depositories for customers that traded in foreign futures are now under
the control of foreign bankruptcy trustees or administrators. While the
Trustee will pursue them vigorously, experience dictates that recovery
of these foreign assets may be more uncertain and may take more time.
The Office of the Trustee has made every effort to communicate
directly and frequently with customers. The Trustee's website includes
updates, court filings, claims forms and claims filing instructions,
including a section addressing the common questions being asked by
customers in calls or other communications to the Trustee's staff. The
Trustee's staff is answering customer calls and e-mails and holding
meetings with customer groups and counsel. In the month of November,
the Trustee's call center handled more than 8,500 calls, and more than
60,000 individuals accessed the Trustee's detailed website on more than
222,000 occasions.
If your constituents have any questions, we encourage them to visit
the Trustee's website at MFGlobalTrustee.com, e-mail the Trustee's
staff at
[emailprotected]
, or call our call center at 1-
888-236-0808.
The Trustee and everyone working with him understands the
frustration of many former MF Global Inc. customers, some of whom you
may have heard from directly. When a broker-dealer fails under the
unprecedented circumstances surrounding MF Global's demise, the
liquidation is necessarily complex. The Office of the Trustee has been
working tirelessly with speed and diligence to identify ways to return
assets to customers to the full extent of our ability under the
applicable provisions of SIPA, the Bankruptcy Code and CFTC
regulations.
Customer Distributions
Commodities Accounts
Returning assets to former MF Global Inc. retail commodities
customers has been accomplished thus far through two Bankruptcy Court-
approved bulk transfers. The Trustee has filed a motion for an
additional bulk transfer for commodities accounts that will be before
the Bankruptcy Court for approval at a hearing tomorrow morning.
Approximately $2 billion has already been distributed to former MF
Global Inc. retail commodities customers through the first two bulk
transfers. The first transfer was approved by the Court just 2 days
after the appointment of the Trustee and implementation began
immediately.
The approval of the third bulk transfer will allow the distribution
of an additional $2.1 billion, which will restore approximately \2/3\
or more of U.S. segregated customer property pro rata to all former MF
Global Inc. retail commodities customers with U.S. positions.
Once approved by the Court, the Trustee expects that the process to
implement the third bulk transfer can start immediately on a rolling
basis working with the CME and other derivative clearing organizations
and industry participants, who estimate the transfers will take them 2
to 4 weeks to complete in most cases.
The Trustee appreciates the exhaustive efforts of the CME and other
derivative clearing organizations, which have made the bulk transfers
possible. The Trustee also appreciates the CME's offer of a $550
million guarantee, which will be available for the benefit of commodity
customers should it ultimately be determined that any customer has
received more than a pro rata share of the final distribution.
Securities Accounts
Last week, the Trustee filed an expedited motion with the
Bankruptcy Court seeking authorization to sell and transfer
substantially all retail securities accounts to Perrin, Holden &
Davenport Capital Corp. If successfully implemented, this transfer of
approximately 300 accounts will allow former MF Global Inc. retail
securities customers to receive all or a majority of the net equity in
their accounts. This motion will also be heard by the Bankruptcy Court
tomorrow.
The Trustee appreciates the ongoing support and partnership of
SIPC. The staff of SIPC have been an invaluable resource for the
Trustee's office as both groups work to protect customers and return
assets as quickly as possible. SIPC will play a vital role in the
return of securities customer assets.
Claims Process
The Bankruptcy Court approved the Trustee's customer claims process
on an expedited basis on November 22, 2011. Consistent with SIPA
principles and in the interest of an orderly and efficient claims
process, separate, parallel customer claims processes have been
established for MF Global Inc.'s commodity futures customers,
securities customers, and general creditors, respectively.
Former MF Global Inc. commodity futures customers will file their
claims against the commodity account estate. They will receive an
equal, prorated distribution from two subsets in that estate: one for
U.S. positions traded through U.S. clearing houses (so-called Rule 4(d)
segregated funds), and another for foreign positions (so-called Rule
30.7 secured funds). The foreign secured funds are now largely under
the control of foreign bankruptcy trustees or administrators, and the
Trustee will use all means available to gain control of those assets
held by foreign entities for the return to U.S. customers. At this
time, the Trustee does not have control of most of these assets and it
is not known when, or if, the assets will become available to the
Trustee. If commodity customer claims are not satisfied from the
segregated commodity account estate, the remaining claim will
automatically go against the general creditors' estate.
Security customers will file their claims against the separate fund
of customer property segregated for security customers under SEC rules.
Deficiencies will be covered to the limit of SIPC, which is $500,000
for the valid claims of each securities customer, including up to
$250,000 for claims for cash deposited for the purpose of purchasing
securities. Remaining deficiencies in security customer claims, if they
exist, will automatically go against the general creditors' estate.
General creditors cannot receive distributions from the customer
estates and can only recover claims from the general creditors' estate.
The clear regulatory intent of SIPA is the protection of customer
property. Consistent with SIPA, the Trustee has the authority to seek
recovery of assets removed from customer property funds to the extent a
cause of action exists against those who wrongfully removed the funds.
In addition, the Trustee may also seek Bankruptcy Court approval to
allocate existing funds from the general creditors' estate for
distribution to customers to the extent of regulatory shortfalls and
under certain conditions and circumstances.
Claims have already started to be filed and reviewed, and the
Trustee's office is committed to processing them promptly and to
supporting a customer-friendly claims process. More than 75,000 claims
forms were mailed to customers last week, and PDF claims forms have
been available on the Trustee's website since November 23, 2011. The
Trustee has also provided detailed instructions and deadlines on the
website and has been meeting with customer groups and counsel about the
process.
Investigation and ``Shortfall''
As part of his statutorily-mandated duty, the Trustee is
investigating the extent of and reasons for the shortfall in customer
funds. The Trustee's investigative team, consisting of counsel
experienced in broker-dealer liquidations and expert consultants and
forensic accountants from both Deloitte and Ernst & Young, continues in
close coordination with the Department of Justice, the CFTC, the SEC,
SIPC, and others.
The investigation is ongoing, and the Trustee is not yet in a
position to make any definitive conclusions. However, he has determined
that even if he could recover everything that is at U.S. depositories,
there will be a significant shortfall in what MF Global management
should have segregated at U.S. depositories for the benefit of
customers. At present, the Trustee believes this shortfall may be as
much as $1.2 billion or more. These are preliminary numbers that may
well change, and the Trustee will update these numbers as appropriate.
The Trustee felt obligated to share these preliminary numbers and their
uncertainty with the public to dampen assumptions that some smaller
amount of the shortfall was known with certainty and could not be
larger. It is the Trustee's hope that, for the benefit of customers,
the number will come down. No matter the exact size of the shortfall,
however, its probable size is significant and will substantially affect
the Trustee's ability to make a 100% distribution to former MF Global
Inc. customers.
The investigation will also address broader topics, including the
demise of MF Global Inc. and the events and transactions that preceded
it. The Trustee has requested and has been granted subpoena power to
aid the investigation. The Bankruptcy Court has written an opinion
supporting the Trustee's view of the importance of maintaining the
independence of that investigation and denying participation in it by
the representatives of the holding company or former management whose
conduct of course is an important subject of the investigation. At the
same time, the Trustee is coordinating his investigation with those
being conducted for law enforcement purposes by the SEC, the CFTC, and
U.S. Attorneys. It is expected that the Trustee will make an interim
report on the investigation to the Court at an appropriate time, and
that on completion of the investigation, the final report will be made
public.
Conclusion
Thank you Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson and other Members
of the Committee for the opportunity to be here on behalf of the
Trustee and to submit this testimony for the full record of the
hearing. You can be assured that the Trustee and his staff are fully
committed to returning customers' property as quickly as possible in a
fair and equitable manner that complies with the law.
Appendix--Timeline of Trustee's Motions on Behalf of Customers and
Court Approvals

October 31, 2011--Court appointment of the Trustee for the
SIPA Liquidation of MF Global Inc. at approximately 5:00 p.m.
EST.

November 2, 2011--Trustee files emergency motion seeking
approval of the bulk transfer of customer commodity open
positions and a percentage of the collateral associated with
those positions.

November 2, 2011--Court holds a hearing and approves
Trustee's motion for the bulk transfer of open positions and
collateral.

November 4, 2011--Court holds a hearing on an expedited
basis and confirms Trustee's authority to issue subpoenas as
part of his duty to conduct an investigation. The Court denies
a motion to participate in the investigation by representatives
of the holding company and subsequently issues an opinion
emphasizing the importance of the independence of the Trustee's
investigation.

November 7, 2011--Trustee files motion seeking establishment
of procedures to return misdirected wires.

November 15, 2011--Trustee files application seeking
approval of an expedited claims process.

November 15, 2011--Trustee files motion seeking approval of
the bulk transfer of 60% of the cash attributable to
commodities accounts holding only unencumbered cash, or cash
equivalents, on October 31, 2011.

November 17, 2011--Court holds a hearing and approves
Trustee's motion for the bulk transfer of cash-only accounts.

November 22, 2011--Court holds a hearing and approves
Trustee's expedited claims process.

November 22, 2011--Court holds a hearing and approves
procedures for return of post-bankruptcy misdirected wires.

November 29, 2011--Trustee files motion seeking approval of
the bulk transfer of up to an additional $2.1 billion to
restore approximately \2/3\ or more of U.S. segregated customer
property pro rata to all former MF Global Inc. commodities
customers with U.S. positions. The motion is scheduled for
hearing on December 9.

November 30, 2011--Trustee files motion seeking
authorization to sell and transfer substantially all retail
securities accounts to Perrin, Holden & Davenport Capital Corp.
The motion is scheduled for hearing on December 9.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Kobak.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Commission Sommers, it has become clear that there were
warning signs at MF Global in the weeks if not months leading
up to the bankruptcy--increased exposure in foreign sovereign
debt, increased leverage, insufficient capital. Was the CFTC
aware of these warning signs?
Ms. Sommers. Mr. Chairman, the investments in foreign
sovereign debt would be on the broker-dealer side of that
business. The types of reports that we receive from the FCM we
were receiving daily segregation reports from MF Global, and
those did not raise red flags for us until right before the
bankruptcy.
The Chairman. So it is fair to say, then, that the first
time you were made aware of these issues was right before the
bankruptcy. Who has primary responsibility for monitoring those
segregation account records, the CFTC or the DSRO or the NFA?
Who verifies their accuracy in addition to monitoring?
Ms. Sommers. A typical FCM would be required to compute and
keep daily segregation records that the DSRO or the CFTC would
be able to come in and look at. In the case of MF Global, those
daily seg reports were not actually just kept at MF Global, but
they were sent to the CFTC and the DSRO.
The Chairman. Nonetheless, the bottom line is still that
the daily reports were prepared, they were examined at CFTC,
but the mechanism by which to verify the accuracy, how is that
done?
Ms. Sommers. You would have to go back to bank records to
make sure. The daily seg reports would compute how much of
customer segregated money was required to be there and how much
was actually there.
The Chairman. So on a day-to-day basis, we were taking
their word for what they told us they had in the accounts in
which accounts?
Ms. Sommers. That is right. Our system relies on self-
reporting, and an FCM is required to report to the CFTC if they
are ever undersegregated.
The Chairman. And once again, remind me what CFTC did to
protect those customer accounts leading up to that bankruptcy
filing?
Ms. Sommers. We were reviewing the daily segregation
reports.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Kobak, you indicated that potentially there was at
least if not more than $1.2 billion in these funds that are not
accounted for at the present time?
Mr. Kobak. That is our best estimate to date, yes, Chairman
Lucas.
The Chairman. That is a substantial sum of money by
anybody's definition. Tell me this--if the Trustee is unable to
recover the missing funds, what priority will MF Global's
commodity customers be given in the bankruptcy proceedings?
Mr. Kobak. I actually refer to it not as a priority but
really with respect to the funds that are there in the
segregated accounts, it is really an exclusive right of
commodities customers. So general creditors, securities
customers, other kinds of claimants have no right at all to
those funds. If there is an insufficiency, if there are other
sources available that we can legally pursue, we would do that.
As Commissioner Sommers indicated, there are provisions that
allow us to do that. There are also provisions that allow
general estate assets to be put into the segregated funds and
to be available for commodities customers.
The Chairman. Mr. Kobak, the CME has estimated that its
$550 million guarantee would facilitate the distribution of
assets to ensure that every customer receives at least 75
percent of its account value. Is that correct?
Mr. Kobak. The $550 million guarantee really just goes to
truing up accounts so that if somebody in some of the transfers
got more than their proportionate share at the end of the day,
it would be evened. We don't think it is enough to let us get
to quite 75 percent. I think the distribution that we are
hoping the Bankruptcy Court will authorize tomorrow will get us
up to the area of 69 to 70 percent, somewhere in that vicinity
for customers.
The Chairman. So if I am a customer out in the countryside
caught in this situation, how would I assume that you would
proceed with this extra money? Will I have to wait
substantially longer to get potentially up to that 75 percent?
Mr. Kobak. We have been working with the CME closely. If
the court approves the transfer, we have systems in place to
start the mechanism rolling immediately. Some accounts may be
more complicated than others. The CME thinks that the process
should take between 2 to 4 weeks depending on the accounts
involved.
The Chairman. We have read reports that MF Global's records
were a mess and that this has complicated the investigation.
And I ask this of the panel--is that an accurate description of
MF Global's books and records, a mess?
Mr. Kobak. Yes. I am no accountant, but I think it is fair
to state--and I think this often happens in situations like
this where a company gets in trouble, where there is a run on
the bank, and there is a tremendous volume of transactions over
the last week or 10 days of its business, many unusual
transactions, it is very hard to sort through all that. There
are a lot of--especially with electronic systems nowadays,
there are a lot of things that get entered in the record that
may or may not represent actual transactions. So in that sense,
the records are a mess.
The Chairman. And if this goes back previous to the final
painful days of this business, shouldn't the previous audits
have forced MF Global to straighten up or clean up their
records?
Mr. Kobak. Well, I think most of the mess we see is really
from the last week or 2. And again, I am not an accountant. We
have Deloitte and others working for us and they could probably
answer these questions better than I can. I think frankly the
customer account records for individual customers were actually
in fairly good shape up until toward the end, as I understand
it.
The Chairman. Commissioner Sommers, any comment on that?
Ms. Sommers. Yes. I think that there is no real way to
overemphasize the complexity here. I mean there are over 38,000
customer position accounts. As I understand it, some of the
primary bank statements are 300 to 500 pages long. There are
thousands of transactions that have to be traced from beginning
to end because we need to know where every penny of the money
went.
The Chairman. Thanks, Commissioner.
My time has expired. I now turn to the Ranking Member for 5
minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am an accountant and I can understand how it could get in
this situation that last couple weeks given what went on. And
from what I can tell, Mr. Corzine, his testimony says he was
stunned to find out that the customer money was missing, so
apparently he didn't know about until Sunday either.
I guess my first question is you have those accountants now
and they are now sorting through all of this. How long is it
going to take before they are going to be able to find out what
happened to this money? Do you have any idea, either one of
you?
Mr. Kobak. We are basically working 24/7. I really can't
answer that question. I think no one will know the exact amount
of money that is owed to customers until we are through the
claims process, and that basically began about a week ago and
there is a 60 day period. So I would hope that at least by the
end of that period we would have a good understanding of what
this shortfall is and a better understanding of all the reasons
for it.
Mr. Peterson. But during the process, you are also trying
to figure out who it was that knew about this, authorized it,
and whatever. That is part of your------
Mr. Kobak. Yes. Our primary emphasis, though, is how much
money------
Mr. Peterson. Yes.
Mr. Kobak.--is missing? Where did it go? Do we have a legal
way to get it back?
Mr. Peterson. Right.
Mr. Kobak. And there are law enforcement investigations
with the U.S. Attorney and we really don't want to get in the
way of those. So we see that as very much a secondary mission
right now to finding out where the money went.
Mr. Peterson. Right. On November 29, the New York Times,
there was an article by Ben Protess and Azam Ahmed about how
some investigators suspect that there was a transfer of some
$200 million from MF Global to JP Morgan Chase in Britain and
it may have been the first major misuse of customer money it
was reported. It was also said that the authorities are looking
into whether JP Morgan initially questioned the source of this
cash and sought proof from MF Global that it was complying with
regulations. Generally, when third parties receive funds from
futures commission merchants, what is the third party's
obligation to confirm or inquire with the FCM whether or not
these funds are customer funds? And if the third party knows or
suspects that the funds they receive are from customer funds
being inappropriately transferred, what obligation does that
party have to report this knowledge or suspicion to the
regulator?
Ms. Sommers. I will take the first part of that question
first and to say simply that if there is any customer money
that has been transferred out of the section 4d accounts, that
is part of what we are working together to find and that money
will be clawed-back to be distributed back to customers.
The second part of the question on the obligations of an
FCM or of a third party, generally speaking, transactions like
that to take customer money out of a section 4d segregated
account and transfer it to pay some other debt do not happen.
That is a violation of the Act. So there wouldn't be an
obligation for the third party. I mean I would not think that
it would generally come to somebody's mind to question it.
Mr. Peterson. As I understand what I have read, this stuff
that these segregated accounts have a different name. And so if
you are involved in this business, you are going to understand
if it has that name, it is a customer's account. I think that
is part of the issue here is that there was apparently some
question about the way this thing was named. So if that in fact
is the case, I mean is there responsibility on the part of JP
Morgan Chase to question that or did they question that if you
are looking into that?
Ms. Sommers. I am not aware of those specific circumstances
that you are describing, but I would think that in a normal
course of business there would not be a case for a third party
to ask for some sort of verification.
Mr. Peterson. Hopefully you will look into that because I
also had heard that they were fairly trying to get preference
to get this money back somehow or another. I don't know.
Anyway, there was this story out there so hopefully somebody is
looking into that.
The other question I have is if you determine--this is for
both of you--in the course of doing this that the customer
funds were inappropriately commingled or used, can personnel at
MF Global, if they authorized these actions, be held personally
responsible or liable? And can the Commission or the Trustee
require MF Global personnel responsible for missing funds to
use personal assets to compensate victims who lost their money?
Mr. Kobak. It sounds like that is a question for me in the
first instance, and those are certainly issues that we are
looking into apart from what their liability might be from a
criminal side or a regulatory side. As I said, our mission
right now is to see if there are causes of action and that is
something that--first, we have to know if people did do things
improperly, and then if they did, are there legal theories to
pursue that. But that certainly is the kind of thing we would
be looking into and are looking into.
Mr. Peterson. Ms. Sommers?
Ms. Sommers. From the CFTC's perspective, they are subject
to civil prosecution under our rules, and there would also be
potential for criminal violations of the Act as well, so
criminal prosecution by other authorities.
Mr. Peterson. So your civil authority, would that just be
fines?
Ms. Sommers. Right.
Mr. Peterson. And is there a limitation on how much the
fines could be or can you charge enough fines to cover this?
And if you did, could you use that to make--you probably
couldn't use that to make good these accounts anyway.
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that there are a number
of different avenues with regard to the authority we have for
fines. It is $140,000 per violation of the Act, or three times
the amount of the monetary gain, as well as additional fines
that we could charge for restitution to customers and various
other fines. So there are a number of different ways we could
go in assessing the fine that would be appropriate.
Mr. Peterson. But that money wouldn't be available to make
good the customer account. That is going to go to the CFTC,
right?
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that would go to
general Treasury fund. Restitution would go back to the
customers but the fines would------
Mr. Peterson. Yes.
Ms. Sommers.--be returned to the general Treasury fund.
Mr. Peterson. Right.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Virginia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner
Sommers, Mr. Kobak, welcome.
My first question to you, Commissioner Sommers, is related
to how this works. As I understand it, customers of MF Global
would place funds--in fact in many instances very large amounts
of funds--into an account that is like a trust account or an
escrow account that would be held there, and then at
appropriate times the customer would give instructions to MF
Global to engage in a particular trade, and when they did that,
they would take the funds from that account to engage in the
trade. So what has happened is that MF Global has taken those
funds without the customers' authorization and placed them in
various types of investments, some of which like foreign
sovereign debt might be viewed to be quite risky. Is that what
is at the heart of this?
Ms. Sommers. Mr. Goodlatte, I wouldn't want to discuss any
of the details that may compromise the enforcement
investigation, but to say that generally speaking, yes, a
customer would place money in a section 4d account with an FCM
and that FCM is not allowed to use customer funds, for
instance, to make proprietary investments for their own
account.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. And on Monday, the Commission, after
considerable investigation and deliberation and starting prior
to this MF Global problem arising, made changes to Rule 1.25
which gives instructions to companies like MF Global about what
they can do with the funds in those accounts. Is that not
correct?
Ms. Sommers. That is correct. But I think it is also--just
to be clear, when an FCM is using funds to invest in
permissible investments under rule 1.25, simultaneously the
exact amount of money has to be put back into the customer
account. They can't take the money out there, use it, invest
it, and then at some other time put it back.
Mr. Goodlatte. Correct. So they have to maintain the funds
in that account much like if you put money into a bank account,
the bank, using that as collateral, will make investments in
various things but they can't deduct it from the account and
put it back in later on.
Ms. Sommers. That is exactly right.
Mr. Goodlatte. It operates similarly.
Do you believe that the changes that were enacted by the
CFTC on Monday would have made clear--I don't know if you can
say it would have prevented actions that may have been
illegal--but would it have made it clear that the actions taken
by MF Global were not legal had they been operating under the
new rule?
Ms. Sommers. Nothing under rule 1.25 has ever allowed an
FCM to use customer funds for investments for their own
account. So changes that we made on Monday or previous to
Monday would have ever allowed that.
Mr. Goodlatte. What was the purpose of making the changes
on Monday? What did those accomplish?
Ms. Sommers. Actually, there is a long history there that
goes back to after 2008 when the reserve fund broke the bank,
and since then, the CFTC has been looking into what type of
investments should be allowed for customer funds. And one of
the beginning issues is whether or not an FCM should be allowed
to put 100 percent of customer money into one money market fund
like the reserve fund. So we were looking at concentration
levels and asset-based concentration levels, issuer-based
levels on those money market accounts.
Mr. Goodlatte. And you also restricted their ability to
invest in foreign sovereign debt, did you not?
Ms. Sommers. We did on Monday. Yes, we did.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. Do you think that those changes would
have prevented what happened in MF Global from occurring in
terms of where they made investments? Maybe not in terms of how
they conducted the account, which is a whole separate part of
this investigation, but in terms of where they made the
investments?
Ms. Sommers. At this point, I believe it would be premature
for us to assume that what has happened, that they used
permitted investments that may have been permitted before
Monday and that that is where the money was lost. We don't know
that that is what happened.
Mr. Goodlatte. So the money could have been lost that way,
the money could have been embezzled, the money could be
somewhere that the Trustee hasn't yet located. That part of the
investigation is not yet clear?
Ms. Sommers. That is correct.
Mr. Goodlatte. And one hopes for the best but from looking
at this one expects the worst.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Sommers, if I understand your answer to Chairman Lucas'
question, the CFTC was receiving daily reports from the FCM
that indicated no problem at MF Global?
Ms. Sommers. Daily segregation reports.
Mr. Holden. Okay. When was the last CFTC audit of MF Global
and what did that audit show?
Ms. Sommers. The CFTC is not the frontline regulator for
FCMs, so we do not perform audits on FCMs. We do spot checks
and other different procedures to review books and records. But
the audits are performed by the DSROs.
Mr. Holden. Are you aware of the results of the last audits
by the DSROs and what it showed?
Ms. Sommers. CFTC staff would review those.
Mr. Holden. So you don't have personal knowledge of that?
Ms. Sommers. I do not.
Mr. Holden. Okay. How closely does the CFTC monitor capital
levels at FCMs?
Ms. Sommers. I am sorry, how often?
Mr. Holden. Not how often, how closely?
Ms. Sommers. That would be------
Mr. Holden. Give it a lot of attention.
Ms. Sommers. For an entity that is FCM solely, those types
of capital levels would be part of our oversight for an FCM--or
I am sorry for an entity that would be a broker-dealer FCM,
then those capital levels would be reviewed by either the
securities side or the futures side, depending on the higher of
the two is what the regulations require.
Mr. Holden. Did the CFTC coordinate with other regulators
leading up to MF Global bankruptcy? Did you consult with FINRA
and the SEC?
Ms. Sommers. I am not sure exactly of the circumstances of
who was consulting with the SEC or FINRA in the days leading up
to the bankruptcy. I was not involved at that point.
Mr. Holden. Well, would it be common practice to consult
with the SEC?
Ms. Sommers. I think that there are periodic meetings that
regulators have to review issues in the markets, but I am not
sure how often those happen.
Mr. Holden. Thank you.
Mr. Kobak, how many accounts were affected? I believe you
said 36,000; Ms. Sommers said 38,000, so somewhere------
Mr. Kobak. Our best number is approximately 36,000.
Mr. Holden. How many of those accounts are commodity
accounts?
Mr. Kobak. I am talking about commodities accounts. A small
number, about 300 or 400 act as securities accounts on the
broker-dealer side of the business.
Mr. Holden. Okay. How many accounts have been transferred
to a different futures commission merchant?
Mr. Kobak. When we will have completed--assuming the court
approves the transfer tomorrow--we expect that substantially
all accounts should move. There are a number of very small
accounts--I am talking about accounts with less than $1,000,
many times just $100 or $200 that may not have been active
accounts for a long time--it may be possible to find other FCMs
to take those, so we may try to expedite the resolution of
those claims in the claims process. But other than that,
virtually all accounts should get to another FCM with something
like \2/3\ of the value of their domestic positions.
Mr. Holden. And the transfer has to be reviewed by the
Trustee, correct?
Mr. Kobak. Well, we have to move the Bankruptcy Court
actually, and that is what we are doing tomorrow. And there are
people that oppose the transfer for various reasons. We are
hopeful that it will be approved.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognized the gentleman from Illinois for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee.
Ms. Sommers, you are in the unfortunate position of having
to take some slingshots from Members of the Committee that I
think are legitimately directed to CFTC but not to you
personally. But I guess you have broad shoulders and you are
going to have to accept that.
I am wondering in the first instance why Mr. Gensler isn't
here today?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, Mr. Gensler has recused himself
from matters regarding MF Global.
Mr. Johnson. It is interesting to me that Mr. Gensler, who
has been willing to come in here hearing after hearing to
explain the inordinate delays that CFTC has had in regulations
and rules on perhaps the most important--at least as to the
agricultural community nationwide--the most important hearing
we have had in years has chosen to send you in here for him. We
are glad to have you here, but I find that, in light of his
past filibustering, entirely unacceptable. When did he first
determine that he was going to recuse himself?
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that he made that
decision on November 4.
Mr. Johnson. Is that because he is part of this Goldman
Sachs fraternity that includes ministers of foreign governments
in which the money is invested, Mr. Corzine himself, Mr.
Gensler himself, and this whole nebulous group of individuals?
Is that why he has decided to recuse himself because he is part
of that group or why did he do that?
Ms. Sommers. I do not know the reason.
Mr. Johnson. So you are simply here--and we appreciate your
being here--but I find that entirely unacceptable. And Mr.
Gensler is here somewhere in the room or listening to this
which I assume he is, I must tell you that from the standpoint
of Congressman Johnson, in light of your past testimony and the
role of CFTC, I find your failure to testify here totally
unacceptable.
Mr. Peterson. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Johnson. Sure.
Mr. Peterson. Yes, I just wanted to inform the gentleman
that I think the thing that precipitated this is that Senator
Grassley asked Chairman Gensler to recuse himself.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I am not certain------
Mr. Peterson. It was Senator Grassley that precipitated
this, just so people understand.
The Chairman. And if both gentlemen yield, I would note I
believe the Chairman is out of the country today. Is that
correct?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, he is.
The Chairman. He is in Europe.
Mr. Johnson. When and from whom did CFTC first hear of
these concerns that were actually expressed as long ago as June
that MF Global was undercapitalized?
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that CFTC staff, in
reviewing a focus report that was submitted to us by MF Global
in August, showed the under-capitalization for July.
Mr. Johnson. Does CFTC have the power or authority to force
a firm into bankruptcy?
Ms. Sommers. No, we do not.
Mr. Johnson. What is your authority in that regard and how
far can you push the envelope so to speak in terms of your role
in the process?
Ms. Sommers. For a BD/FCM, that would be SIPC. For a firm
or an entity that was an FCM only, the FCM would have to
initiate the bankruptcy proceedings.
Mr. Johnson. How often do you examine the FCMs?
Ms. Sommers. The CFTC is not the frontline auditor for
FCMs. It is the self-regulatory organizations that are the
frontline auditors for FCMs.
Mr. Johnson. Was there a point--and if so when was it--when
you audited MF Global? And what were the results if any of that
audit?
Ms. Sommers. The DSRO would be the one to audit. And in MF
Global's case, the DSRO is the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Mr. Johnson. And again can you explain to us--just so I
will understand when Mr. Corzine is here later because he is
the other part of the trilogy--what the basis is by which Mr.
Gensler chose to recuse himself? I just want to know the
background. I don't understand. I think Mr. Peterson and
Chairman Lucas' questions are good ones. The points are good
ones. I am just not entirely sure I understand what the basis
was for the recusal.
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I am not familiar with the basis
of his--he has a recusal letter, but that is the limit of my
understanding.
Mr. Johnson. I guess the last question which is in some
ways a rhetorical question, and I think probably everybody in
here, the Chairman, Ranking Member, and the Members of this
Committee--and I am not sure you are in a position nor your co-
witness at the table answer--I think on behalf of farmers and
the agricultural sector, investors all over the country, we
need to know how soon we can give answers to our constituents,
our people who are trying to buy seed and otherwise when they
are going to get their money back. What would you expect?
Ms. Sommers. I understand that completely and want to
emphasize that that is our number one priority. And we are
working closely with the Trustee to make sure that happens as
soon as possible.
Mr. Johnson. Well, I guess my last question is--I know and
appreciate your desire to get that done. I guess my question is
if a co-op, as they have, a number of co-ops in my district
would ask me and I were to give them an estimate, what would I
tell them? Because they have to buy seed and land and equipment
and various other things right now for the next crop year.
Mr. Kobak. Yes, I understand that. People should be getting
another--assuming the court approves our motion--another $2
billion shortly. It should get them up to around 69, 70
percent. Until we recover more funds, if we recover more funds,
we can't really do further bulk transfers. At this point, we
have started the claims process. It has a 60 day period. We
have started it on an expedited basis. We are already reviewing
and determining claims, and through that process, people should
get the remainder of the money that is available. I can't
really give you a better estimate than that of exactly how long
it will take.
As has been noted, some of the accounts are fairly simple
to determine. Some are very complicated.
Mr. Johnson. My time has run out. I would just simply say
that we are all here and inside the Beltway operation, and
there are millions of people around the country whose lives are
depending on what we do.
Mr. Kobak. We are well aware of that.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa for 5
minutes.
Mr. Boswell. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you
and Ranking Member for having this hearing, and I thank our
witnesses for being here today.
The last line of questioning kind of triggered me to ask
this question to both of you. Do you think the CFTC is properly
funded to do the job that we have charged you to do?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I think that what I have said all
along with regard to the new authorities that we have been
given under Dodd-Frank is that it is premature for us to know
how much more funding we are going to need. I think there is no
doubt that we cannot implement and enforce Dodd-Frank without
additional funding, but until we are down the road far enough
to know who a swap dealer is and what a swap is, it is hard for
us to know exactly what type of funding we need.
Mr. Boswell. Well, I appreciate that.
An earlier comment was made that someone breaks the law or
breaks the rule, whichever way you want to put it, you don't go
after the law enforcement. I had an experience with that
violation of my own home not too many weeks ago. I don't blame
the law enforcement. They have done a good job. I think you are
trying to do a good job. But, I am concerned whether you have
the resources to do the job that we expect you to do? We have
had that discussion going on here for a while.
In Dodd-Frank, we seem to expand your responsibilities
quite a bit, and I have said from the onset that my first
priority is the producers out there that have this unbelievable
capital investment these days, which I will probably say more
about when we get to the third panel, and how do we give them
the tools they need? And then how are they protected? And that
is where you folks come in as well. So that is a concern. We
have a lot of people waiting to ask questions so I am going to
yield back and probably concentrate on the later panel.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Sommers, I want to go back to the rule 1.25 change that
you all had on Monday. And basically, I think a point was made
by the gentleman from Virginia was that it prohibited now those
funds being invested in foreign sovereign debt, is that
correct?
Ms. Sommers. It eliminated foreign sovereign debt as a
permissible investment under rule 1.25, but we did invite
petitioners to petition us for section 4c exemptive relief if
they choose to do that.
Mr. Neugebauer. So do we believe then that since this
entity in their proprietary trading accounts was investing
their own money in foreign sovereign debt with repurchase
agreements and others, do we believe that monies for customers
were being invested in foreign sovereign debt as well?
Ms. Sommers. I think, Congressman, I would not be able to
do discuss the specifics of where we believe the money is at
this time for fear of compromising the investigation.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, I am not asking you where it is, but
do you have knowledge that the entity was investing customers'
money into foreign sovereign debt?
Ms. Sommers. There is no evidence for us to assume that at
this point, but it is premature because the investigation is
not finished.
Mr. Neugebauer. So when you are doing the daily
reconciliation--and as I understand it all the way through
Friday the reconciliation showed that the customers' accounts
were whole--who would determine from an oversight perspective
what kinds of investments that they are investing customers'
account money into? Who would oversee that?
Ms. Sommers. My understanding would be that the FCM
oversees how the section 4d account would be invested. But the
CFTC currently does not receive reports to let us know what
individual FCMs are investing customer money in, what
permissible investments under rule 1.25.
Mr. Neugebauer. And I think you also mentioned that you
really didn't have any knowledge that this entity was having
financial problems up until the day of the bankruptcy. Is that
correct?
Ms. Sommers. The daily segregation reports did not indicate
that for us.
Mr. Neugebauer. But, one of the things that we were
promised in Dodd-Frank that there was going to be tremendous
amount of interagency coordination, and so obviously this
entity has other regulators--SEC, FINRA. They were concerned
about the condition of this company earlier in the year. Were
they not relaying that to you?
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that we were made aware
of the increased capital charges on MF Global through their
focus report.
Mr. Neugebauer. Mr. Kobak, I want to go to you. I want to
stay on this rule 1.25 question because I think this is
something that will be very interesting to see how this plays
out. Do you have knowledge that the funds of customers on
behalf of those customers were being invested in foreign
sovereign debt?
Mr. Kobak. At this point, I would say we have suspicions
but we really don't have knowledge. And again we are
coordinating with regulators and with law enforcement on the
investigation. So I think I am a little limited in what I could
say. I certainly don't want to do anything that would delay or
interfere with any ongoing criminal-type investigations.
Mr. Neugebauer. And obviously the foreign sovereign debt
market has been very volatile here lately, so if I had $10,000
in MF Global and they decided to invest my $10,000 while it was
just sitting idly in my account, they had decided to invest
that on my behalf in foreign sovereign debt and that became a
losing position for me. Then that would diminish my asset value
and it would be the responsibility of MF Global to then make up
the difference of that since they had invested my cash in
something that was------
Mr. Kobak. Well, they shouldn't have done what you are
hypothesizing.
Mr. Neugebauer. But as I understand it, for liquidity
purposes they can put those monies in other areas and one of
them is foreign sovereign debt.
Mr. Kobak. Yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. So if they do that, even though they are
not doing it on their account, they are doing it basically on
my account, if there is a loss suffered because they decided to
invest that in something that turned out not to make me whole,
whose responsibility is that?
Mr. Kobak. Well, it is really management's responsibility.
Whether there is liability or not, I don't know. Then that is
something obviously we would be looking into.
Mr. Neugebauer. So obviously there are three ways my
account can be diminished. One is I make an investment and I
lose my money or somebody illegally transfers money out of my
account for other purposes or they, for liquidity purposes, the
cash management tool they used didn't make me whole. Is that
correct?
Mr. Kobak. Potentially. It is probably not just your money
but the money in the pool for customers.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes.
Mr. Kobak. If that happened?
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes. So if the pool shrunk, then we are
all------
Mr. Kobak. Yes.
Ms. Sommers. If I could just clarify for the record that
investments in foreign sovereign debt by an FCM are only
allowable up to the amount that that customer posts a foreign
currency with the FCM as collateral. So it is to prevent the
FCM from having to take on currency risk.
Mr. Neugebauer. Okay. That is an important point. Thank
you, Ms. Sommers, for that information.
Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chairman would note to the Committee that we have a
series of votes that has begun. I would ask if the gentleman
from California, Mr. Cardoza, would like to be recognized for 5
minutes------
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman.--and then at that point we will stand at ease
until after the vote series.
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Sommers, did the CFTC coordinate with other regulators
leading up to the MF Global bankruptcy? For example, did the
CFTC consult with FINRA and the SEC when they forced MF Global
to change its capital treatment of its foreign sovereign debt
positions?
Ms. Sommers. That would not be part of our oversight. No.
Mr. Cardoza. Okay. Well, I am looking ahead a little bit,
and in the written testimony that we have received from Mr.
Corzine, on page 11 it indicates that he had a series of
meetings in June or calls with the SEC, CFTC, and FINRA, and
perhaps other regulators, and it goes on to talk about August
15 when he met with the SEC to question FINRA's requirements
that they increase their capital requirement. And then it talks
further about on September 1 that MF Global was still not happy
with the fact that they were going to have to increase their
net capital, and yet they filed the required documents with
FINRA. During that time, the Federal Government, the different
agencies involved in this, you weren't coordinating at all?
Ms. Sommers. The increased capital on the broker-dealer
side would be something that we would receive notice of from
the BD/FCM. So we were made aware of that issue by MF Global in
a report that they are required to file with us monthly.
Mr. Cardoza. Earlier in your testimony, you indicated that
you really didn't know about this until a few days before, all
of a sudden everything unraveled. Yet there were reports that
indicated there were some problems going on here.
Ms. Sommers. They were required to post more capital on the
BD side, and they did. So although they reported being
undercapitalized for July, because of the increase in their
capital required by FINRA, they did post that capital. So, for
instance, we may then look at the house proprietary trades of
MF Global on our side to look at the risk exposure that they
have to look at what kind of collateral they are holding.
Mr. Cardoza. Did you look at any of those things?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cardoza. Okay. And did you find any shortfalls when you
took those views of their accounts?
Ms. Sommers. No, sir.
Mr. Cardoza. Our financial system has traceability
protocols. When money is transferred from account A to account
B, we can trace that, correct?
Ms. Sommers. I am not familiar with--I assume that that is
true I guess I should say.
Mr. Cardoza. Okay. My point is at this time does anyone in
your agency--can you tell us why we can't find the money that
is supposed to be in MF Global's segregated accounts?
Ms. Sommers. As I stated earlier, I think that we can't
overemphasize the complexity of the books and records of MF
Global. The amount of accounts and transactions are enormous.
Mr. Cardoza. I understand, but frankly, either we have to
be able as regulators to do that or we have to throw up red
flags and say that these things are too complex and we are
going to have to do a better job. Because ultimately, we are
put in place to protect the public interest, and if we lose
confidence in these markets, it is going to affect our entire
economy, not just the people who lose the money in a one-time
trade. Others won't want to go in and invest.
Ms. Sommers. I don't want to suggest that we are not making
progress. Certainly, we are making enormous amounts of progress
every day, and there is no doubt that we at the end of the day
will know where all of these transactions were from beginning
to end. That is our job.
Mr. Cardoza. How many companies would you say are engaging
in transactions that are too complex for us to understand on a
daily basis?
Ms. Sommers. I also do not think that they are engaged in
transactions that are too complex for us to understand. It is
just tracing the amount of different accounts and the
transactions from one place to the other.
Mr. Cardoza. Will your agency be coming forward with
protocols that will change and make easier our ability to trace
and understand on a more timely basis?
Ms. Sommers. I think that there is no doubt after this is
over and at the end of the day when we know exactly what
happened that there are going to be ``lessons learned.'' There
will be policy changes that we will want to come to this
Committee with for your consideration.
Mr. Cardoza. I would suggest that is a good idea. Thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair would note to the Members that we are in the
first of a series of four votes. When we return, Mr. Conaway
will be next, followed by Mr. Scott.
The Committee stands in recess until the conclusion of
these votes. Please promptly return.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
to examine the MF Global bankruptcy will come back to order.
The chair will now recognize the gentleman from Texas for 5
minutes, Mr. Conaway.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And,
Ms. Sommers and Mr. Kobak, thank you for being here.
In the risk of not asking questions I am going to ask over
and over and over, Ms. Sommers, when you get these daily
reports if you see the daily reports with respect to the
segregated accounts, you never expect to get one that shows a
breach of the segregation. Is that the norm?
Ms. Sommers. We do not normally get daily segregation
reports from an FCM.
Mr. Conaway. But if you got daily ones, you would normally
see them to be clear that the segregated funds are there and
the------
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
Mr. Conaway. And you are relying on the integrity of
management and the employees of the FCM in this instance--
whichever one that they are doing--to prepare those reports
properly and for those reports to properly reflect the status
on that day?
Ms. Sommers. Right. They are required to report to us if
they are under segregation, and that has happened.
Mr. Conaway. So that is a positive that they have to do
when you get the statement. And then at the company itself,
they are relying on first the integrity of the management and
the employees there. And I assume your requirements under
Sarbanes-Oxley and others that they have control systems and
management systems in place that drive information to
management that is accurate and timely with respect to a
variety of instances but in particular with respect to this
segregated account?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
Mr. Conaway. And if that didn't happen, if the reports
don't reflect the underlying activity, then a variety of things
could have happened which we can subject to conjecture. But
suffice it to say that the segregated account had a leak of
about $1.2 billion as we currently understand that number.
Mr. Kobak, if the ratios are right, the total segregated
funds should have been in the $6 billion range?
Mr. Kobak. Somewhere between about $5.5 and $6 billion.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. So the $1.2 is a meaningful number
against the total under any circumstances?
Mr. Kobak. Yes, very.
Mr. Conaway. Even here in Congress------
Mr. Kobak. Even $600 or $700 million would be meaningful in
this situation, yes.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. So at this point the variety of
investigations will look to how that happened.
From a management control standpoint, Ms. Sommers, is a
breach of the segregated fund a meaningful breach in your
overall regulatory scheme with respect to FCMs?
Ms. Sommers. It is extremely serious and it is not
something that we typically see.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. I roll through a stop sign; that is one
thing. I do something much more severe, then that is--I am
trying to get the severity of where a breach in the segregated
account would fall under the attention that your investigators
and the folks that regulate--would they immediately talk to you
about it or somebody?
Ms. Sommers. It is one of the most serious breaches of CEA
regs.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. And then if that is the case, at a
company--now we are going to hear some testimony later on where
the witness will say, ``I was so far up the food chain that I
really didn't get involved in the details.'' But from a company
standpoint--and we have some FCMs coming later; we will ask
this question of them as well--where would that breach fall in
terms of importance that upper management should be made aware
of it?
Ms. Sommers. I am not familiar enough to be able to answer
that. I assume on the FCM side, it would be the upper
management of the FCM. But as far as a parent company, I would
not know.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Kobak, you are representing MF
Global Inc. Is that the overall parent or is that------
Mr. Kobak. No, that is the broker-dealer FCM. There was a
holding company and a number of affiliates------
Mr. Conaway. Right. What is the name of the holding
company?
Mr. Kobak. MF Global, Limited, I believe.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Is it in bankruptcy?
Mr. Kobak. It is in Chapter 11, yes.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Well, I am going to try to ask Ms.
Sommers to get her on the hook. If whoever is in charge of the
segregated funds accounting, the top person there, the person
in charge of the FCM--and this is the broker-dealer--they would
have been made aware of it.
Ms. Sommers. I wasn't sure if the CFO had to sign a daily
seg report but we could charge them with a failure to supervise
if the management at an FCM did not know.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. And then, of course, there had been a
breach and they had failed to notify you of that, that is in
and of itself a separate violation?
Ms. Sommers. That is right.
Mr. Conaway. And again, this is just for the record, in the
scale of bad things FCMs could be accused of doing, breaching
this secured accounting concept is at the top?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Scott, for 5
minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Ms. Sommers, let me just get right to what I think is a
very serious point in this. First of all, I find it very
unacceptable that Commission Chairman Gensler is not here, that
he has recused himself, that he has gone out of the country at
the very time that we are faced with the eighth largest
bankruptcy in the history of the United States on a firm that
comes under his oversight. Where $1.2 billion of our
constituents' money is missing, and where Mr. Gensler has a
very close personal relationship with Mr. Corzine where they
both worked at Goldman Sachs. Now, I am just raising this
because it raises a great deal of suspicion.
But here is the real point: the core of this entire
investigation and resolution of this investigation rests with
the application of Rule 1.25. And in that rule, it clearly
states you can't commingle any of the customers money with the
business accounts. Here we have a company and a firm, MF
Global, who goes out, over-leverages tremendously with European
sovereign debt. You all put a rule in that you passed just
Monday, but that isn't the first time you put it out. You put
this rule out in June or July of this year. Then, Mr. Corzine
calls Mr. Gensler, opposes this, and you delay that
implementation of this rule to prohibit the use of customers'
funds for sovereign debt on Monday, just 3 days ago, after the
fact.
This is a glaring, glaring example of why the American
people are rapidly losing faith in our ability here in
Washington to get our hands around this. So I think that at
some point Mr. Gensler is going to have to answer some
questions about what happened here about this, and I think that
it just raises some questions there. So I think that this is
something we have to really answer. Could you please tell me
why you delayed putting this rule into place after Mr. Corzine
contacted the CFTC?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I think just to clarify, the
investments in foreign sovereign debt or the repo to maturity
investments that have been widely reported is my understanding
are on the BD side of the broker-dealer FCM. Rule 1.25 is a
regulation that governs what are permissible investments for an
FCM to be able to use customer funds to invest in. Rule 1.25
has never allowed an FCM to take money out of a customer
segregated account, invest it, and not simultaneously put back
the exact amount into the customer's------
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Ms. Sommers, my time is pretty
short, but just my question is why the delay after you were
contacted by Mr. Corzine on an agreement to prohibit at that
point--but prior to that point, prior to Monday, it was okay to
use customers' funds for an account. But here is a company that
went down in 10 months. They moved from $1.5 billion in
sovereign debt to $6.3 billion in sovereign debt, which is the
cause of their problems. So you see the connection here and you
have a rule now to prohibit that. Here he is in this and that
decision was made to delay it until now.
Ms. Sommers. The Rule 1.25 would not govern what type of
investments a broker-dealer would be able to make with their--
whether it is their house funds, Rule 1.25 only governs
customer segregated money on the FCM side. The rule that we
passed on Monday would not prohibit a BD from making
investments out of their house account in foreign sovereign
debt.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. All right. But now, under this
rule, it is illegal; it is wrong; you cannot take a customer's
money now and apply it to foreign debt under the rule you just
passed Monday.
Ms. Sommers. The rule we passed on Monday eliminates
foreign sovereign debt as a permissible investment but allows
FCMs to petition us for exemptions.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. All right. Let me just ask you
this on the DSROs, the designated self-regulatory
organizations, do you feel that that is sufficient in the wake
of the spectacular collapse of MF Global, can this model
continue to be justified? Should not the CFTC be conducting
some of these audits themselves? And do you have the capacity
to do so?
Ms. Sommers. We do reviews of the DSROs to make sure that
the DSROs are performing those audits in an adequate manner. So
we have authority over the DSROs, and if we ever find any
deficiencies there, the DSROs are required to correct those
deficiencies.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Mr. Kobak, I just want to ask
you a really quick question. You are now nor have you ever been
an employee of MF Global?
Mr. Kobak. No.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. And you are employed by Hughes,
Hubbard, and Reed, the court-appointed bankruptcy Trustee, is
that correct?
Mr. Kobak. The Trustee is James Giddens, who is a partner
of our firm and our firm was appointed to be his counsel.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. It is my understanding though
that your firm, this firm, also has in its employ nearly 200
former MF Global staffers as part of its forensic accounting
team.
Mr. Kobak. Well, we have about 175, some in Chicago, some
in New York. They are really not part of the forensic work.
They are really more the people that understood the accounts,
were the back office people who processed trades. We have hired
them temporarily for about 3 months in order to help with the
transfer------
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Do you feel that this
complicates matters any to have the employees formerly of the
firm who were on the audit forensic team of the------
The Chairman. The gentleman's time is about to expire. The
witness may answer the question.
Mr. Kobak. Yes, they are really not on the audit forensic.
They are just really helping us do account transfers, look at
the accounts. We need people. We did the Lehman case. A lot of
the employees had been hired by Barclays that bought a lot of
the business. We didn't have people like that available to help
us understand the accounts. And I am not talking about the big
accounting transfers; I am talking about the individual
commodity claims. So that is really why we hired them.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, particularly for
coordinating this important hearing. Welcome to our witnesses.
A number of years ago in the wake of the near financial
collapse due to Wall Street's reckless behavior, I had met with
a group of Nebraskans who are members of the Chamber of
Commerce; they were bankers there. And I looked at them and I
asked, I said how many of you use synthetic collateralized debt
obligations? And they just stared at me. They didn't know what
I was talking about. And I thanked them because our financial
institutions back home didn't take advantage of liberalized
credit, didn't do things out of the lanes, stayed responsible,
lived up to their fiduciary responsibility. And so
consequently, we have not suffered some of the problems that
the rest of the country has because of this reckless behavior.
The reason I say this--and I want to quote directly from a
Thomson Reuters article that has just come out--and it is a new
term I have never heard of called ``rehypothecation.'' And I am
going to quote directly from the article. ``MF Global's
bankruptcy revelations concerning missing client money suggests
that funds were not inadvertently misplaced or gobbled up in MF
Global's dying hours but were instead appropriated as a part of
a mass Wall Street manipulation of brokerage rules that allowed
for the wholesale acquisition and sale of client funds through
rehypothecation.'' Would you explain this, please?
Mr. Kobak. I really can't explain it. I don't think that is
what our investigation has shown at this point necessarily.
Now, we are at an early stage and it may be that we will find
that there is money that went to account A and then that got
rehypothecated somewhere else.
Mr. Fortenberry. Let me read the next sentence. ``A
loophole appears to have allowed MF Global and many others to
use its own client funds to finance an enormous 6.2 billion
eurozone repo bet.''
Mr. Kobak. I think there was a repo on the securities side.
I don't think at this point we know all the details of that or
what the outcome was.
Mr. Fortenberry. But again the issue is the segregation of
client accounts and now we are learning there may be a loophole
manipulated to get around this requirement. Am I reading this
correctly?
Mr. Kobak. Yes, I think it is on the broker-dealer side,
not necessarily the commodities side. It is something that we
are looking into. It is a very complex transaction.
Mr. Fortenberry. But it still applies because it is
effectively commingling clients' funds, which is disallowed by
these rules that we are talking about.
Mr. Kobak. Well, except I think it is on the broker-dealer
side, not the commodities side. And one of the things we are
looking at is in doing some of these transactions, were
commodities, funds that should have been segregated, used? Were
securities funds that should have been segregated used
improperly? That is one of the things we are looking at.
Mr. Fortenberry. How long do you think before we will have
that answer?
Mr. Kobak. I just can't give you a definitive answer. As I
said, we have this 60 day claim period. We will know then what
the amount of the claims are, and I am hoping that in that time
frame we will have a pretty good idea of what happened.
Mr. Fortenberry. I am going to speed up some questions
because the time is limited. Who owns MF Global?
Mr. Kobak. Are you referring to the broker-dealer entity
that we are involved in or the holding company entity?
Mr. Fortenberry. MF Global. You define it.
Mr. Kobak. Well, okay. The holding company, which was our
parent company, is now in Chapter 11 and an independent Trustee
was recently appointed by the bankruptcy court. Our entity----
--
Mr. Fortenberry. So how is it structured and who owns it?
Mr. Kobak. Well, it is now under the jurisdiction of the
bankruptcy court.
Mr. Fortenberry. Well, no, I understand that, but prior to
this?
Mr. Kobak. Prior to that, it was owned--I am not exactly
sure but it was owned as any holding company would be. It had a
management. It owned a number of companies, including our
entity and a number of other affiliates.
Mr. Fortenberry. Okay. It goes to the issue of fiduciary
responsibility and to a question that the Ranking Member asked
earlier. In regards to your investigations, if you find that
funds were inappropriately commingled, will you be able to go
after the personal assets of people who violated the public
trust here?
Mr. Kobak. We would have to look carefully at what the law
says. If there is a theory, we would go after people.
Mr. Fortenberry. Can particular personnel be held liable,
accountable, their personal funds?
Mr. Kobak. I think it depends on the facts and
circumstances. That certainly is something that we would be
prepared to do if the law provides for it.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now turns to the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Kissell, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Kissell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I welcome our
witnesses here today, obviously a very important, very timely
hearing. A lot of important issues have been raised and I am
trying not to go through the same questions.
So Ms. Sommers, I want to try to look at some of the red
flags, the warnings, maybe things that were missed and kind of
understanding maybe why they were missed, what could have been
done. Did I understand you correctly that prior to just very
recently there were no red flags that would have been sent in
your direction, CFTC's direction?
Ms. Sommers. Yes, Congressman. The types of reports that we
receive, the daily segregation reports from MF Global would
show how much segregated funds should be there and how much
were there. But we don't, on a daily basis, look behind those
reports to look at bank statements. So if the FCM is reporting
that that segregated money is there, then there would be no red
flags for us.
Mr. Kissell. Now, I am just curious. If they had shown that
there had been a breach of the segregated funds, what would
have been your reaction? What would have happened next?
Ms. Sommers. If they had reported to us that there had been
a breach------
Mr. Kissell. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Sommers.--of segregation? Then, they are required to
come into compliance immediately.
Mr. Kissell. Okay. Does that happen much with corporations
or is that a very rare thing?
Ms. Sommers. It has happened in the past. I cannot tell you
how many times.
Mr. Kissell. And do they come into compliance fairly
quickly?
Ms. Sommers. Yes.
Mr. Kissell. Okay. I had read that the risk assessment
manager for MF Global had issued warnings that they were going
into dangerous territory some time ago, maybe even a year ago,
and this person was fired. Is that your understanding?
Ms. Sommers. I do not have knowledge of that.
Mr. Kissell. If that was the case and this person was
seeing the warning signs, is there any way that those warning
signs would come in your direction?
Ms. Sommers. I suppose if that risk officer would contact
us to give us some sort of tip, that could come our way.
Mr. Kissell. But internally, if somebody sees something
going wrong, unless they do make that effort, there is no
institutional way in which that information would be sent up
the chain to you guys?
Ms. Sommers. Not that I know of.
Mr. Kissell. Okay. Okay. Thank you so much for being here.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Rooney, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rooney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, caught me off guard
there for a second.
I just have some basic fact-finding-type questions for Ms.
Sommers. From what I have read, the CFTC--first of all, the
CFTC, months prior to the collapse of MF Global, had been
trying to change the rule for whether or not the type of
trading that ended up leading to the collapse of MF Global,
they were trying to reign in that type of behavior, is that
correct?
Ms. Sommers. If you are referring to Regulation 1.25, that
is not--to clarify, 1.25 only goes to permissible investments
of customer funds.
Mr. Rooney. I am just trying to get some basic information
here. The kind of trading that apparently MF Global was
involved in, this repurchase agreements that had become
somewhat commonplace, your agency was trying to reign that in.
You weren't? You weren't trying to reign in something that was
overly risky to investors?
Ms. Sommers. As I understand it, Congressman, the repo to
maturity or foreign sovereign debt investments that MF Global
was engaging in is on the BD side of that entity. The
Regulation 1.25 under our rules would not prohibit a broker-
dealer from using house funds to invest in foreign sovereign
debt or repo to maturity instruments.
Mr. Rooney. Okay. So it is of the opinion of your agency
that that kind of activity is not risky and should not be
regulated?
Ms. Sommers. It is not regulated by us.
Mr. Rooney. Is it your opinion that it should be?
Ms. Sommers. No. That is on the broker-dealer side
regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Mr. Rooney. Okay. I am just trying to, as I said, get some
background.
And the gentleman that Mr. Johnson was referring to before,
Mr. Gensler, who is recused from testifying today is your
superior, your boss so to speak?
Ms. Sommers. He is not my boss, but he is the Chairman of
the Commission.
Mr. Rooney. And Mr. Gensler used to work for Mr. Corzine at
Goldman Sachs?
Ms. Sommers. That is my understanding.
Mr. Rooney. So what I am trying to get my hands around is
that when the CFTC was trying to curb certain investment types
like these repurchasing agreements or risky behavior--I am
getting this from the New York Times article which you probably
are familiar with--months before this happened that there was
pushback from the industry not just from MF Global but from
various trading people that work in this business and that
there was pushback and that Mr. Corzine was one of the ones
that pushed back against your agency. And then you guys backed
off because of that effort. Is that correct?
Ms. Sommers. I didn't personally have any conversations
with Mr. Corzine.
Mr. Rooney. What I am just trying to get my arms around
here is: it seems like we have an agency that saw a risky
behavior and was trying to impose a rule. People like Mr.
Corzine said, hey, back off, and the fact that your boss or the
guy that is in charge of your agency used to work for Mr.
Corzine, you all did back off. And now, in retrospect--you can
correct me if I am wrong. But now, in retrospect, your agency
is trying to go back in and enforce that rule, which is too
late for the people that have lost their shirt under MF Global,
but, now in hindsight you are trying to do it again. So I am
just trying to get my arms around the players that were
involved and the timeline.
Ms. Sommers. Right. So Regulation 1.25 does not apply to
the investments that MF Global may have made on the broker-
dealer side out of their house account investing in foreign
sovereign debt. So going back and finalizing that rule does not
apply to those investments.
Mr. Rooney. So the article that I am referring to, this New
York Times article, their factual basis is incorrect?
Ms. Sommers. I am not familiar with the article.
Mr. Rooney. Okay. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Peterson. Mr. Chairman, with the Committee's
indulgence, I am going to get out on a limb here and hopefully
not cause too much trouble.
As I understand it, MF Global was not--was an FCM for
years, and what they did was they charge commissions to do
these trades and they had this segregated money and they made
money on that. But as I understand it, this business has become
increasingly competitive, and it is to the point where they
cannot make money, any of these firms, on their commissions
that they charge to do these trades. The way they are making
money is on investing the customer money. And so one of the
reasons they wanted to liberalize, as I understand it--this is
my interpretation--liberalize that is that then they could make
more money. But when they invest this money, if they put it
into a sovereign debt, they have to put treasury bonds into
that fund to cover it. So the customer is not at risk.
What happened with this FCM is they were losing money so
Mr. Corzine came in and made them a broker-dealer. Well, the
broker-dealers are not regulated by the CFTC; they are
regulated by the SEC. And so this is where the confusion is
coming in. So they got into the broker-dealer business. They
started investing in sovereign debt, and doing these repos,
adding their risk. They leveraged themselves up somewhere
between 30 and 37.5 times and this thing moved against them.
They had to come up with margins; they couldn't come up with
the margins; the firm collapsed.
So there are two different things, and what Commissioner
Sommers is trying to tell you is that the CFTC doesn't regulate
the broker-dealer side of this. I am sure some of my folks back
home that did business with MF Global forever, are--I don't
know if they weren't paying attention--but all of a sudden now
that firm became a broker-dealer, got into a much riskier
business, and jeopardized their customer accounts. That is what
happened basically.
So, you need to split this between what the CFTC can do and
what they can't.
The Chairman. And to distill it even further was money from
the futures side of the business that is regulated by CFTC used
to offset the stakes made in the securities side of the------
Mr. Peterson. Right.
The Chairman.--company regulated by a different entity, and
that transfer then is the legal question and the question of
responsibility that ultimately has to be addressed.
Mr. Peterson. And if the bottom line here as I understand
it that I have been considering requiring that this money be
put in a third party account so somebody else would hold the
money instead of the firm. But I have been told if I did that,
we would bankrupt all of these FCMs because they can't make
money just doing business on commissions.
So it is kind of like the issue with the banks on their
interbank fees. If you do this, these people are going to have
to raise their commissions and the people that do business with
them are going to have to pay more money in order to keep them
in business. So it is complicated.
The Chairman. And the Ranking Member touches on several
subjects for several more hearings.
With that, let us return to regular order.
And the next person the chair would like to recognize for 5
minutes is the gentleman from Connecticut.
Mr. Courtney. Why thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I appreciate
the colloquy actually which just took place and would just like
to reiterate also the comments the chair and the Ranking Member
made earlier regarding the Chairman, Chairman Gensler, which is
that his decision to recuse himself was in response actually
from a Member of the Senate who demanded that he recuse himself
because of allegations that somehow there was some relationship
with MF Global. You can get whiplash around this place
sometimes trying to keep up with the competing finger-pointing
that is going on right now. But I think he followed what was a
demand from this Branch of the Government to step back from
this whole question.
Going to the rulemaking process on Monday, which again you
did a nice job, Commissioner, in terms of explaining the
distinction between what the rule applied to what the hearing
is about today. Nonetheless, I mean if you look at the notice
that the Federal Register posted after you voted and it was a
unanimous vote, am I correct? You know, it stated what the sort
of legal source of that rule was, which was a statutory source
like almost all administrative regulations, which was Section
939(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act. And I realized your staff had
been working on this issue for a number of years, as you
testified earlier.
But nonetheless, the legal trigger for the process that
took place on Monday, according to your own notice that was
issued by the Commission, was 939(a) of the Dodd-Frank Act. Am
I correct?
Ms. Sommers. That was part of it. That section, as I
understand it, required us to remove all references to credit
rating agencies. So that was part of what we did in the
amendments to 1.25.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. And I ask that question because
frankly, for the last 11 months, I mean this Committee--and
Chairman Gensler has been here on a number of those hearings
and so have you--has been bitterly complaining that you are
moving too fast. And now today we get another case of whiplash
from people who are saying you move too slow. And what I would
just simply say is that--what I think we ought to do is let you
do your job and also, by the way, give you the resources that
you need so that you can do your job.
And you testified earlier again that it may be
inappropriate for the Commission to get more money before you
know what the scope of your duties are pursuant to Dodd-Frank.
But nonetheless, I mean what we just went through in terms of
the budget this year wasn't about increasing your budget. The
House reported out an appropriations to cut your budget by
about $30 million. And we are talking about a total budget that
is about $200 million. So I mean that is a huge decrease. And
again here we are today with Members of Congress complaining
that you are not doing enough when at the same time it is the
same chamber which was out to really just knock the legs out
from you in terms of having the resources to do your job.
And again this is a Committee that reported out a bill H.R.
1573 which pushed back Title VII of Dodd-Frank for 2 years in
terms of implementing any of the rules on derivatives despite
the fact that for some of us you are not moving fast enough.
You are using all deliberate speed in terms of trying to digest
tens of thousands of comments that are flooding into your
agency.
So, there are times when I just look at your agency, which
in my opinion is so important to the smooth functioning of
markets and our economy and the punching that you are subjected
to from all sides, whether it is to participate or recuse or to
defund it or not fund it.
And then we have a situation like this today when again it
is hopefully an educable moment about the value of what the
CFTC brings to our country and to our economy. And I again just
hope all of us will let you guys just proceed and do your job
and in my opinion follow the mission in a reasonable, balanced
way in terms of what the Dodd-Frank Act asks for.
And with that I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Indiana, Mr.
Stutzman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And first of all, Mr. Chairman, I would like to identify
myself with Mr. Scott and his comments earlier. You know, I
guess I just believe that for us to get the facts to everything
that has happened here, every player should be willing to step
forward and share with this Committee what they know and when
they knew it. You know, I believe the buck always stops at the
top, and in this situation I believe that Mr. Gensler should be
here as well and I believe that for us to get to the bottom of
this we could get the answers that we are looking for more
quickly. And I believe that a trip internationally today must
have been more important and I think that the timeliness of
that trip is no coincidence.
But I would like to ask Mr. Kobak. You have been working
with about 200 employees I believe from MF Global through this
liquidation. Is that correct?
Mr. Kobak. About 175.
Mr. Stutzman. About 175? How has that been working? I mean
obviously they are in a tough situation with them losing the
company that they worked for. Have you heard from them? Did
they see things happening? I mean the timeline that I see--and
I would like you to comment on that--and then also this might
be a question for the Federal Reserve Bank folks--but it looks
like according to this company, a company that had $41 billion
in assets when Mr. Corzine became the CEO in 2010, as early as
June of 2011 the FINRA started to grow concerned. But in
February of this year, MF Global was designated as a primary
dealer in February of 2011. And so there seems to be a very
short timeline here that I have a real problem with that
weren't there red flags being thrown up somewhere along the way
with as many eyes that were looking at this particular company?
And also if you could comment about the employees that are now
working with you.
Mr. Kobak. Okay. So that is a couple of questions.
Mr. Stutzman. Sorry.
Mr. Kobak. So I will take the second part first. I think it
is fair to say that our investigation in the short term has
been focusing more on what happened on the end. Is there
missing money? If there is, where do we think it went? And if
we can find out where it went, what if anything can we do about
recovering it? So those other questions, although we are
looking into them, are kind of questions for a later day.
On the first part of your question about the 175, most of
those people were systems people and things like that so I
don't think they are the ones who would know the answers to
these questions.
Mr. Stutzman. Have any of them mentioned, though, that they
had concerns earlier on?
Mr. Kobak. We have been talking to them. We have also been
talking to others. One of the first things in this case was get
an order from the bankruptcy court confirming our power to do a
very thorough and independent investigation. Some of the
holding company that I alluded to, which obviously would be one
of the groups of people we would be looking at to possibly
recover money wanted to participate in that investigation and
we filed papers and argued to the judge that we didn't think
that was at all proper. We are supposed to have independent
authority and that having some of the very people we might need
to investigate looking over our shoulder wasn't appropriate.
And the judge immediately, while he was on vacation I think,
wrote an opinion confirming our independence.
So we are talking to people, both the people we employ but
more importantly other people. Now, some of those people have
lawyers and might not allow us to talk to them. We also are
trying to coordinate our investigation with the U.S. Attorney's
offices, so in some cases we may need to hold off talking to a
witness until they have done their job.
Mr. Stutzman. Okay. Real quick, I have a question for
Commissioner Sommers. In reviewing daily segregation reports,
were there any signs that anything was awry? If so when? And
also, could MF Global, without commingling, use the buying
power with segregated funds in purchasing sovereign debt?
Ms. Sommers. So the last part of that question if you could
repeat, could they------
Mr. Stutzman. Without commingling funds, could you use the
segregated, sacred, funds to use to buy sovereign debt?
Ms. Sommers. So typically an FCM in purchasing foreign
sovereign debt would be purchasing the amount of foreign
sovereign debt that a customer would have posted to them as
collateral. So you could do that without commingling.
Mr. Stutzman. Okay. All right. And then also real quick,
anything awry on the daily segregation reports? Did you see
anything?
Ms. Sommers. As I stated before, although we review those
daily segregation reports, an FCM is required to report to us
if they are undercapitalized. We don't look behind them to bank
records to verify that what they have reported to us on a daily
basis is absolutely accurate.
Mr. Stutzman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The next person up will be Congressman Owens of New York,
and I would serve note to Congressman Austin Scott, you are
after that.
The gentleman from New York is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Owens. I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Your testimony here today has indicated that prior to the
weekend of the collapse of MFG that there was no indication in
the reports, nor was there any self-reporting that they were
out of compliance.
Ms. Sommers. That is correct.
Mr. Owens. That being the case, what audit techniques or
risk management techniques or procedures should be in place in
order to require that type of reporting? I think we can safely
assume based upon the facts that we know to date that this is
likely a fraud perpetrated by MFG at some level. And it seems
to me that we can't rely on the individuals in this particular
instance to self-report. Is there some technique that you are
aware of--either a computer program or other audit technique
that would require the self-reporting?
Ms. Sommers. They are already required to self-report if
they are under seg.
Mr. Owens. So we assume that they did not.
Ms. Sommers. Right.
Mr. Owens. Then is there some independent analytic tool
that you could access remotely, if you will, to determine
whether or not they have made any inappropriate use of their
customer funds?
Ms. Sommers. I think in the end when we know exactly what
happened and how it happened, it will be appropriate for us to
go back and look at every single measure that could be used to
prevent this from ever happening in the future.
Mr. Owens. And if you do discover that there are tools
available, would you be inclined to impose those requirements
on these organizations?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely. And I think in some cases if there
are changes that need to be made, we would come to this
Committee to ask for you to give us the authority.
Mr. Owens. So it is your belief, then, that this is a
serious enough issue that this type of regulation would be
appropriate?
Ms. Sommers. When we are able to look at what went wrong, I
think that absolutely that may be one of the things that we can
look to to change in the future.
Mr. Owens. Thank you very much.
I have no further questions. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia for 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I share the concerns of the other Committee Members
about the money that my constituents lost. And you know, I
think what we have to get to here is how do we work together to
stop this from ever happening again.
I guess, Ms. Sommers, one of the things I would like to get
back to is the reporting. As I understand it, it is self-
reporting of the segregated accounts. And I guess when I look
at the Moody's ratings and everything else, this firm was rated
investment grade less than 10 days before the bankruptcy. I
think that is an indication of how complex these issues are and
how hard it is to just unwind everything that is on the books
of some of these firms like this.
But getting back to the reporting, if we audited those on
an unannounced basis, spot-checking if you will, do you believe
that that would have been enough of a deterrent to stop this?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, that already happens. DSROs
certainly do spot-checks on unannounced basis right now.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Ms. Sommers. That is, in the end, what they are responsible
for.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. So obviously, then, that is
not enough to stop it from happening if we are doing it right
now and it hasn't stopped it. I will be interested as you go
through your investigation to know what mechanisms we need to
put in place to ensure that the reports that we are getting--
that your agency is getting are actually reflective of what is
going on in the firm.
Mr. Kobak, as you go into the courtroom tomorrow, what are
some of the issues that you think may arise that would prevent
the customers, the consumers from being made whole throughout
this bankruptcy process?
Mr. Kobak. Well, what we are doing tomorrow is asking the
court to give us authority to distribute another little over $2
billion, which we think would bring everybody up to around 69
or 70 percent. We have had some opposition to that motion and
there are some people that represent the creditors committee in
the holding company case--that would be the creditors of the
parent company, not even us--have opposed it on the ground that
it might be taking money away from those creditors' banks and
bond-holders------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Kobak.--in favor of commodities customers and we have
opposed that pretty vigorously, as you might imagine. We think
it kind of turns the whole statute and our whole proceeding on
its head to say that customers don't come before those people.
So we are getting oppositions like that. There are some foreign
administrators who are holding funds that are customer funds
abroad that we are not including in this motion, although I
think eventually we will probably come to some understanding
with them, and their customers can also receive funds. It is
just not right now. Their big concern was maybe we weren't
holding back money and we are holding back some money for that.
So I don't think that will be a problem.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. If I could interrupt you real
quick because I am down to a little better than a minute, but
as far as putting the customers first with regard to who gets
paid first, do you believe that the statute is clear on that or
do you think that is something that this Committee should
address?
Mr. Kobak. I am happy to have the Committee address it. I
believe it is crystal clear. I don't think, as I said, it is
just a priority------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Kobak.--the way that is used in bankruptcy. It really
says customers have exclusive rights to these funds.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, sir. And thank you,
ma'am, for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now turns to the gentleman from Texas for 5
minutes.
Mr. Cuellar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Sommers, let us talk about lessons learned.
What is it that we have not learned from the past issues that
are so novel in this case, so novel that we have to change
policy? Could you outline the lessons that you have learned
from this particular case in order to protect customers?
Ms. Sommers. Certainly. We are not used to having a
bankruptcy in the futures side that customers lose money, that
customer segregated accounts are not whole. And as I talked
about in my testimony, the past two bankruptcies, the most
recent two bankruptcies, even though there were problems with
those companies, customer segregated accounts were whole. So
those customers and their positions and the collateral
supporting those positions were transferred to healthy FCMs
with no issues for customers.
Mr. Cuellar. That is lesson number one. Give me lesson
number two.
Ms. Sommers. So we need to look forward as to how we--if
there are loopholes or if there are any parts of our regulation
that don't provide for the ultimate protection for customer
funds, those need to be changed.
Mr. Cuellar. So that is lesson number one. Give me lesson
number two. And this is not a one-term bankruptcy. I am looking
forward so we can do some preventive medicine before we get in
that situation. Give me another lesson.
Ms. Sommers. Well, it may be a little bit premature for me
to already say that I know what the lessons learned are when we
are not sure what happened.
Mr. Cuellar. Right, but you said earlier I think it was for
Mr. Cardoza you had said that there were some lessons learned
that would change policies. So I assume you do know of some
lessons learned because I mean this is not the first time. And
I know Enron and the other situations were different. I
understand but I mean every time we get into this situation,
our regulators, the first thing they say, oh, lessons learned.
So how many more situations do we need to have before we get it
right? So you said lessons learned. Is that the only one you
can give me, a post-situation, after the bankruptcy for better
protection? Can you name any other ones?
Ms. Sommers. Not at this point. And I certainly didn't mean
to suggest before that we know everything and we know what
lessons we have learned. I think this is going to be something
that will be comprehensive for us but we don't have all the
facts.
Mr. Cuellar. All right. Could you submit that to the
Chairman, the Ranking Member, the Committee any lessons
learned------
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
Mr. Cuellar.--because apparently the only thing we have
learned so far has to do with better protection of the
bankruptcy situation. Is that correct?
Ms. Sommers. Better protection------
Mr. Cuellar. That is the only one you can name right now.
Ms. Sommers. For customer funds.
Mr. Cuellar. Right, for customer funds.
This question is to Mr. Kobak. Is this basically a straight
bankruptcy? Do the bankruptcy laws apply on secured creditors?
And I assume that is where those creditors are coming in. Give
us the priority on secured creditors and where customers fall
in and what priorities do they have?
Mr. Kobak. SIPC is a special statute that incorporates
elements of the bankruptcy to the extent they are consistent
with SIPA. SIPA puts a priority on customers, on the securities
side, also says the Trustee has the same duties as a Trustee
would have if it was a straight commodities.
Mr. Cuellar. And again I wish you all the luck tomorrow for
the protection of those customers.
Mr. Kobak. Thank you.
Mr. Cuellar. So again just so we get the picture, where do
the customers fall in this particular situation?
Mr. Kobak. Customers have rights. I will talk about
commodities customers against the segregated funds. They are
the sole people that have rights against those funds. The
bondholders, the banks, and so forth may have rights against
general estate assets in some cases but nothing to do with the
fund. If there are general estate assets, it may be possible to
allocate some or all of those to make up for shortfalls in the
commodities case.
Mr. Cuellar. Mr. Kobak, again, let us assume that you are
successful tomorrow. That will get the customers up to 59, 69
percent?
Mr. Kobak. Sixty-nine to seventy percent is our best
estimate.
Mr. Cuellar. Sixty-nine. And I know this is just the
beginning of the Trustee's work and the attorneys, but do you
foresee other assets that could be out there that could make
the customers whole?
Mr. Kobak. I think there will be other distributions.
Whether customers--we sincerely hope--it is our goal; it is our
aspiration anytime we do cases like this to try to get
customers to 100 percent. I think it would be premature to say
either yes, that will be the case or no, it won't be the case.
We just don't know.
Mr. Cuellar. We wish you luck. I know bankruptcies are
always difficult and all that.
And Commissioner, again, I would appreciate if you can get
those lessons learned. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mrs. Schmidt [presiding.] Thank you. Mr. Tipton?
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Madam Chair and Ranking Member.
Commissioner Sommers, can you explain--I would just like to
make sure that I am clear--with the Regulation 1.25 that you
just approved, this is going to be able to prevent MF Global-
type companies that are under the CFTC's regulation from being
able to take those segregated funds and treasury funds and
being able to put them into foreign investments. Is that
correct?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, the way that Regulation 1.25 treats or
has treated up until Monday the investments in foreign
sovereign debt if a customer were to post a foreign currency--
----
Mr. Tipton. I am talking after Monday.
Ms. Sommers. So after Monday the regulation eliminated
foreign sovereign debt as a permissible investment but invited
petitions for exemptions to that.
Mr. Tipton. And the problem that we are really having the
challenge with right now was some investment in foreign
sovereign debt as it relates to MF Global.
Ms. Sommers. What has been reported is that there were
investments in foreign sovereign debt and the repo to maturity
instruments that were on the broker-dealer side------
Mr. Tipton. Right.
Ms. Sommers.--of MF Global, so Regulation 1.25 would not
speak to those investments.
Mr. Tipton. Even after------
Ms. Sommers. Even after.
Mr. Tipton.--the approval end of it? You know, I think some
of the comments--and I think it is worthy of some note--where
there is real concern when we are talking about lessons
learned, we do have the report that was mentioned earlier out
of the New York Times. I will just quote it. It said, ``Mr.
Corzine and other members of the firm met with the Commission
in July to discuss the proposed rule changes. Following that
meeting, the rule changes were not implemented.'' Is there a
problem to where we are seeing the Commission's judgment being
influenced not by good policy decisions but by outside
influences?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, my recollection is that there were a
number of different issues with the proposed rule last summer.
They had to do with both in-house repos, as well as the foreign
sovereign debt, as well as the concentration levels for money
market funds, and there were a number of different issues that
we were working through. I don't think it was ever the
Commission's intention to never take up the rule.
Mr. Tipton. Right, yes, because in your opening statement
you had--I think I quoted you correctly here--that it was ``the
long-held view of the Commission to be able to get this Rule
1.25 through.'' But the concern seems to be after Mr. Corzine's
meeting, it stopped.
Ms. Sommers. The rule was already in place so the long-held
view of the Commission was that standards that are------
Mr. Tipton. But you just attested the rule on Monday.
Ms. Sommers. We made amendments to Regulation 1.25 that has
been in effect for many, many years.
Mr. Tipton. I would like to follow up a little bit because
I am disturbed as some of my colleagues are that Chairman
Gensler has recused himself. He is recusing himself from the
enforcement matters related to MF Global and any matter
directly related. Does this preclude him from being able to
answer questions regarding events that led up to the bankruptcy
and the normal operations of the CFTC?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, I don't think I am in a position to tell
Mr. Gensler what he should and should not answer questions with
regard to. His recusal is his personal decision.
Mr. Tipton. In your opinion, since it is obviously an
important issue, is this recusal impacting CFTC's ability to be
able to address this issue?
Ms. Sommers. I believe that we have dozens of capable
professional staff that have been working on this issue since
day 1 and are doing an excellent job.
Mr. Tipton. I am out of time. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Commissioner.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you.
Mr. Costa, you are next.
Mr. Costa. Thank you, Madam Chair and both to our chair and
Ranking Member for holding this important hearing.
Most of my questions regarding the proceedings of the
bankruptcy, Mr. Kobak, have been asked by other Members, but
Ms. Sommers, I would like to focus my line of questioning to
you.
MF Global, eighth largest bankruptcy in American history,
do you have any idea under those of your regulatory authority
if there are other potential bankruptcies out there like this?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, I am not exactly sure if you are asking
whether or not a potential bankruptcy of a very large FCM would
be larger than the eighth largest?
Mr. Costa. I am asking, do you have a watch list? Do you
have any idea under the fragile nature of this economic
recovery that we are dealing with on, I might add, a global
basis, are there others out there that potentially might fall
in this category and would you know if in fact there were?
Ms. Sommers. What we have the ability to see is the FCM or
the futures side of the business. So what we are looking at on
a daily basis are the investments of an FCM both in their
customer accounts and if there are house or proprietary
investments of those firms.
Mr. Costa. Okay. That is the process. Do you have a watch
list?
Ms. Sommers. I am sure that there are firms that may be
close to the margins of what collateral they have------
Mr. Costa. Let me ask it in this way. Is there any concern
among you and your fellow colleagues, the regulators, that
there may be others out there that are in harm's way or, on the
other hand, that we have farmers and ranchers and dairymen
around the country in danger? That is my focus, my concern, the
agricultural futures trading industry that is so essential
toward financing both short-term and long-term, both
domestically and internationally, and I don't want to see these
future markets destroyed or the confidence in them tremendously
eroded.
Ms. Sommers. I understand.
Mr. Costa. And so again my question, can you actually
perform the duties as a regulator, as a watchdog?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely. And certain economic------
Mr. Costa. But you don't know if there is a list?
Ms. Sommers. I don't think that there is a particular list
and it is certainly not a list that is shared with me on a
daily basis, but we have financial------
Mr. Costa. Would you think that is something that you ought
to be looking at?
Ms. Sommers. I don't mean to suggest we don't look at
firms. We have a financial surveillance team and that is their
job, to make sure that firms have the appropriate collateral
posted with regard to risk exposure of that firm.
Mr. Costa. Do you have the tools, and do you have the
staffing to do that job?
Ms. Sommers. We do.
Mr. Costa. Do you have 77 full-time equivalents on
oversight on all the futures commission merchants I understand
and introducing brokers and commodity cooperators, as well as
trading advisors, which are under the self-regulatory
organizations? Is that correct?
Ms. Sommers. I am not exactly sure the exact amount of
employees we have------
Mr. Costa. Well, let me ask this. Are your frontline
auditors enough to do the job?
Ms. Sommers. We are not the frontline auditor for FCMs----
--
Mr. Costa. I know------
Ms. Sommers. The DSROs do that.
Mr. Costa.--but do you believe they are?
Ms. Sommers. Do I believe that we are the frontline
auditors?
Mr. Costa. No, no, no, no, no. I am trying to get a handle
on whether or not you are able to do your job and also the FCMs
as well. And do you have a sense of this? Could you tell the
Committee?
Ms. Sommers. We are absolutely able to do our jobs. There
is no question about that. We have very capable staff that do
financial surveillance of these firms that look and review the
statements that they are required to send to us. We look at
yearly audits that they are required to send to us. We review
all of these and------
Mr. Costa. Before my time expires, we have heard the
complaints that the claim process sent to the commodity
customers is very complicated. Is there some way we can make it
less complicated?
Ms. Sommers. Not unless you limit the amount of
transactions that an FCM is able to do. I don't know how else--
----
Mr. Costa. Should a customer use in any one of our
districts an account equity in October 31 when a bankruptcy was
filed to establish a claim or should the customer use an
account equity at the close of business 4 days later when the
bulk account transfer took place? Mr. Kobak, do you want to
respond?
Mr. Kobak. I think under the CFTC rules you look to when
positions were liquidated if they were liquidated. So that
means it wouldn't necessarily be the 31st. If you just had cash
in your account, it would be the 31st. Otherwise, it might be a
later date. I know customers have problems with this concept.
It is difficult to apply. But what we are going to try to do is
get them statements to show where they were on the 31st and
then the subsequent activity. It may not be 100 percent
reliable at this point, but it is the best we have, and that
should allow people to help them because I realize people have
had questions about how to fill out------
Mr. Costa. No. And the questions continue to arise. My time
has expired but, Mr. Chairman and the Ranking Member, as we try
to determine the fault lines on this effort and what is the
proper mix, it seems to me that the potential to have another
MF Global out there is real. Notwithstanding the answers to the
questions I raised, I am not confident that you have a good
handle on whether or not you are able to provide that insight
to us as to who ought to be on a watch list so that we are not
surprised like this. I think that is an area we need to work
on.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
And observations are important. The chair would note the
next gentleman will be from Kansas followed by, Mr. Baca, from
California. The gentleman, Mr. Huelskamp, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First question
would be for Mr. Kobak. There have been news reports that
indicated in the last week of October that customers or clients
that requested the return of their funds in accounts were
mailed paper checks, the dollars were to subtract out of their
account. Then, when they went to cash in the checks at the
bank, are those treated any differently? What are we doing to
track this down? Because that to me demonstrates clear intent
at least a week before the bankruptcy to withhold funds.
Mr. Kobak. We found out about that situation. The accounts
reflected that the money went out even though the accounts
bounced, so in this third transfer, assuming the court approves
it, we are going to include them. There are approximately $57
million worth of bounced checks that we know about. I think
that is the universe, and they should all get the 69 to 70
percent of that. It was unfortunate that we couldn't include
them in the earlier transfers.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. And I daresay before going further,
producers always thought the risk they faced was in the market
rather than the firm that was handling their dollars and this
has caught a number of my constituents.
I have a question for Ms. Sommers if I might. I am looking
at the first question. What is a statement of nonparticipation
versus recusal? Is that the same thing, Ms. Sommers?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I don't know the answer to that.
Mr. Huelskamp. Well, the letter that Mr. Gensler sent out
does not mention recusal at all. It mentions nonparticipation.
Can you further describe his being a fellow Commissioner at
CFTC what exactly that is versus recusal?
Ms. Sommers. I wouldn't know the differences between the
two. I will say that the CFTC doesn't have a specific policy
dealing with recusal. We follow the Office of Government Ethics
regulations on that.
Mr. Huelskamp. I appreciate that. I appreciate the comments
of Mr. Stutzman suggesting how that would be a great question
if we could hear from Mr. Gensler at a later time. But again it
has been noted in here that Mr. Gensler was forced by a Senator
but that makes no notice of that in a statement of
nonparticipation. But again I will note that he participated in
numerous calls and interactions, activities with MF Global
after the bankruptcy. Has he indicated to you or other members
of the staff of CFTC why suddenly he decided after he had
already participated after the fact in multiple negotiations?
Ms. Sommers. He has not discussed the particulars of his
recusal with me, sir, but that is his personal decision.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you. And I wish you would share with
the other Commissioners that obviously, if you were unaware,
that looks rather suspect and reflects poorly on him as a
Chairman of the Commission to invent something such as a
statement of nonparticipation, which no one seems to know what
it is other than he has already participated.
And another question I have, on July 20, which was the 1
year anniversary and then-deadline for the Dodd-Frank
requirements, there were four conference calls and I believe
you participated in one with MF Global. And could you describe
what occurred in those conference calls?
Ms. Sommers. I don't believe I participated in a conference
call with MF Global in July.
Mr. Huelskamp. You are correct. I am sorry. That was in
December. I know there were four conference calls. I apologize.
I had the wrong date on that.
Ms. Sommers. In December of 2010 I had a meeting in my
office with MF Global.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes. Was Jon Corzine in on that meeting?
Ms. Sommers. He was.
Mr. Huelskamp. And were there notes kept of this particular
meeting?
Ms. Sommers. Perhaps. I don't recall whether I took notes.
It was approximately a 15 minute meeting.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes. I might ask if you would provide those
to the Committee.
[The information referred to is located on p. 155.]
Is it normal that a meeting such as this there may not be
notes taken and no one outside the room will know what occurred
inside this------
Ms. Sommers. My staff was in the meeting with me. Mr.
Corzine had staff with him as well, but if no real substantive
issues were discussed, it is not uncommon to have a meeting
where there are no notes taken.
Mr. Huelskamp. Well, it indicated to discuss segregation
and bankruptcy with MF Global on 12/21 of 2010, I would think
that would be a particularly important subject as we continue
here.
But one other item as far as Mr. Gensler's meetings with
Mr. Corzine, which one did occur on July 20. Do we have notes
of what they discussed? And I think this is very strange. I was
unaware until today that Mr. Gensler actually used to work for
Mr. Corzine at Goldman Sachs and that seems very suspect,
certainly, to my constituents. So if I might have an answer to
that question.
Ms. Sommers. I can pass that on. I don't know if there
are------
Mr. Huelskamp. We do not know if there are any notes of
this closed-door meeting?
Ms. Sommers. To Mr. Gensler's meeting I do not know if
there are notes.
[The information referred to is located on p. 155.]
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr. Baca, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Baca. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Commissioner Sommers and Mr. Kobak, thank you very much for
coming and testifying before us on the enforcement
investigation into the MF Global. I guess from this we have
learned a lot of valuable lessons. It is too bad that the
valuable lessons are at the expense of the consumers.
Apparently, we need a lot more oversight and accountability,
and that is why we need the Dodd-Frank Act as well. And we
can't assume that everybody is going to do the right thing to
follow the correct guidelines, policies, or procedures, and
that is what has led to some of the problems.
But let me ask you, Ms. Sommers, from your testimony it is
my understanding that MF Global is different than the previous
FCM bankruptcy such as Lehman Brothers and Refco because the
commodity customers at MFG lost their money. In layman's terms,
can you explain to the Committee why these losses occurred for
commodity customers at MFG but not at Lehman Brothers or at
Refco?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, in both of the previous, most recent,
bankruptcies, Lehman Brothers and Refco, the customer accounts
were whole or fully intact meaning that all the positions and
supporting collateral for those positions were in the section
4d segregated accounts. So when the FCM went into bankruptcy
proceedings, the customers were transferred to healthy FCMs and
the customers were whole. In MF Global, that didn't happen.
Mr. Baca. Why not?
Ms. Sommers. Because the customer segregated accounts were
not whole. All the money was not there.
Mr. Baca. Should they have been?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely.
Mr. Baca. Then why not?
Ms. Sommers. The money was not there and that is part of
what our investigation--both on the enforcement side and in the
accounting or bankruptcy to look through the books and records,
we are looking at exactly what did happen to the money.
Mr. Baca. So there is probability that the money was never
there or was there?
Ms. Sommers. I think the money was there in the beginning.
The customers deposited that money with the FCM. So the money
belonging to the customers was there.
Mr. Baca. But now it is poof, gone? Okay.
Let us talk for a moment about staffing needs at CFTC.
Simply put, does CFTC have enough manpower to effectively
regulate--I say regulate all of the futures exchanges and
trades that need to be monitored in the United States?
Ms. Sommers. Sir, we do have a system where we rely on
self-regulatory organizations------
Mr. Baca. Do you have enough manpower? I am asking a
specific question.
Ms. Sommers. We do.
Mr. Baca. Okay. So that means you don't need any additional
manpower to monitor what goes on in the exchange or trades in
the United States?
Ms. Sommers. I think that there is no doubt as we implement
Dodd-Frank and are given the new authority that we were given
under that law overseeing swap dealers, major swap participants
and all the over-the-counter trades that we will be overseeing,
that there is no doubt that we will need to increase the staff
and the resources that we have at the CFTC.
Mr. Baca. Okay. Mr. Kobak, can you explain to the Committee
some of the difficulties you are facing in collecting MFG
customer funds that are now located in foreign depositories?
Mr. Kobak. Yes, there is a separate pool of property under
different CFTC regulations for that property. Virtually all of
the property that was held or should have been held for those
accounts at MFGI is held in foreign locations. Those are
affiliates of the business that are in bankruptcy or other
kinds of insolvency proceedings themselves. So they are now
held by foreign administrators. We have been contacting those
administrators and seeking to get both an accounting of what
they have and also to talk to them about getting the funds
back. But experience tells me that it may be a longer process
to do that than it is domestically.
Mr. Baca. Are there any steps that we in Congress can take
or the CFTC can take to help facilitate the return of the
customers' funds? And I say the customers' funds because that
is what we are dealing with. And the American people are tired
of their funds being spent somewhere else in foreign
depositories. Are there any steps that we should be doing or
the CFTC can take?
Mr. Kobak. Well, the Trustee is taking all the steps that
he can take. Unfortunately, that might mean having to go to
litigation with people. Whether there are steps that could be
taken between regulators and different jurisdictions, that
might be helpful. I know from experience that one problem in
these cases sometimes is insolvency rules in other parts of the
world don't always work the same way they do in the United
States. And I don't know what the impact of that might be on
the administrators' decisions.
Mr. Baca. If not, then maybe we need to develop some
guidelines to make sure that this happens if they are not or
make sure that they are clear and they are followed as well.
Mr. Kobak. Yes, it would be very helpful to have
international protocols, have countries follow much more
similar rules than they do today.
Mr. Baca. Okay. Thank you. I know my time has expired.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Thompson, and Mr. Hultgren of Illinois should be standing
ready.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Commissioner
Sommers, Mr. Kobak, thank you for your testimony and thank you
for your due diligence in this ongoing investigation. I think
the findings from the investigations being completed are
obviously extremely important to us. This particular situation
to me in just simple terms poses three potential losses--the
real loss of the customer monies, and I wish you the best of
luck in being able to make these individuals whole and their
resources, their monies; second, is loss of opportunity for
proper investments where this money would be out and earning
for those individuals; and finally, a loss of confidence. I
think a loss of confidence for those in the system that we have
for trading futures and options in this country.
Commissioner, a situation like this is exactly why many
farmers are not using hedging to manage or mitigate risk and
control their costs. In terms of agricultural producers, what
can the CFTC do to help rebuild and grow confidence in this
system?
Ms. Sommers. Congressman, I think that you have certainly
hit on a very important issue because we want to make sure that
confidence is maintained in the markets that we oversee, that
the integrity and the proper functioning of those markets is
communicated to the public and to those who are using the
markets. Shortly after I took over as senior commissioner for
MF Global, working with the DSROs, I directed a spot review of
segregated funds so that we can give the public confidence that
all other clearing FCMs are in compliance with Commission
regulations and are treating customer segregated funds
properly.
Mr. Thompson. MF Global was required to file daily
segregation reports, monthly audited financial reports and
annual certified financial reports. Was there a failure on the
part of CFTC to act on and utilize these reports?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely not. If we would have seen any sort
of red flags with regard to these daily segregation reports, we
would have acted upon that. The FCM is obligated to notify us
of being undersegregated and that did not happen.
Mr. Thompson. And I know the investigation is ongoing but
it appears if there was a requirement for daily reporting, the
information at MF Global was reporting on a daily basis
obviously was failing to disclose the realities that now it
appears that we have with this loss of funds.
Ms. Sommers. The red flags were raised for us in the week
preceding the bankruptcy of MF Global. So, we had staff in MF
Global starting on the 26th of October.
Mr. Thompson. My last question actually is for both of you.
Given that commodity accounts are settled daily, why has it
taken 5+ weeks to determine if custodial customer account
excess cash is missing? And are there any preliminary
recommendations that have been identified to correct that from
continuing in the future?
Ms. Sommers. I will certainly let Mr. Kobak answer as well,
but I think we can't overemphasize again the complexity of
these books and records, the thousands of accounts, the tens of
thousands of transactions and following each of these
transactions, the bank reports, looking through what I
understand from primary accounts reviewing 300-500 pages of
summaries from bank accounts. It is very complex.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Kobak, any comment?
Mr. Kobak. Sorry, yes. I would support it is very complex.
You also have to understand that in the early days of one of
these proceedings, one may not have perfect access to books and
records. Sometimes depositories turn off screens or don't allow
you access. Sometimes system vendors threaten to shut off their
systems. In our case, we did have some issues with the holding
company about getting access to documents that both of us had
an interest in. So in addition to the sheer complexity, they
are just the practicalities that it may be a few days before
one can actually get into all the systems and records one needs
to review.
Mr. Thompson. Okay, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair will next call upon the gentleman from Illinois
and note to Mr. Sablan he will be after that, followed by Mr.
Gibbs.
Mr. Hultgren, you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Hultgren. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I will be briefer than
that. I just have a couple questions for Mr. Kobak.
First, I wonder to what extent the U.S. Department of
Treasury is involved.
Mr. Kobak. I am not aware. I know there are some U.S.
Attorneys that are looking at things, as well as the CFTC and
the SEC and FINRA.
Mr. Hultgren. So as far as you know, you don't know
anything as far as they are tracking funds either domestically
or internationally?
Mr. Kobak. Not as far as I know.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. I wondered if all domestic exchanges or
clearinghouses that held MF Global customer money released that
money to the Trustee?
Mr. Kobak. They have or they will be doing so. And in the
first transfers, we actually used--because we hadn't gotten all
the money from U.S. depositories and a lot of it was at the
exchanges. So we actually were--especially the CME. We are
largely using their money to affect the transfers. So they have
been very good about that.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. And you said they have or they will be
so when would you expect that to be completed?
Mr. Kobak. Well, if the court approves our motion for the
next transfer, which is on for a hearing tomorrow morning, I
think it might take 2 to 4 weeks to implement. It will be a
little faster for some customers than for others.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Last question and then I will yield
back my time. Does the Trustee seek or conduct assessments of
the health of the receiving firms prior to transferring MF
Global accounts?
Mr. Kobak. Well, the way the CFTC regulations work, we have
to get a consent to the CFTC, and one of their criteria is that
the receiving broker not only agree to take the account but be
in appropriate financial condition so it wouldn't put them
under their capital requirements.
Mr. Hultgren. So there is an assessment of their health----
--
Mr. Kobak. Yes.
Mr. Hultgren.--to make sure that they could handle it?
Mr. Kobak. Yes.
Mr. Hultgren. Okay. Well, I know there is a number of other
witnesses that we want to hear from today, so I will yield back
the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair recognizes the gentleman, Mr. Sablan, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Sablan. I don't have any questions at this time.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Gibbs.
Mr. Gibbs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
panelists today.
The question I am concerned about is the integrity of the
futures market. I think it is an essential tool for our
agricultural producers and hopefully Mr. Kobak will be able to
make our farmers out there whole as quickly as possible;
because I understand as a farmer when you are making margin
calls and putting cash up front, it can be detrimental to the
operation.
Along the questions on that, I assume that moving
segregated funds to their house account, per se, is illegal. Is
that correct, Commissioner?
Ms. Sommers. That is right.
Mr. Gibbs. Okay. What are the penalties for doing that? We
talk about how complex all this is and I understand the
complexity of that, so enforcement or penalties I would think
would have to be how we really monitor this or control this. So
what are the penalties under current law?
Ms. Sommers. The way the statute reads it would be $140,000
per violation or three times the monetary gain, as well as
potential restitution and other types of fines we may find
appropriate.
Mr. Gibbs. Okay. Also, when funds are moved to a third
party, okay, does that third party have any obligations to the
entity it is moving the funds from to make sure they are not
segregated funds and do they have any obligations?
Ms. Sommers. There are obligations that are from our CEA
regulations put on the banks that hold section 4d accounts.
They have to provide acknowledgement letters that they
understand that this is customer segregated money, and so there
are obligations from our regs. There may well be other
obligations from banking regulations on other banks with regard
to those kind of transfers.
Mr. Gibbs. Okay. I just want to follow up a little bit on
the Ranking Member's comments. I think he did a really good job
explaining what really happened here. There was a lot of money
that moved from margin accounts on the commodities side over to
the securities side to do their deal they were doing. When
there are funds like that moved from the commodities side of
the operations of an FCM, is there any reporting that they have
to do when it goes over to say the securities side of their
operation?
Ms. Sommers. If money is moved out of a section 4d
segregated account into a permissible investment, the exact
amount of collateral has to be put back into the customer
segregated account. It would be a violation of the Act------
Mr. Gibbs. Okay.
Ms. Sommers.--to just take that money out and use it for
your own use.
Mr. Gibbs. Okay. Thank you very much and I yield back my
time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair turns to the gentleman from Minnesota, and would
note that then the gentlelady from Ohio will follow that. Mr.
Walz is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Walz. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
your timeliness on getting on this. I know you mentioned and I
agree $1.2 billion is a lot by any standard. But I have to tell
you it is the 30,000 of my constituents that I am really
concerned about. So I know this was probably asked. I don't
want to take up any more of the time as we move on. Thank you
both for being here.
As we look at Regulations 1.20 to 1.30, you need to look at
those in entirety I understand because I am sure the two of you
are familiar with the infamous 1.29 as everybody says. Are we
interpreting that wrong? I know you have had to answer this
over and over and over again. It appears that in 1.29 that
those segregated accounts were fair game. Have you told us, Ms.
Sommers, that that is incorrect and you have to see that rule
in its entirety, not in the small piece of 1.29?
Ms. Sommers. Regulation 1.25 deals with the investment of
customer funds in permissible investments and gives a list of
what investments are permissible for an FCM to use. But an FCM
is not allowed to take customer funds out of a segregated
account to use for their own use. That has never been
permitted.
Mr. Walz. So when the next panel arrives, that is the
question we should be asking. Did those funds get removed for
use?
Ms. Sommers. For use on the house side or the securities
side, however------
Mr. Walz. Great. My final question is--and maybe, Mr.
Kobak, you can help me from a bankruptcy side on this. Are the
claims by the segregated account holders, are those superior to
all other claims?
Mr. Kobak. They have claims against that account that no
other creditors have claims against.
Mr. Walz. So if JP Morgan asked, these folks are first in
line?
Mr. Kobak. In line for those firms. First in line, they are
really the only line unless there happened to be an excess,
but, we are not dealing with an excess; we are dealing with a
deficit.
Mr. Walz. Okay. Thank you very much.
I yield back. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair will next recognize the gentlelady from Ohio and
she will be followed by the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Gibson.
The gentlelady from Ohio, Mrs. Schmidt, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Ms. Sommers, I would like to go back to something you
said a few minutes ago about a December 10 meeting with Mr.
Corzine. And while you may or may not have taken notes,
normally when somebody requests a meeting there is a purpose
for the meeting that has been documented. What was the purpose
for that meeting?
Ms. Sommers. As I recall, the issue that we spoke about on
that day was the issue of individual segregated accounts for
swaps versus individual segregation for futures accounts. We
were discussing at the time whether or not we should put swaps
in individually segregated accounts and whether or not that
structure or that framework would be appropriate for futures as
well.
Mrs. Schmidt. And what was Mr. Corzine's position and what
was yours?
Ms. Sommers. His position, as is the same position for a
lot of FCMs, is that it would be a very costly structure to
impose on the futures market.
Mrs. Schmidt. And did you have a position on that Ms.
Sommers?
Ms. Sommers. We are still looking at that issue. It is one
of the issues that we have not finalized with regard to swaps,
but the proposal that we have been discussing is only for
swaps. It is not for futures.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. To go to another part of the
question, if MF Global was not a broker-dealer and held no
securities accounts, would SIPC have been involved? Would MF
Global go through regular bankruptcy proceedings? And what
would be different from our present situation? And who would be
in charge? I know that is a couple of questions wrapped into
one, Ms. Sommers, and then, Mr. Kobak, if you want to follow.
Ms. Sommers. I am sorry. I thought you were asking him a
question about the SIPA bankruptcy. Could you repeat?
Mrs. Schmidt. Sure. If MF Global was not a broker-dealer
and held no securities accounts, would SIPC have been involved?
Would MF Global go through regular bankruptcy? What would be
different from our present situation? And who would be in
charge? If you can't answer that------
Ms. Sommers. If MF Global were an FCM only, the proceeding
would not have been a SIPC or SIPA bankruptcy liquidation.
However, the Commission CEA regulations, part 190 of our rules
do apply even in a SIPA bankruptcy. So the customers would not
be treated any differently in an FCM-only bankruptcy to my
understanding.
Mr. Kobak. Yes, and the SIPA statute says that not only
does the Trustee have duties towards security customers but he
has all the same duties and rights and so forth as the Trustee
and bankruptcy if it were just the straight commodities
liquidation.
Mrs. Schmidt. Okay. And maybe somebody has already answered
this, but at the Senate Agriculture Committee hearing last
week, Chairman Gensler said individuals who commingled customer
segregated funds with their own funds could face civil
penalties. Can you confirm that there are civil sanctions for
this behavior? Are they just monetary? Is their punitive damage
or jail time for taking a customer fund and using it for a non-
authorized purpose?
Ms. Sommers. A misuse of customer funds is a violation
under our Act and we have civil authority to impose civil
penalties for violations of our Act.
Mrs. Schmidt. Are they monetary only or------
Ms. Sommers. Monetary penalties. The criminal authorities
have the right, of course, to look into this and pursue
criminal------
Mrs. Schmidt. And would it be appropriate for you to seek
those criminal authorities to get involved or would you just
hope that they would be looking at this and get involved on
their own?
Ms. Sommers. In many cases we do referrals to criminal
authorities.
Mrs. Schmidt. And do you anticipate that action happening
here?
Ms. Sommers. It is my understanding that there are a number
of different authorities that are looking into this matter.
Mrs. Schmidt. And if you have an opportunity to weigh in,
would you be weighing in favor of criminal penalties from the
civil side or would you just take a--or can't you answer that?
Ms. Sommers. Well, I think we will pursue to every extent
of the law that we have under our authority--we will pursue
that as vigorously as we can. I can't speak to what will happen
on the criminal side.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you. I yield back my time.
The Chairman. The time has expired.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Gibson for 5 minutes. Thank
you.
Mr. Gibson. I thank the chair and I thank the panelists for
being here.
My question: with regard to the daily segregation reports,
is it a requirement to report on the weekend?
Ms. Sommers. The daily segregation reports are required to
be kept by FCMs. MF Global provided the CFTC with daily
segregation reports because we required them. It is not
required of all FCMs.
Mr. Gibson. And the last report that you are aware of was
on Friday, the 28th?
Ms. Sommers. Right. Although I guess I should clarify. Our
staff went into MF Global on October 26, that Wednesday, and
hasn't left yet. So we didn't leave on Friday night and come
back on Monday. We were there Saturday and Sunday.
Mr. Gibson. So where I am heading with this is we have a
report on Friday, the 28th. We have a written statement today
from the former CEO who says he was stunned the funds were not
there. Any early indication that had there been a report over
the weekend we may have captured some important information?
Ms. Sommers. The way I understand this would work, the end-
of-the-day reports from Friday would normally be filed on
Monday, but if there were examiners in a firm on Saturday and
Sunday, they could be getting end-of-day Friday reports earlier
than what they normally would get them.
Mr. Gibson. So in other words, there is the process where
it allows for if there is movement over a weekend, you can
capture that?
Ms. Sommers. If there are examiners in an FCM, they could
ask to be looking at those books and records over the weekend.
Mr. Gibson. Okay. And from the vantage point now of my
farmers, from customers, and certainly we have had testimony
here this morning, talked about when you moved the funds even
if it is in something permissible there is collateral that goes
into the account, do you think it is reasonable that a farmer
would expect some kind of disclosure if an FCM is moving their
money?
Ms. Sommers. Absolutely. And I think a customer of an FCM
should be able to ask that FCM what they invest customer money
in so the customer would know.
Mr. Gibson. Any thought--it is certainly early in the
process, but have you had any discussions about that, about how
things might need to change to provide that?
Ms. Sommers. We have had a lot of discussion internally
about those types of requirements, and I think as we get
towards the end, knowing from the investigation exactly what
happened, we will be able to put a comprehensive list of
lessons learned together.
Mr. Gibson. Well, I thank you for that. And I will be
watching for that very keenly.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Alabama who
will be followed by the gentlelady from North Carolina, Mrs.
Roby is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Roby. I am having a hard time putting my eyes on you.
Thank you both for being here today.
And just real briefly, Commissioner, you said that very
emphatically when you were asked by Mr. Costa about whether or
not you have the ability to do your job, you said very
emphatically, yes, I have the ability to do my job. So I just
want to ask a real easy question. Is what we are here today
about with all of the really particular nuances surrounding it,
is this about whether or not our current laws are appropriate
or they are strong enough protections in place as it is right
now, or is this just really about one or more individuals' poor
decision-making ability?
Ms. Sommers. Well, I think certainly after we learn what
happened, we can look back and see whether or not our current
statutory authority was appropriate. But at this point, there
are adequate laws that protect customer segregated funds and
that do not permit an FCM to take customer funds and misuse
them.
Mrs. Roby. And as it relates to the self-reporting aspect,
why would one self-report their own wrongdoing?
Ms. Sommers. Well, if they are even undersegregated for a
little while and they know that it may be an issue for bank
transfers, an FMC is required to report to us if they are
undersegregated for that small amount of time. And that does
happen. FCMs do report that.
Mrs. Roby. Okay. Thanks so much.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina
for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you so much to our panel.
And Ms. Sommers, my questions are pretty much for you. I
would like to first make a comment and associate myself with
the comments that have been made today about Chairman Gensler
not being here. I think that he should be here. I know it has
been discussed that there was someone from the Senate who
compelled him to not be here, but this is the House of
Representatives and he has been here on a number of occasions
on behalf of the CFTC, and I think he should have been here as
well.
And I applaud you for coming and taking part, Ms. Sommers.
I just want to clarify something that you had said and
maybe I misunderstood. In some of the questions you had said if
we are able to move forward on our investigation, is there
something standing in the way of the CFTC?
Ms. Sommers. No, and I am sorry if I said that. I misspoke.
It is not if; it is when.
Mrs. Ellmers. Okay. So it is a necessary progression.
Also, getting back to the red flags and not seeing red
flags go up and whatnot, I am just going over some of the
dates. On September 1, MF Global announced in a public filing
that it would comply with the FINRA determination to increase
its capital. Was this considered a red flag by the CFTC?
Ms. Sommers. That was something that we were made aware of
by a previous filing in August by MF Global to us, but because
they were required to post more capital and they did, it was
not necessarily a red flag to us. At that point, we would then
look at that firm for the FCM side of the business, the futures
side of the business and make sure that we were reviewing the
risk associated with their futures positions and making sure
that they had enough collateral to support their business on
the futures side. And at that time they did.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back. All Members have
had an opportunity to question.
The chair wishes to thank this panel for their insights and
their participation today. And you are dismissed.
I would like to welcome our second panel witness to the
table, the Hon. Jon Corzine, former CEO, MF Global,
Incorporated, New York, New York.
Mr. Corzine, would you please stand for administering of
the oath, which will be administered to the rest of the
witnesses in this hearing. Please raise your right hand. Please
state your name for the record.
Mr. Corzine. My name is Jon Stevens Corzine.
The Chairman. Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you
are about to give before this Committee in the matters under
consideration on this day, December 8, 2011, is the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth so help you God?
Mr. Corzine. I do.
The Chairman. I thank you. Please be seated, Mr. Corzine.
Do you know you have the right to counsel?
Mr. Corzine. Yes, I do, sir.
The Chairman. Is your counsel in the room?
Mr. Corzine. My counsel is.
The Chairman. Would you please state his name for the
record?
Mr. Corzine. Andrew Levander.
The Chairman. Thank you, Senator. Of course, I am pleased
to begin your testimony when you are ready.

TESTIMONY OF HON. JON S. CORZINE, FORMER CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, MF GLOBAL INC., NEW YORK, NY

Mr. Corzine. Thank you, Chairman.
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and distinguished
Members of the Committee, like all of you I am devastated by
the enormous impact on many people's lives resulting from the
events surrounding the MF Global bankruptcy. Of course, my
distress and sadness pale in comparison to the losses and
hardships that customers--farmers and ranchers and others--
employees and investors have suffered. Their plight weighs on
my mind every day. As the chief executive officer of MF Global
at the time of its bankruptcy, I truly apologize to all those
affected.
Before I address what happened, I must make it clear that
since my departure from MF Global on November 3 this year, I
have not had access to many of the relevant documents which are
essential to my being able to testify accurately about the
chaotic days preceding the declaration of bankruptcy. The
Members should also understand the Committee turned down my
request to testify voluntarily in January. I had hoped that by
that time I would have obtained and reviewed relevant records
so that I could be more helpful to the Committee. While I
intend to be responsive to the best of my ability today,
without adequate time and material to prepare, I may be unable
to respond to various questions Members might pose. Other
questions, given my specific role in the company, will be
questions for which I simply have no personal knowledge. I make
it very clear many of your questions may well be ones I myself
have.
When I joined the company in late March 2010, MF Global was
primary a voice-based broker that provided execution and
clearing services for products traded in derivative markets on
exchanges around the world. The firm had reported losses in
five consecutive quarters before I arrived and it had lost
money in each of the previous 3 years.
On my arrival at MF Global, management and the board,
advised by an outside consultant, devised the new business
plan. The plan was communicated to the public and provided in
substance that MF Global would evolve into a broker-dealer and
ultimately into an investment bank. The implementation of the
plan was expected to take 3 to 5 years. I was hopeful about the
prospects for the company and I invested in it personally. Much
of my compensation was in the form of options to purchase
stock, which would have value only if the company prospered. In
addition, on a number of occasions I purchased shares of the
company with my own funds. I never sold any stock.
In the summer of 2010, I met several times with Global
senior traders to discuss ways to improve the company's
revenues and profitability. One of the ideas discussed was for
MF Global to purchase short-term European sovereign debt using
repos to maturity, known as RTMs. Before I came to MF Global,
the firm had engaged in billions of dollars of RTMs with regard
to U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agencies, bonds, and
corporate debt. It had also previously held billions of dollars
of foreign sovereign debt positions.
In the summer of 2010, we decided to draw on these
experiences and to engage in RTMs involving short-term foreign
sovereign debt. In these transactions, MF Global purchased
foreign sovereign debt from a seller and sold the same to a
counterparty with an agreement to purchase the securities from
the counterparty at the maturity of the debt.
When MF Global entered into the transactions, I believed
that its investments in short-term European debt securities
were prudent investments. MF Global invested in RTMs with
respect to the debt of Belgium, Italy, Spain, Ireland, and
Portugal. The first three of these were rated AA or better when
MF Global invested in them. Even today, all three remain A
rated or better. Ireland and Portugal were lower rated but they
were largely backed by the European Financial Stability
Facility and the IMF.
I accept responsibility for the RTM trades. I strongly
advocated that trading strategy. Nevertheless, it is important
to recognize that MF Global's investment in these positions was
the subject of internal discussions with senior managers,
traders, and with MF Global's Board of Directors. The trades
were described, analyzed, and debated at multiple board
meetings. I believe that the board members, all of whom joined
the board before I joined MF Global were independent and
sophisticated. They asked hard questions and raised concerns.
The directors approved sovereign risk limits for these RTM
trades. At the time of the bankruptcy, MF Global was within
these risk limits. The RTM positions were also publicly
disclosed both in the periodic financial statements, which were
reviewed by the company's counsel and accountants, and other
public statements including press releases and earnings calls.
As of today, none of the foreign debt securities that MF
Global used to engage in RTM trades has defaulted or been
restructures. All of those securities that reached maturity
while they were a part of the RTM position paid in full.
In my written statement, I have attempted to describe the
relevant contacts with regulators during my time at MF Global.
As explained in that statement, I did not exert undue or
improper influence on regulators. My communications were
typically in the presence of various members of the regulatory
staff, as well as my own colleagues.
The late summer and fall of 2011 were extraordinarily
difficult times in financial markets for almost all market
participants. On October 17, 2011, The Wall Street Journal
published an article that described a FINRA ruling regarding
the capital treatment of RTM positions which MF Global had
disclosed on September 1, 2011. Other news stories followed. On
Monday, October 24, rating agencies began to cut MF Global's
ratings. MF Global announced its quarterly earnings on October
25. The announcement revealed that MF Global had lost $191.6
million in the quarter that ended September 30.
In light of the attention that has been given to RTMs and
the reports that attributed MF Global's loss to RTMs involving
European debt securities, it is important to note that the loss
was not, and I will repeat, not related to those positions. As
I have explained in my written statement, the lion's share of
the quarterly loss was a write-off of approximately $119.4
million that related to tax losses accumulated largely in the
years before I arrived.
Shortly following the earnings announcement and the ratings
downgrade, some clients and counterparties withdrew their
business from the firm. Others required increased margins.
Firms' stock traded at sharply higher volumes and lower prices.
Despite our best efforts to sell assets and generate liquidity,
the marketplace lost confidence in the firm.
Obviously, on the forefront of everyone's mind, including
mine, are the varying reports that customer accounts have not
been reconciled. I was stunned when I was told on Sunday,
October 30, 2011, that MF Global could not account for many
hundreds of millions of dollars of client money. I remain
deeply concerned about the impact that the unreconciled and
frozen funds have on MF Global's customers and others. I simply
do not know where the money is or why the accounts have not
been reconciled to date.
As the Chief Executive Officer of the MF Global holding
company, I ultimately had overall responsibility for the firm.
I did not, however, generally involve myself in the mechanics
of the clearing and settlement of trades or in the movement of
cash and collateral, nor was I an expert on the complicated
rules and regulations governing the various different operating
businesses that comprised MF Global. I had little expertise or
experience in those operational aspects.
In short, I do not know which accounts are unreconciled or
whether unreconciled accounts were even subject to the
segregation rules. Moreover, there were an extraordinary number
of transactions during this period, the last few days of MF
Global. And I do not know, for example, whether there were
operational errors at MF Global or elsewhere or whether banks
and counterparties have held onto funds that should rightfully
have been returned to MF Global. I am sure that the Trustee in
bankruptcy, the SIPC receiver, and the regulators are working
to answer these questions and to understand precisely what
happened during the firm's last days and hours.
As the Chief Executive Officer of MF Global, I tried to
exercise my best judgment on behalf of our clients, employees,
and shareholders. Once again, let me go back to where I
started. I mean this with sincerity. I apologize both
personally and on behalf of the company to our customers, our
employees, and our investors. I truly know they are bearing the
brunt of the impact of the firm's bankruptcy.
This concludes my prepared remarks and I am willing to
answer your questions.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Corzine follows:]

Prepared Testimony of Hon. Jon S. Corzine, Former Chief Executive
Officer, MF Global Inc., New York, NY
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson and Distinguished Members
of the Committee:

Recognizing the enormous impact on many peoples' lives resulting
from the events surrounding the MF Global bankruptcy, I appear at
today's hearing with great sadness. My sadness, of course, pales in
comparison to the losses and hardships that customers, employees and
investors have suffered as a result of MF Global's bankruptcy. Their
plight weighs on my mind every day--every hour. And, as the chief
executive officer of MF Global at the time of its bankruptcy, I
apologize to all those affected.
Before I address what happened, I must make clear that since my
departure from MF Global on November 3, 2011, I have had limited access
to many relevant documents, including internal communications and
account statements, and even my own notes, all of which are essential
to my being able to testify accurately about the chaotic, sleepless
nights preceding the declaration of bankruptcy. Furthermore, even when
I was at MF Global, my involvement in the firm's clearing, settlement
and payment mechanisms, and accounting was limited.
The Members should also understand that the Committee turned down
my request to testify voluntarily in January. I had hoped that, by that
time, I would have obtained and reviewed relevant records so that I
could be more helpful to the Committee.
As a consequence of my situation, not every fact of which I am or
may have been aware that may be relevant to your inquiry is contained
in this statement. While I intend to be responsive to the best of my
ability today, without adequate time and materials to prepare, I may be
unable to respond to various questions Members might pose. Other
questions, given my specific role in the company, will be questions for
which I simply have no personal knowledge. Many of your questions may
well be ones I myself have.
Considering the circumstances, many people in my situation would
almost certainly invoke their constitutional right to remain silent--a
fundamental right that exists for the purpose of protecting the
innocent. Nonetheless, as a former United States Senator who recognizes
the importance of Congressional oversight, and recognizing my position
as former chief executive officer in these terrible circumstances, I
believe it is appropriate that I attempt to respond to your inquiries.
My Background
I was born in 1947 and raised in the rural community of
Taylorville, Illinois. After high school graduation in 1965, I attended
the University of Illinois, from which I graduated in 1969. In the
summer of 1969, I joined the United States Marine Corps Reserve, in
which I served until 1975. In 1970, I enrolled in the University of
Chicago Business School. I took classes at night while working at a
bank during the day, and I and received my MBA in 1973.
In 1975, after working for a short time for a regional bank in
Ohio, I took a job as a bond trader at the investment banking firm
Goldman Sachs in New York. I remained at Goldman Sachs until January
1999, rising to the position of Senior Partner.
In 2000, I was elected to serve in the United States Senate
representing New Jersey. I served in the Senate until January 2006,
when I became the Governor of New Jersey. I was elected to one term as
Governor, serving from January 2006 to January 2010.
Approximately 3 months after I left the governorship, I was
recruited to become the chief executive officer of MF Global, whose
prior chief executive had resigned abruptly after serving for 17
months. Prior to being approached about this position, I had no
involvement with MF Global, and my only financial tie to it was
extremely remote--I was an investor in the private equity fund J.C.
Flowers, which had an investment in MF Global and a seat on the board
of directors. My connection to J.C. Flowers led to my introduction to
MF Global.
MF Global Before I Joined
Before I joined the company in late March 2010, MF Global was
primarily a brokerage which provided execution and clearing services
for products traded in derivative markets on exchanges around the
world. MF Global was primarily a voice-based broker, which means that
it took and placed orders largely over the telephone and had not yet
made significant use of electronic trading technology. As stated in MF
Global's annual Form 10-K filing for the fiscal year ended March 31,
2009, the company's revenues derived principally from commission fees
generated from execution and clearing services and from interest income
on cash held in customer accounts.\1\
By 2010, however, online brokerages and high-frequency traders had
begun exerting downward pressure on commissions. Interest rates were at
historic lows and were expected to remain so for an ``extended
period,'' according to Federal Reserve policy statements. As a
consequence of these developments among others, revenues were in
decline. MF Global was accordingly experiencing substantial losses. The
firm had reported losses in five consecutive quarters before I arrived,
including the final quarter of the fiscal year ended March 31, 2010
(just as I was arriving),\2\ and it had lost money in each of the
previous 3 years, including the fiscal year that ended on March 31,
2010, for which the company posted a net loss to common shareholders of
$167.7 million.\3\ (MF Global's fiscal year ran from April 1 to March
31; the fiscal year ended on March 31, 2010 was MF Global's 2010 Fiscal
Year.)
I took the job at MF Global even though the company was in a weak
financial position because it had several positive attributes such as
memberships on multiple derivative exchanges around the globe, solid
market shares on those exchanges, and an extensive set of client
relationships. I saw the possibility of taking part in the
transformation of a challenged company by restructuring existing
businesses and capturing opportunities available in the post-2008
financial environment.
Upon my arrival at MF Global, management and the board initiated a
strategic review of our business. We engaged an outside consultant, the
Boston Consulting Group, to help the firm define a business strategy
that would lead it to profitability. Management, the board of
directors, and the consultant came to the common conclusion that MF
Global had to change its business strategy and diversify its revenues.
The new business plan provided, in substance, that MF Global would
evolve into a broker-dealer, and ultimately into an investment bank,
which would provide broker, dealer, underwriting, advisory and
investment management services. The implementation of the plan was
expected to take 3 to 5 years. This new strategic plan was communicated
to the public.\4\
During my tenure as chief executive officer, MF Global made both
structural and personnel changes in an effort to implement the
strategic plan. One of the first priorities was to reduce the level of
compensation as a percentage of MF Global's revenues. The company was
paying over 60% of its revenues to its employees, and sought to reduce
this figure. Many employment contracts were restructured to increase
the amount of pay that was dependent on MF Global's performance. My own
pay was structured to include a substantial component determined by MF
Global's performance, as discussed below.
Before my tenure at MF Global, Promontory Financial Group
(``Promontory''), a prominent financial consulting firm run by Eugene
Ludwig, the former United States Comptroller of the Currency, had been
retained pursuant to a settlement with the CFTC to review and assess MF
Global's implementation of the settlement.\5\ During my tenure, we
retained Promontory to review various of MF Global's compliance
systems.
I was hopeful about the prospects for the company, and I invested
in it personally. Much of my compensation was in the form of options to
purchase stock, which would have value only if the company prospered.
When the company made a public equity offering in June 2010, I
purchased almost $2.5 million worth of stock. In 2011, I bought
approximately $500,000 more stock in the company.\6\
MF Global's Leverage
One of the recurrent themes in the media has been that MF Global
took on too much risk during my tenure, in particular the amount of
leverage that MF Global bore at the time of its bankruptcy. In fact, MF
Global reduced leverage. In the quarter ended March 31, 2010, MF
Global's leverage was 37.3. During my tenure, it was consistently
around 30.\7\
A. Description of RTMs
There has been extensive comment about a series of positions
entered into by MF Global that involved ``repurchase transactions to
maturity,'' known colloquially as ``RTMs.'' I would like to address
those here.
As relevant here, repurchase transactions (also known as ``repos'')
worked roughly as follows: MF Global would purchase a debt security
(such as sovereign debt) from a seller and would sell the same security
to another party (the ``Counterparty''), with an agreement to
repurchase the security from the Counterparty at a later date. The
agreement between MF Global and the Counterparty to sell and buy back
the debt security was the repurchase agreement, and it served, in
effect, as a loan from the Counterparty to MF Global. The Counterparty
would hold the debt security as collateral for the loan.
An RTM is a particular kind of repurchase transaction in which the
purchaser (MF Global) agrees to buy back the underlying debt security
on its maturity date.
The economic benefit of RTMs to MF Global was the difference (or
``spread'') between (a) the interest rate paid by the issuer of the
debt security to MF Global, and (b) the repurchase rate (referred to as
the ``financing rate'') paid by MF Global to the Counterparty. It is my
understanding--and I do not claim to be an accountant--that under the
applicable accounting principles, MF Global was required to recognize
its profit immediately in RTMs, and the asset (the debt security) and
the liability (the money owed to the Counterparty) must be
``derecognized,'' i.e., removed from MF Global's balance sheet. I want
to note here that I believe that accounting issues with respect to the
RTMs would have been reviewed by MF Global's internal auditors, outside
auditors (PricewaterhouseCoopers), and its audit committee.
B. Risks Related to RTMs
Financing the purchase of debt with RTMs allowed MF Global to
reduce certain kinds of risk. Because RTMs financed MF Global's
purchase of the debt security to the security's maturity, the RTMs
eliminated the risk (referred to as ``financing risk'') that at some
point during the life of the security MF Global would not be able to
find additional financing for the security, and would therefore be
forced to sell the security, potentially at a loss. Elimination of the
financing risk meant that MF Global's market risk (arising from the
fluctuation of the price of the underlying debt security) was
significantly reduced.
MF Global retained, however, the risk that the debt securities
might default or be restructured. If the debt securities defaulted or
were restructured, then MF Global would not be paid in full at their
maturity, even though MF Global would still have the obligation to buy
back the debt securities from the Counterparty in full (at par).
Also, the clearing house through which the repurchase transaction
was executed (typically, the London Clearing House, or ``LCH'') could
demand that MF Global increase its margin. It might do so for at least
two reasons: (a) if it determined that MF Global itself was not credit-
worthy, or (b) if it determined that the underlying debt security--
which was the collateral for the loan from the Counterparty to MF
Global--decreased in value. The possibility of such margin calls from
LCH meant that MF Global retained liquidity risk.\8\
To mitigate some of the risk of the RTMs, on some occasions MF
Global took short positions in the underlying debt securities or in
similar securities.\9\
C. The Decision To Engage In RTMs Involving European Sovereign Debt
Even before I joined MF Global, the firm traded European sovereign
debt securities. For instance, for the year ending March 31, 2010, the
company reported that it was carrying over $9 billion in foreign
government securities, including both foreign securities owned outright
and those sold to counterparties under repurchase agreements.\10\ The
company also reported that it had used RTM agreements to purchase some
securities, although not specifically foreign government debt.\11\
In the summer of 2010, I met with MF Global's senior traders to
discuss ways to improve the company's profitability. One of the ideas
discussed was for MF Global to purchase European sovereign debt using
RTMs. Such transactions were attractive for the reasons stated above--
the reduction of finance risk and market risk--and the spread on the
European sovereign debt securities appeared to be favorable. MF Global
could engage in RTMs with these securities much as it had already done
with other securities. Through these discussions, I became an advocate
of purchasing European sovereign debt using RTMs.
At the time that MF Global entered into the transactions, I
believed that its investments in short-term European debt securities
were prudent. MF Global invested in RTMs with respect to the debt of
Belgium, Italy, Spain, Ireland and Portugal. The first three of these--
Italy, Spain and Belgium--were rated AA or better when MF Global
invested in them. Even today, they are all at least A rated, and some
of them are AA rated.\12\ All of the sovereign debt of these three
countries that MF Global held in RTMs matured no later than December
2012. Ireland and Portugal were lower rated, but for most of the time
that MF Global held these securities they were backed by financing
offered through the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and
the IMF, which made it highly likely that Ireland and Portugal would be
able to roll over their outstanding debt before June 2013, when the
funding facility expired. All of the sovereign Irish and Portuguese
debt that MF Global held in RTMs matured no later than June 2012.
Furthermore, because the European debt instruments that MF Global
purchased did not all mature at the same time, there was an additional
level of risk mitigation. As time went on and as the instruments
matured, MF Global's risk would decrease.
D. Participants In The Decision To Engage In RTMs Involving European
Sovereign Debt
MF Global's involvement in RTMs involving European sovereign debt
securities was the subject of internal discussions with the company's
traders, senior managers, and the board of directors.
The RTM transactions were reported to the board of directors. There
were discussions at board meetings, at which the transactions were
described, analyzed and debated. Although some people complain that
boards of directors are ``rubber stamps'' for the decisions of company
management, MF Global's board was not a rubber stamp. The members of
the board of directors were independent and sophisticated, and they
asked hard questions and raised concerns about the RTMs. All of the
members had been on the board of directors before I joined MF Global.
The board met without management on some occasions, and it is my
understanding that the RTM portfolio was a topic of discussion during
at least some of those meetings.
The directors approved sovereign risk limits up to which MF Global
could invest in the RTM trades. Ultimately, the limits were specified
on a country-by-country basis. MF Global attempted to adhere to those
limits, and generally did so. On a few occasions, however, the chief
risk officer reported that the firm had exceeded its limits with
respect to a particular country. I recall, for example, one occasion on
which the limit was exceeded because the Euro gained value against the
dollar, and the risk limits were set in dollars. On the occasions on
which the firm exceeded the country limits, it nonetheless remained
within the overall limit and took appropriate steps (such as entering a
reverse-RTM or shorting the same security) to bring its level of
exposure back within the country limits. At the time of the bankruptcy,
MF Global was within the risk limits set by the board of directors.
I accept responsibility for the RTM trades that MF Global engaged
in from the time that I arrived at MF Global until my departure, on
November 3, 2011, and I strongly advocated the trading strategy that I
have described here. It is important to recognize, however, that MF
Global's involvement in RTM trades was disclosed to the board of
directors, the senior officers of the company, the company's
accountants and numerous outsiders.
E. The Public Disclosures Of The RTMs
The RTM trades were also publicly disclosed, both in the periodic
financial statements and in other public statements, including press
releases and earnings calls.
MF Global's annual filing (Form 10-K), dated May 20, 2011, for the
fiscal year ended March 31, 2011, stated that MF Global invested in the
sovereign debt of Italy, Spain, Belgium, Portugal and Ireland, and that
the final maturity for any of these securities was no later than
December 2012, which, it noted, was ``prior to the expiration of the
European Financial Stability Facility.'' \13\ The filing also reported
that ``[a]t March 31, 2011 securities . . . sold under agreements to
repurchase of $14,520,341[,000] at contract value, were de-recognized,
of which 52.6% were collateralized with European sovereign debt.'' \14\
On July 28, 2011, the company announced its results for the first
quarter of Fiscal Year 2012 (which ended on June 30, 2011), and its
disclosures about the RTMs were again extensive. Its filing (Form 10-Q)
stated that as of June 30, 2011, ``securities purchased under
agreements to repurchase of $16,548,450[,000] . . . were de-recognized,
of which 69.3% . . . were collateralized with European sovereign debt,
consisting of Italy, Spain, Belgium, Portugal and Ireland.'' \15\ The
Form 10-Q also stated that the net notional value of the Italian,
Spanish, Belgian, Irish and Portuguese sovereign debt securities that
MF Global held was $6.4 billion.\16\ In a conference call that MF
Global held on July 28 to announce its results, the RTMs collateralized
with European sovereign debt were discussed.\17\
F. The Fate Of The RTMs
As of today, none of the foreign debt securities that MF Global
used in the RTM trades has defaulted or been restructured. All of those
securities that reached maturity while they were part of the RTM
position paid in full.
Communications With Regulators
A. FINRA's Position Regarding The Capital Treatment Of The RTMs
Involving European Sovereign Debt Securities
In approximately the first week of August 2011, I recall becoming
aware that officials from FINRA were considering whether to require
that MF Global modify its capital treatment under SEC Rule 15c3-1 of
the RTMs involving European sovereign debt instruments. I believe that
FINRA officials may have raised this issue with others at MF Global
earlier than August 2011, but to the best of my recollection, I did not
focus on the issue until approximately early August. I had not met with
FINRA officials, to the best of my recollection, although I spoke
briefly at a meeting at MF Global's offices on or about June 14, 2011,
that was attended by officials from the SEC, the CFTC, FINRA and
perhaps other regulators. I believe that I spoke about RTMs at that
meeting. I believe that other members of the management of MF Global
spoke at that meeting about several topics, although I did not attend
those others members' presentations.
On or about August 15, 2011, I went with others from MF Global to
the SEC in Washington to question FINRA's interpretation of SEC Rule
15c3-1. We met with Michael Macchiaroli, the Associate Director in the
Division of Trading and Markets, and others from the SEC, and presented
our argument that the capital treatment of the RTMs involving European
sovereign debt securities should not be changed in the way that FINRA
proposed. Some days after the meeting, MF Global was apprised by FINRA
that FINRA would not change its position. I thereafter made a telephone
call to Mr. Macchiaroli who told me, in substance, that there was no
further appeal and that MF Global had to comply with FINRA's direction.
He noted, however, that other companies in similar positions had sent
letters of objection to the SEC, although he was clear that such a
letter would make no difference to FINRA's or the SEC's position.
Although MF Global disagreed with FINRA's position, the firm
promptly complied with the demand that its United States subsidiary
increase its net capital. On September 1, 2011, we made a Form 10-Q/A
public filing disclosing FINRA's ruling. It stated:

As previously disclosed, the Company is required to maintain
specific minimum levels of regulatory capital in its operating
subsidiaries that conduct its futures and securities business,
which levels its regulators monitor closely. The Company was
recently informed by the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority, or FINRA, that its regulated U.S. operating
subsidiary, MF Global Inc., is required to modify its capital
treatment of certain repurchase transactions to maturity
collateralized with European sovereign debt and thus increase
its required net capital pursuant to SEC Rule 15c3-1. MF Global
Inc. has increased its net capital and currently has net
capital sufficient to exceed both the required minimum level
and FINRA's early-warning notification level . . . .\18\
B. My Communications Regarding Proposed CFTC Rules Changes
Sometime in late 2010 or early 2011, the CFTC proposed certain
changes in 17 CFR  1.25 (``Rule 1.25''). As far as I understand,
roughly speaking, Rule 1.25 outlines the permissible investments and
uses for customer funds, as that term is defined in the CFTC Rules and
Regulations, held by a Futures Commission Merchant (``FCM'').
The proposed rule change was the topic of substantial discussion
among regulated entities, industry organizations, associations,
committees and even designated self-regulatory organizations. I
understand that there were numerous letters received by the CFTC
opposing various aspects of the proposed rule change.\19\ MF Global
submitted a letter, along with Newedge, which was one of the largest
FCMs in the United States, opposing the proposed amendments to the
rule.
The proposed rule change was also the topic of the conference call
in which I took part on July 20, 2011, in which CFTC Chairman Gary
Gensler participated. As best as I can recall, there were others from
MF Global who took part in the conference call, and the CFTC's own
records state that in addition to CFTC Chairman Gensler, four other
officials from the CFTC were on the call. According to the CFTC's
records, I was not the only representative of the industry that had
calls with members of the CFTC, including Chairman Gensler, regarding
the proposed changes.
The principal topic of discussion was whether Rule 1.25 should be
changed to prevent FCMs from engaging in repurchase transactions with
related broker-dealers. As I understood it, the then-current version of
Rule 1.25 permitted such transactions but the proposed version would
not, or would somehow limit such transactions. Consistent with the
letter that we had submitted with Newedge, I argued, in substance, that
such transactions should continue to be permitted because such
transactions could be beneficial to the FCMs.
On the same afternoon, I spoke with another CFTC Commissioner, Mr.
Bart Chilton, to discuss the same matter. Mr. Chilton, who, according
to the CFTC's records was accompanied by another CFTC official,
listened to the arguments. I was joined on the phone by the General
Counsel for MF Global.
Later, I came to understand that the CFTC deferred consideration of
the new rule.
C. Further Contacts
From the time that I joined MF Global through October 30, 2011, to
the best of my recollection, I spoke with Chairman Gensler on only
limited occasions. In addition to those contacts set forth above, I had
a meeting with him in or about May 5, 2010, and I also met with him in
or about December 2010. Those meetings were at the CFTC in Washington,
and on those occasions there were other officials from the CFTC
present.
In addition, Chairman Gensler and I had a few brief interactions at
which there was, to the best of my recollection, no private discussions
about the CFTC's regulation or oversight of MF Global. For example:

(a) He was a guest lecturer on government regulation at my class at
Princeton on or about November 22, 2010. When he spoke at
Princeton, there was another person from the CFTC present, and
we did not discuss professional matters, except in the context
of the class.

(b) I also attended a conference that was sponsored by the
investment firm of Sandler & O'Neill on or about June 9, 2011.
Chairman Gensler was there, as were others from the CFTC. I
gave a presentation about MF Global at the conference, and
Chairman Gensler gave the luncheon speech. I do not recall that
I discussed any business with Chairman Gensler other than a
question that I put to him before the full audience during a
question and answer session following his presentation. To the
best of my recollection, the question was about proposed
changes to Rule 1.25.

(c) In addition, on or about September 14, 2011, Chairman Gensler
and I attended the wedding celebration of mutual friends. On
that occasion, Chairman Gensler was not accompanied by anyone
from the CFTC, but, again, we did not discuss business or
regulatory matters so far as I recall.

On various occasions during my tenure at MF Global, I met or
communicated with others at the CFTC about a variety of issues.
During my tenure at MF Global, to the best of my recollection I
never spoke about business with Chairwoman Schapiro of the SEC, another
of our regulators, or any other SEC Commissioner. (I may have greeted
Chairwoman Schapiro at a conference.) During my tenure at MF Global, to
the best of my recollection, I never communicated with Secretary of the
Treasury, Timothy Geithner.
During my tenure at MF Global, to the best of my recollection, I
never spoke with the President of the New York Federal Reserve William
Dudley until approximately the week preceding the bankruptcy of MF
Global, other than on one occasion (on or about April 13, 2011) when he
and I attended a speech at Princeton by Chairman Bernanke of the
Federal Reserve. To the best of my recollection, Mr. Dudley and I
greeted each other on that occasion, but did not engage in substantive
conversation. During my tenure at MF Global, to the best of my
recollection, I did not speak with any governor of the Federal Reserve
other than to greet Chairman Bernanke after his presentation at
Princeton.
The Events Of October 2011
The late summer and fall of 2011 were extraordinarily difficult
times in the financial markets for almost all market participants. Like
many comparable firms, MF Global was experiencing poor earnings
principally on account of diminished revenues, and highly correlated
volatility in many markets.
On October 17, 2011, the Wall Street Journal published an article
that described the FINRA ruling that MF Global had disclosed on
September 1. Other news stories followed, and some of MF Global's
counterparties decided to reduce their exposure to the company,
requiring some adjustment in our financing. MF Global's stock began to
perform relatively poorly.
On or about October 21 and 22, 2011--in anticipation of a
disappointing earnings announcement, and concerned that the ratings
agencies would downgrade MF Global--I and several of my colleagues made
presentations to the ratings agencies to put the earnings announcement
in context. The firm customarily made presentations to the ratings
agencies shortly before the firm's quarterly earnings announcements.
On Monday, October 24, 2011, Moody's cut MF Global's rating from
Baa2 to Baa3, followed by another downgrade to Ba2, on October 27.
Fitch followed suit, cutting the company's rating from BBB to BB+. On
October 26, S&P placed MF Global on its ``credit watch negative'' list,
although it did not downgrade its rating below investment grade.
MF Global announced its quarterly earnings on October 25, 2011. The
announcement was made 2 days ahead of schedule so that the firm could
get full information to the public in light of Moody's downgrade. The
announcement revealed that MF Global had lost $191.6 million in the
quarter that ended September 30, 2011.
In light of the attention that has been given to RTMs, and the
press reports that attributed MF Global's loss to RTMs involving
European debt securities, it is important to make clear here that the
loss was not related to those positions. The lion's share of the
quarterly loss was a writeoff of approximately $119.4 million that
reflected a valuation adjustment against a deferred tax asset. That
asset had been created by years of (non-RTM) tax losses cumulated
(mostly before I arrived at MF Global) in the firm's United States and
Japanese subsidiaries, which had allowed MF Global to recognize as an
asset potential tax benefits--equal to $119.4 million--in future years.
Under applicable accounting rules, by the second quarter of MF Global's
2011 Fiscal Year (i.e., the quarter ending September 30, 2011) the firm
was no longer permitted to recognize those tax benefits as assets, and
therefore, with the advice and knowledge of its external auditor, it
recognized a loss in that amount.
In addition, approximately $16.1 million of the quarterly loss
resulted from the retirement of debt arising out of MF Global's
purchase of certain of its 9% senior notes due 2038. Another
approximately $10.0 million was for ``restructuring charges,'' which
included the closure of our Japanese securities business. The remainder
was miscellaneous matters including reserves for litigation, much of it
arising out of events before I arrived at MF Global. Approximately $18
million was operating losses (again, not related to the RTMs).
Shortly following the earnings announcement and the ratings
downgrades, some clients and counterparties withdrew their business
from the firm; others required increased margins. The firm's stock
traded at sharply higher volumes and lower prices.
During the week of October 24-28, 2011, MF Global undertook
extraordinary steps to ensure that it was able to honor customers'
requests to withdraw funds or collateral. To the best of my
recollection, during that week the firm unwound hundreds of millions of
dollars worth of RTMs, and sold the underlying sovereign debt
instruments; it also sought to draw down its revolver loans from a
consortium of banks led by J.P. Morgan. On October 27, MF Global sold,
to the best of my recollection, $1.3 billion in commercial paper
instruments for same-day settlement, and over $300 million in corporate
securities, also for same-day settlement. The next day, I believe that
MF Global sold approximately $4.5 billion in United States agency
securities. Over the course of the week, MF Global reduced the size of
its match book by, to the best of my recollection, approximately $10
billion. Despite our best efforts to sell assets and generate
liquidity, the marketplace lost confidence in the firm.
The firm was in regular contact with its regulators, including the
CFTC, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the SEC and the UK's
Financial Services Authority, and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange
(CME), the firm's designated self-regulatory organization.
The firm was also engaged in efforts to sell the FCM part of its
business. It had been contemplating, for some time prior to the week of
October 24, a strategic partnership involving the FCM business. On or
about Tuesday, October 25, the firm retained an investment bank,
Evercore, to explore selling that business. By the next day, MF Global
instructed Evercore also to explore selling the entire firm. MF Global
was in negotiations to sell the firm through the weekend of October 29-
30. The sale did not take place when it was discovered that customer
accounts could not be reconciled at that time.
The Unreconciled Accounts
Obviously on the forefront of everyone's mind--including mine--are
the varying reports that customer accounts have not been reconciled. I
was stunned when I was told on Sunday, October 30, 2011, that MF Global
could not account for many hundreds of millions of dollars of client
money. I remain deeply concerned about the impact that the unreconciled
and frozen funds have had on MF Global's customers and others.
As the chief executive officer of MF Global, I ultimately had
overall responsibility for the firm. I did not, however, generally
involve myself in the mechanics of the clearing and settlement of
trades, or in the movement of cash and collateral. Nor was I an expert
on the complicated rules and regulations governing the various
different operating businesses that comprised MF Global. I had little
expertise or experience in those operational aspects of the business.
Again, I want to emphasize that, since my resignation from MF
Global on November 3, 2011, I have not had access to the information
that I would need to understand what happened. It is extremely
difficult for me to reconstruct the events that occurred during the
chaotic days and the last hours leading up to the bankruptcy filing.
I simply do not know where the money is, or why the accounts have
not been reconciled to date. I do not know which accounts are
unreconciled or whether the unreconciled accounts were or were not
subject to the segregation rules. Moreover, there were an extraordinary
number of transactions during MF Global's last few days, and I do not
know, for example, whether there were operational errors at MF Global
or elsewhere, or whether banks and counterparties have held onto funds
that should rightfully have been returned to MF Global. I am sure that
the Trustee in bankruptcy, the SIPC receiver, and the regulators are
working to answer these questions and to understand precisely what
happened during the firm's last days and hours.
As the chief executive officer of MF Global, I tried to exercise my
best judgment on behalf of MF Global's customers, employees and
shareholders. Once again, let me go back to where I started: I
sincerely apologize, both personally and on behalf of the company, to
our customers, our employees and our investors, who are bearing the
brunt of the impact of the firm's bankruptcy.
That concludes my prepared statement. I am willing to answer the
Committee's questions.
Endnotes
1. See FY 2009 Form 10-K (for fiscal year ended March 31, 2009)
(filed on June 10, 2009), at pp. 3-4 (``Description of Business'').
2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Quarter     Profit/(Loss)                     Source
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4Q 2010    ($96.5 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Fourth
Quarter and Fiscal Year 2010 Results,''
May 20, 2010, at p. 1 (filed with Form 8-
K on May 20, 2010).
3Q 2010    ($22.3 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Third
Quarter 2010 Results,'' Feb. 4, 2010, at
p. 1 (filed with Form 8-K on Feb. 4,
2010).
2Q 2010    ($16.0 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Second
Quarter 2010 Results,'' Nov. 5, 2009, at
p. 1 (filed with Form 8-K on Nov. 5,
2009).
1Q 2010    ($32.8 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports First
Quarter 2010 Results,'' Aug. 6, 2009, at
p. 1 (filed with Form 8-K on Aug. 6,
2009).
4Q 2009   ($119.4 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Fourth
Quarter and Fiscal Year 2009 Results,''
May 21, 2009, at p. 7 (Consolidated &
Combined Statements of Operations) (filed
with Form 8-K on May 21, 2009).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Quarter     Profit/(Loss)                     Source
------------------------------------------------------------------------
FY 2010   ($167.7 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Fourth
Quarter and Fiscal Year 2010 Results,''
May 20, 2010, at p. 1 (filed with Form 8-
K on May 20, 2010).
FY 2009    ($69.2 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Fourth
Quarter and Fiscal Year 2009 Results,''
May 21, 2009, at p. 7 (Consolidated &
Combined Statements of Operations) (filed
with Form 8-K on May 21, 2009).
FY 2008    ($71.1 million)  News Release, ``MF Global Reports Record
Fourth Quarter and Fiscal Year 2008
Results,'' May 20, 2008, at p. 1 (filed
with Form 8-K on May 20, 2008).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. See, e.g., FY 2011 Form 10-K filing (for fiscal year ended March
31, 2011) (filed May 20, 2011), at p. 6 (``Growth Strategy''); id. at
15.
5. In February 2008, MF Global suffered a loss of $141.0 million,
following an unauthorized trading incident involving wheat futures
(``Dooley Trading Incident''). Criminal charges were brought against
the trader, Evan Dooley. MF Global, among other things, entered into a
settlement with the CFTC, under which the company agreed to specific
undertakings relating to risk management, including the engagement of
an independent outside consultant (Promontory). See FY 2010 Form 10-K
(for fiscal year ended Mar. 31, 2010) (filed May 28, 2010), at p. 35.
6.

My Equity Acquisitions in MF Global

------------------------------------------------------------------------
04/07/2010   Granted 2,500,000 stock options (granted as part of
my initial compensation)
06/03/2010   Bought 352,100 common shares at $7.10, in a public
offering
05/20/2011   Granted 1,600,000 stock options (granted at the time
of my contract extension)
06/09-11/2011   Bought 36,100 common shares at between $6.85 and
$6.92, on the market
08/08/2011   Bought 33,960 common shares at $5.71 and $5.91, on
the market
08/10/2011   Bought 1,000 common shares at $5.41, on the market
08/18/2011   Bought 18,800 common shares at $5.25, on the market
------------------------------------------------------------------------
I never sold any shares or options.

7. Leverage is calculated by dividing (a) the reported total
assets, by the sum of (b) total equity and (c) preferred shares. The
relevant data can be found in MF Global's consolidated balance sheets,
which are contained in the firm's quarterly (Form 10-Q) or annual (Form
10-K) financial statements.
8. These risks were described in, for example, MF Global's Form 10-
Q for the period ending June 30, 2011 (filed August 3, 2011), at p. 76:

Under the Company's repurchase agreements, including those
repurchase agreements accounted for as sales, its
counterparties may require the Company to post additional
margin at any time, as a means for securing its ability to
repurchase the underlying collateral during the term of the
repurchase agreement. Accordingly, repurchase agreements create
liquidity risk for the Company because if the value of the
collateral underlying the repurchase agreement decreases,
whether because of market conditions or because there are
issuer-specific concerns with respect to the collateral, the
Company will be required to post additional margin, which the
Company may not readily have. If the value of the collateral
were permanently impaired (for example, if the issuer of the
collateral defaults on its obligations), the Company would be
required to repurchase the collateral at the contracted-for
purchase price upon the expiration of the repurchase agreement,
causing the Company to recognize a loss. Also, margin funds
that are posted by the Company cannot be used by it for other
purposes, which may limit the Company's ability to deploy its
capital in an optimal manner or to effectively implement its
growth strategy. For information about these exposures and
forward purchase commitments, see ``-Off Balance Sheet
Arrangements and Risk'' and ``Item 3. Quantitative and
Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk-Disclosures about
Market Risk-Risk Management.''

9. See, e.g., FY 2011 Form 10-K, at p. 78 (``From time to time, and
in addition to short positions in our non-trading book, we also take
short positions in our trading book to mitigate our issuer credit risk
further.'').
10. See Notes 5 & 7 to Consolidated & Combined Financial
Statements, FY 2010 Form 10-K, at p. 112-13.
11. See id. at pp. 100, 112 (describing accounting treatment of
RTMs).
12. The current ratings are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Belgium:           AA negative (S&P)  AA+ negative      Aa1 possible
(Fitch)           downgrade
(Moody's)
Italy:             A negative (S&P)   A+ negative       A2 negative
(Fitch)           (Moody's)
Spain:             AA^ negative       (S&P) AA^         A1 negative
negative          (Moody's).
(Fitch)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
The credit ratings above were obtained from the websites of the three
major credit rating agencies on December 6, 2011. See http://
www.standardandpoors.com/ratings/en/us/; www.fitchratings.com;
www.moodys.com.

13. FY 2011 Form 10-K, at pp. 77-78; see also id. at pp. 99-100.
14. Id. at p. 100.
15. Note 3, to Consolidated & Combined Financial Statements, 1Q FY
2012 Form 10-Q, at pp. 13-14 (filed Aug. 3, 2011).
16. Id. at p. 90 (table).
17. Earnings call, ``MF Global Holdings' CEO Discusses F1Q2012
Results,'' July 28, 2011, at p. 4.
18. ``Additional Information,'' Q1 FY 2012 Form 10-Q/A, at p. 2.
19. The CFTC received over 30 comment letters related to topics
covered by the proposed changes. Many of these letters commented on the
same proposed changes on which MF Global commented. As examples, both
the CME and the Futures Industry Association (``FIA'') in conjunction
with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (``ISDA''),
Inc. challenged, among other things, the proposed amendments regarding
permissible investments and internal repurchase transactions. The
comments provided by the CME, FIA and ISDA advocated that an FCM should
be permitted to invest in certain types of foreign sovereign debt and
also advocated that FCMs should be able to engage in repurchase
transactions and reverse repurchase transactions with affiliates and to
engage in in-house transactions. Both JP Morgan Futures, Inc. and
Morgan Stanley took similar positions.

The Chairman. Thank you, Governor. And I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes.
And you have served in the role of Congressional oversight
before. You know we have an obligation to get to the facts, to
address the uncertainties in the market and address whatever
laws may need to be focused upon.
Thousands of your former customers across the country are
experiencing severe financial hardship because of the events
that occurred under your watch. Many of those customers are the
very farmers and ranchers I represent in Oklahoma and that this
Committee represents in the House of Representatives. The fact
that their property is missing is alarming and, yes,
disheartening. The fact that they have lost confidence in the
futures market may have a long permanent impact on the hedging
practices of the agricultural community.
Mr. Corzine, many of my constituents I am sure, the 3,000
or so people that used to work for you are watching today also
and they are looking for answers, too. I expect you may have
some of those answers and so I would like to ask you to answer
these questions to the best of your ability.
Mr. Corzine, is there a shortfall in the customer funds
that MF Global was legally required to keep segregated?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman, I know only what I read and it
certainly was true on the late evening of the 30th of October
that there were unreconciled accounts.
The Chairman. To the best of your knowledge based on your
time at the company before you left, why is there a shortfall?
Mr. Corzine. Well, there are, Mr. Chairman, many
transactions that occurred in those last chaotic days and I am
not aware of all those, nor do I have the information to be
able to look at those transactions. And as a consequence, it
would be very hard for me to speculate why or where that
shortfall took place.
The Chairman. Let me ask in a very precise fashion. In your
role at MF Global, did you authorize a transfer of customer
funds from these segregated accounts?
Mr. Corzine. I never intended to break any rules, whether
it dealt with the segregation rules or any of the other rules
that are applicable.
The Chairman. Are you aware of any transfers authorized or
unauthorized of funds out of customer accounts?
Mr. Corzine. I am not in a position, given the number of
transactions, to know anything specifically about the movement
of any specific funds, and I will repeat I certainly would
never intend to direct or have segregated funds moved.
The Chairman. At what point were you made aware that
customer funds were missing?
Mr. Corzine. As I said in my statement, Mr. Chairman, the
first that I heard of the many millions, hundreds of millions
missing was on Sunday night.
The Chairman. I would like to discuss how a company that
has been around for 230 years fails to the surprise of its
customers and investors, and based upon press reports and your
testimony, under your direction. MF Global's sovereign debt
position increased steadily. In fact, it has been reported that
MF Global's exposure went from $1.5 billion at the end of 2010
to $6.3 billion at the time of the bankruptcy. So let me ask
this, Governor. Who is Michael Roseman?
Mr. Corzine. Michael Roseman was the Chief Risk Officer of
the firm preceding my joining the firm and was up until the end
of 2010.
The Chairman. Explain to me what a chief risk officer does.
Mr. Corzine. A chief risk officer represents the Board of
Directors in administering the delegation of authorities that
the board assigns to the activities of the firm and looks at
market risk, credit risk, operational risk. He consults with
the board and consults with management.
The Chairman. Is it true that Mr. Roseman on multiple
occasions both directly to you and to the board expressed
concerns that MF Global was overexposed in European sovereign
debt and that the firm did not have enough capital to withstand
potential losses those positions might impose upon the firm?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Roseman certainly had a different view
about the sovereign default risk associated with euro
sovereigns and particularly in the context that we did other
business in those countries, and he expressed that to me
directly; he expressed that to the board.
The Chairman. Did any members of the MF Global Board
express concerns to you with the level of risk accumulating in
the firm's portfolio?
Mr. Corzine. There were multiple discussions, as I have
said in my testimony, most of which I think once I have access
to records will be documented in the minutes of the board
meetings about this subject. And there were people who
dissented in the debates and then sometimes supported actions
that we were taking after those debates. Sometimes there were
people who did dissent. I don't know the exact elements but
generally we arrived at a consensus.
The Chairman. Is it true, Mr. Corzine, that you threatened
to leave the firm as CEO if the board did not trust your
judgment?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman, I did not threaten the board
that I would leave. I had one specific conversation with the
lead director, which could have been interpreted that way in
the sense that I said if the board, using the powers that it
held, had lost confidence in me, I would be willing to step
down.
The Chairman. Mr. Corzine, I understand that Mr. Roseman
was no longer chief risk officer after March of this year. Were
you involved in that decision?
Mr. Corzine. My view was that we needed someone in the
chief risk officer position that was more fully attuned to the
broker-dealer side of our business than what Mr. Roseman's
background was about. And there were other issues about how
people worked with each other, not with me in particular but
within the firm, that led the board and my agreement to that
that we should change chief risk officers.
The Chairman. We have all been watching the eurozone crisis
unfold, and there has been significant uncertainty about its
resolution, yet you pushed forward with aggressive bets despite
warnings from employees and even the board it seems. What do
you know, Mr. Corzine, that we didn't? Why were you so
confident about those bets to the degree that you were willing
to bet the survival of the firm, and yes, its employees which
you were responsible for?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman--I looked at many conditions,
first of all, the ratings but they were certainly not the only
consideration, I looked at what counterparties would charge for
initial margin, you would look at how individual securities
were looked at by regulatory authorities around the globe, what
they were able to be used as collateral for, you would look at
prices in markets to determine whether people thought the
default or restructuring risk was being priced into it. So
there were many, many different considerations along with the
ongoing dialogue which after the fact clearly can be second-
guessed, that the European community was going to take a much
more--would take much more forceful steps to avoid bankruptcy
or insolvency rather in sovereigns cases and hold to full
payment of the securities.
The Chairman. In the days leading up to bankruptcy, how
often did you talk with Gary Gensler? Daily or------
Mr. Corzine. There were no private conversations in my
recollection were held between Mr. Gensler and myself. I--to
the best of my recollection and this is one of the reasons I
need records to be able to verify--Mr. Gensler was on the
general discussion with regulators on the very early hours of
October 31. And if I am not mistaken, a posting that was given
to regulators on Saturday, which I guess would have been the
29th were there were a series of regulators.
The Chairman. At any point did Mr. Gensler encourage a
bankruptcy filing?
Mr. Corzine. In my recollection, there was no encouragement
in any of those forms and I don't recall anyone suggesting that
he was encouraging bankruptcy filings.
The Chairman. Mr. Corzine, as a registered futures
commission merchant, MF Global was subject to periodic audits
both by regulators and accounting firms. What generally were
the results of those audits over the past year?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman, from my recollection------
The Chairman. As chief executive officer, you would have
reviewed those, correct?
Mr. Corzine. Some of them I would, particularly if there
were exceptions to challenges. As I included in my statement,
we certainly had discussions with FINRA in the August time
frame that I was very much aware of, further discussions with
the SEC. There were inquiries from the SEC about the treatment
of repos at different points in the year but no reporting of
significant challenges to how the firm was operating that I can
recall except with respect to the FINRA issue.
The Chairman. But when directions and suggestions were
made, as is the nature of many auditing reports, did you make
those changes?
Mr. Corzine. To my recollection of the details--and there
are many, many elements of internal outside consultants',
regulators' observation, we had people who made sure that we
were responding. We went through audit committee reviews of
those kinds of actions that were taken in response to
questions. And so I had reason to believe that we did.
The Chairman. So Mr. Corzine, how would you respond to
charges that MFG's books were a mess? And you were a supporter
of Sarbanes-Oxley, too------
Mr. Corzine. Yes.
The Chairman.--just like myself.
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that our
books and records were reflecting the chaos that occurred in
the last 2 or 3 days as the firm was under severe pressure and
had lost the confidence of the marketplace. I think that is
distinct from the books and records. I think I have reason to
believe based on at least the reporting that occurred in our
audit committees over a period of time that our books and
records weren't in a mess. But that is a question I think
others will have to opine about after they look at those in
retrospect. It is clear that in the last hours, the last days,
there were many, many, many, many more transactions than
typically occur.
The Chairman. One last question. Why did MF Global report
to FINRA in late September of 2010 that it didn't have any
position in foreign sovereign debt when it began entering into
transactions that carried European debt exposure in mid-
September 2010?
Mr. Corzine. Mr. Chairman, I believe--again, without
checking records and without the ability to be certain on
this--always open to confirming with records, I think you must
be referring to--or looking to the month-end reports that we
filed with FINRA on our capital position. And in September of
2010 it is quite possible--and again, I don't have records to
confirm this with, but it is quite possible that beginning
positions that we took in euro sovereigns were on the books of
one of our other subsidiaries not in the FINRA regulated
subsidiary.
The Chairman. My time has expired. The chair appreciates
the indulgence of the Ranking Member and the Members and turns
to the Ranking Member. If he would like to begin his questions,
we will soon have to break for a series of votes. The gentleman
is recognized.
Mr. Peterson. Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I wanted to follow up on a couple things: the one thing
that struck me, Mr. Corzine, about--or Governor or Senator, I
don't know what to call you exactly--but------
Mr. Corzine. A lot of people have bad names.
Mr. Peterson. Mr. Corzine, I don't know. Anyway, in your
testimony about the leverage, apparently when you took over the
leverage was 37.5 to 1 or something.
Mr. Corzine. Something in that neighborhood.
Mr. Peterson. And then you got it down to 30 and that
somehow or another that is a good thing. You know, this
mentality on Wall Street, about this leverage, I don't get it.
You know, and I guess maybe you have to do that in order to
make money given the circumstances, I don't know, but it just
seems pretty risky, you know.
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, if I might, 30 to 1 was a lot
higher than I would have wanted to have on a sustained basis
over a period of time. I think if you review my written
testimony, you will see that we were actively involved in
seeking a strategic partnership with the FCM. In the last days,
we actually moved to trying to sell the FCM. If that had been
accomplished and we had made progress on that, we were all very
hopeful that we would. That would have lowered our leverage
down into the mid-teens to high-teens, which was certainly the
strategic objective that we wanted to get to. The challenge--
and I listened to some of the earlier conversations--the
challenge of running MF Global as it was organized is it was
both an FCM and a broker-dealer. And those two elements posed
different kinds of constraints, but one of those is it built up
your leverage higher than would otherwise be the case in an
organization that was just one or the other.
Mr. Peterson. Well, according to your testimony, these
positions or securities you never lost any money on. None of
them ever defaulted.
Mr. Corzine. Not to this point.
Mr. Peterson. So basically what put you in trouble was when
the margin call or when the FINRA required you to put up
considerable more money------
Mr. Corzine. The FINRA capital adjustments that we took are
really different than the capital--I mean the liquidity issues.
Those were things that we had, the capital and different parts
of our overall organization that we could put into the
regulated subsidiary that FINRA looked at. And with not much
difficulty we were able to more than meet and run excess
capital positions. You are suggesting that the RTM positions
were a drag or a significant user of liquidity is true on the
clearing exchanges in Europe where sovereign RTMs were cleared.
On the other hand, the cause of MF Global's stress in its last
few days was a combination certainly of sovereign positions,
which were a concern to the marketplace. Make no mistake about
that. It was also, though, the ratings downgrades and what I
have tried to say in my oral statement, a--I think an inability
for those of us in management at MF Global to convey what the
losses were all about and often got conflated with euro
sovereign positions which there actually were no losses in.
Mr. Peterson. Well, I guess we have to go vote, Mr.
Chairman. I do have a few more questions------
The Chairman. The Committee will stand in recess and you
will be back in questions when we return.
[Recess.]
The Chairman. This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
to examine the MF Global bankruptcy will come to order.
I now recognize the Ranking Member to continue his
questions.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, your testimony indicates that on Sunday,
October the 30th, that you were informed that MF Global could
not account for client funds. Who told you this information and
when on that day did they tell you?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, to the best of my memory I was
informed someplace 10:30, 11:00 on Sunday evening. And I will
admit that I was in a group of people and I don't know exactly
whether it was the CFO or the general counsel or who exactly--
----
Mr. Peterson. Somebody from your firm?
Mr. Corzine. It was pretty stunning, however.
Mr. Peterson. Somebody from the firm, though?
Mr. Corzine. From the firm.
Mr. Peterson. Yes. So apparently I had talked to Chairman
Gensler the next morning. He said he had been woken up at 2:30
and informed of this. Do you have any idea why it took from
11:30 or 10:30 until 2:30 before he was informed? Because I
guess he was informed as soon as they knew. Do you have any
recollection of what happened there?
Mr. Corzine. To be careful with my remarks, Congressman,
there was a presumption--although the CFO to my recollection
was saying people were still working to try to reconcile the
books. They were going through records and they hadn't
established unequivocally that the money was missing but there
was a serious concern that they were not going to be able to do
that. As you probably have read, the--MF Global--I should say
the firm was working to be sold at the time and we were in the
process of doing due diligence with that prospective buyer and
that individual buyer obviously wanted this reconciliation
established as well.
Mr. Peterson. So I take it that there wasn't any kind of
explanation given to you at the time about why this happened?
Mr. Corzine. Nothing satisfactory.
Mr. Peterson. Pardon?
Mr. Corzine. Not a satisfactory explanation, although
theories and mostly unreconciled accounts that they were
attempting to go through, not unlike what I think now is being
reconstructed. But again I have to--I really should not
speculate. But that was the efforts that were being put in
place at that time.
Mr. Peterson. And so at any point during your tenure I
assume from what you have said that you were not aware of any
segregated commodity customer funds being transferred to the
broker-dealer arm or otherwise?
Mr. Corzine. I am not--again I have not reviewed records
and to be absolutely precise of whether there was some small
entry at some point, but I don't remember. As I sit here and as
I said to the Chairman, I feel comfortable there was no
intention certainly on my part to violate any of these
segregation rules.
Mr. Peterson. So in your testimony you say you have little
expertise in operational aspects of the business such as
movement of cash and collateral and rules and regulations
governing the various operating business. So who at MF Global
had that expertise? Who did you rely on for that?
Mr. Corzine. Sir, every firm would put in place control
elements, policies, procedures, hire people to give assurance
to ourselves in the first instance, to our auditors and
regulators in the filings that we would make to make sure those
were true and accurate. And at least in the experience of the
19 months--roughly 19 months that I was at the firm, certainly
after I got my feet on the ground I had confidence that people
were doing that. We went through, as I suggested to the
Chairman, audit committee reviews of the various procedures
and------
Mr. Peterson. There was not one person that------
Mr. Corzine. Well, it--ultimately, the CEO is responsible
for all aspects of------
Mr. Peterson. Well, I understand that------
Mr. Corzine. And then the CFO is responsible for the
financial aspects of the firm. And there are people in our
organizational chart that were responsible for the operations
aspects of the firm. And there are people who are responsible
for the auditing aspects of the firm, including, by the way, a
separate group to assure management or to give confidence to
management that you could comfortably sign the Sarbanes-Oxley
affirmations on quarterly financial statements.
Mr. Peterson. Well, I am sure there are different people
but who had the authority to move customer funds from
segregated accounts? Is there somebody there------
Mr. Corzine. I believe that it is a team of people in our--
----
Mr. Peterson. So there are a number of people------
Mr. Corzine. Cash financing, cash management that have that
authority. I don't think it rests with any one single
individual, although there is a CFO of our--was a CFO of our
North American operations, a CFO of European operations,
Haitian operations. That individual, again, in a normal course
of an organizational structure that would have people who
handled cash management, handled controls, and would report to
them. Ultimately, there is somebody that hits a button. I
wouldn't--probably don't to this day probably would not have
known who that person was that would send money under the
system. I--one of the reasons that I have been careful to say
that without looking at records it is very hard to try to
reconstruct from the position that I held how that all would
have worked. It is a complex process.
Mr. Peterson. Just a couple things here. Did your firm
invest customer segregated funds in sovereign foreign debt?
Mr. Corzine. To my recollection--and again all records
would verify this--the answer to that is no. The sovereign
positions were held at the broker-dealer and they were not a
part of the FCM process.
Mr. Peterson. And I don't know a lot about this business
but I am told a good part of the profitability of the FCM is in
the earnings or arbitrage on the customer accounts as opposed
to the commissions that are earned.
Mr. Corzine. I won't bore you with rehashing what is in the
oral statement, but we try to make it precise. You buy a
security that yields five percent------
Mr. Peterson. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--and we finance a security to maturity with a
payment of two percent of interest to who is financing you, and
the difference is the profitability that you would make on----
--
Mr. Peterson. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--that RTM.
Mr. Peterson. Yes, but what I was asking is is that a
bigger part of your profitability than the actual commission
business itself?
Mr. Corzine. No, the commission business is still a larger
percentage of revenue.
Mr. Peterson. Revenue but I mean are you making money on
that or where are you making money?
Mr. Corzine. The--as I--again I tried to frame some of that
history of MF Global. The FCM business is under enormous
pressure------
Mr. Peterson. Now that is what I was getting at.
Mr. Corzine.--given the legitimate competition for
commission, high-frequency trading puts enormous pressure on
it, and so commissions had declined and frankly we had not
stayed up-to-date with technology so that we were still voice-
brokering much more than technological delivery or--of
brokerage services. And probably more important than any
element in the current environment is that the extended period
of low interest rates in the United States and around the globe
had compromised what kind of spread an FCM like MF Global would
be able to earn on those balances. On an upward-sloping yield,
higher rates would have been positive for the earnings. They
weren't that--from our FCM business was--made it much, much
more difficult to be successful. Had other long-term aspects
that I spoke about in my oral--I mean in my written statement
that were attractive because of the reach and the scope of the
business and its reach and scope to clients, but it was a
business in stress.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
now recognizes the gentleman from Virginia for 5 minutes, Mr.
Goodlatte?
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And of course then
I would like to follow up with some of the questions regarding
what happened to the best of your knowledge. Can you tell us
what role you personally played in monitoring the segregation
of customer funds?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, my role would be primarily to
bring assurance to myself on an ongoing operating basis that we
had the people, the policies, the procedures in place to
maintain that segregation, which, as I had said to previous
questions, at least until those last few chaotic days, how
comfortable we had adhered to.
Mr. Goodlatte. How often were you shown data demonstrating
that customer funds were intact?
Mr. Corzine. I was aware that we had to make those
calculations daily. I didn't look at those on a daily basis.
Mr. Goodlatte. How often would you say you did look at
them?
Mr. Corzine. I wouldn't say I looked at them other than the
fact that I was assured that they were calculated every day and
submitted to the appropriate bodies.
Mr. Goodlatte. And when did you first discover that the
segregated accounts were missing funds?
Mr. Corzine. As I had answered in previous questions, the
lack of reconciliation was brought to my attention with regard
to many millions on Sunday.
Mr. Goodlatte. Which Sunday?
Mr. Corzine. The 30th. October 30.
Mr. Goodlatte. Got you. And are you aware of any instances
prior to the events immediately preceding the bankruptcy in
which there were shortfalls in consumer funds?
Mr. Corzine. I am not aware of any shortfall that had been
presented to me.
Mr. Goodlatte. Prior to learning that on the Sunday,
October 30.
Mr. Corzine. Prior to--my recollection of events.
Mr. Goodlatte. And is it possible that any such shortfalls
could have gone undetected by you or other senior management?
Mr. Corzine. I am not being flip. Apparently, there were--
----
Mr. Goodlatte. What I am trying to get at is is this
something that has been going on for a long time or did it----
--
Mr. Corzine. Yes.
Mr. Goodlatte.--suddenly happen------
Mr. Corzine. My impression, Congressman, is------
Mr. Goodlatte. Someone made a decision to raid these
accounts in order to recover for------
Mr. Corzine. My impression of it, Congressman, is is that
in the chaos of the last few hours and days either a
miscalculation or money that was expected to come in versus
transactions that occurred as I think I said in my statement.
Mr. Goodlatte. It would be a rather large miscalculation,
wouldn't it, missing $1.2 billion?
Mr. Corzine. I agree.
Mr. Goodlatte. Have customer funds at MF Global ever been
used to fund investments in its house or proprietary accounts?
Mr. Corzine. To my knowledge, customer funds, segregated
funds for futures accounts have been invested in what I would
call Rule 1.25 eligible securities or were held in depositories
for the client.
Mr. Goodlatte. And did your firm ever invest the customers'
segregated funds in foreign sovereign debt without first the
approval of the customer to make such an investment?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, any recollection I have, that did
not occur.
Mr. Goodlatte. And when you have these separate segregated
funds, I mean the money is not in a vault. You put it
someplace. What was the------
Mr. Corzine. Generally, it is invested in securities that
are allowable under the 1.25 rule or it is in depositories.
Mr. Goodlatte. But there is some question about whether
securities under the 1.25 rule could also have included foreign
sovereign debt.
Mr. Corzine. Again, I am--I don't want to claim that I am
the world's greatest expert here, but I think that that is only
available if you have foreign deposits, foreign denominated
currency.
Mr. Goodlatte. And from what you have learned since you
became aware of this in late October, is it your impression
that money was taken from those funds to invest in foreign
sovereign debt or was it used for other purposes?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I really--I don't want to
speculate and I don't have the information that would allow me
to do that. As you know, I left on November 3 and I have had no
access to books and records. And all I can do is read the same
reports that are in the public forum. And I must say that those
are confusing to me.
Mr. Goodlatte. Me, too.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Senator, I have two questions and one of them you addressed
several times already but I want to make sure I understand
clearly your answer. Commission Regulation 1.10 requires an FCM
to file monthly fiscal reports. Each report must file with an
oath or attestation and since an FCM is a corporation, it must
be signed by the CEO or the CFO. From your previous answers, I
assume the CFO was signing the monthly reports, correct?
Mr. Corzine. I presume so myself, Congressman, since I am
not aware of signing those reports.
Mr. Holden. So in your best recollection he would have been
the one signing the October 2011 report?
Mr. Corzine. To be honest, I have no recollection
whatsoever, but I know to the best of my knowledge anyway I
don't think I signed those reports.
Mr. Holden. And in your written testimony, you stated that
you wanted to voluntarily testify before this Committee in
January to give you more time to have access to the records so
you could respond to this Committee's inquiry. Since it has
been over a month since you stepped down and you have not had
access to those records, what made or makes you think you would
have access between now and the 1st of the year?
Mr. Corzine. Well, that is a good--first of all, it is a
good question, Congressman. My expectation is is that we will,
as we get farther down this path, have access. We have requests
into the Trustee of the holding company for access to my e-
mails, papers, files, things that would potentially shed light
and give me the ability to be more precise in my answers.
Mr. Holden. So actions you would take to your counsel to
try and gain records is what would make you think you would be
more helpful------
Mr. Corzine. Right.
Mr. Holden.--in the next several weeks?
Mr. Corzine. Right.
Mr. Holden. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Illinois for 5
minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
Committee.
Senator, Governor, Mr. Corzine, in my comments, sir, both
comments and questions and there is some kind of a hybrid so
you will have to consider them accordingly, I represent--and I
think the people in this room represent--a large number of
ranchers, farmers, small business people whose lives and
livelihood have been jeopardized by their investment, which has
apparently gone south. My question is do you have an estimate--
and I know you can't tell us exactly--as to how much money
collectively at this point has been lost by those investors?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, that is a question I would like
to know the answer to as much as you and I am hopeful that
there will be effective recovery and reconciliation of these
accounts.
Mr. Johnson. I would ask this further. I haven't done a net
worth analysis of individuals who have testified before this
Committee, but at least according to any accounts, you are a
person of substantial wealth and I congratulate you on your
acquisitions. My question for you on behalf of these people who
are largely small farmers, small businesses, co-ops all over
the country, assuming that they are not made whole, are you and
other executives of your company willing to stand the loss with
your personal fortunes and allow them to be compensated and
made whole?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman------
Mr. Johnson. Either yes or no, it is fairly simple.
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I don't think that this will go
unresolved.
Mr. Johnson. Assuming it does go unresolved through the
system, and it appears that there is a lot that is falling
through the cracks, are you willing to commit that you will
commit yours and the other executives' personal fortunes------
Mr. Corzine. As I am sitting here------
Mr. Johnson.--to making these people whole?
Mr. Corzine.--today I would not do that.
Mr. Johnson. My second question is Mr. Gensler has decided,
and I think appropriately so, to recuse himself on this issue
largely I think because of your relationship and I guess I
would say the whole Goldman Sachs fraternity which would
encompass a number of individuals, including foreign ministers
of several of the countries in Europe to which you invested. I
guess my question is if he did that within the last several
days and given the fact that you probably occupy in some ways a
position kind of semi-analogous to an attorney before a judge
where recusal would be appropriate, why didn't this happen a
year ago? Given your relationship and the CFTC's oversight
relationship with your company, why wasn't recusal something
that was pursued a lot earlier in the process?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I think you can expect that I
would not really speculate about the internal considerations
that Mr. Gensler or the people at the CFTC took. I hope that we
demonstrated that in the normal course------
Mr. Johnson. I am down to a minute and 45 seconds, so I
appreciate your response.
I am quoting from you several days ago when you indicated,
``as the chief executive officer of MF Global, I ultimately had
overall responsibility for the firm.'' Then you go into in the
course of a statement or subsequent statements to indicate
everybody else in the process other than you who was
responsible for this. My concern is that based on a failure to
segregate funds and/or a failure to oversee the operation of
the company and/or a technical deficiency in terms of the
overall responsibility of governing the firm, something fell
short. And at the end of the day, the Members of this Committee
and I have people that live in the real world as you do, a lot
of people who have suffered dramatically and will suffer since
they won't be able to buy seed, they won't be able to buy
equipment, they won't be able to invest for the future year,
this coming year in what they do. They have suffered
dramatically.
And while I certainly commend you in your life history, you
have been the leader of a state and represented a state with
millions of people, you have been a CEO of major corporations,
people have given you a lot of responsibility, fiduciary
capacity, and I am concerned, frankly, that those capacities
have fallen short and that a lot of individuals all over the
country and the people they represent are going to wind up
holding the bag because of what is either negligence and/or
commingling and/or abnegation of your responsibility as a
fiduciary in that capacity.
So I guess I am down to 14 seconds. I appreciate your being
here. I also appreciate your not using the veil of the 5th
Amendment to refuse to answer questions. I must say there are a
lot of unanswered questions that are going to be answered
hopefully--and I think you would agree--over the course of the
next several months so that my constituents, these individual
constituents are made whole and life can go on out in the real
world outside the beltway of this process, outside the beltway
of Wall Street where people live in an everyday world who have
to make a living. And at this point they are hurting real
badly.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Corzine. If I may, Mr. Chairman, just respond to say
that I share the sentiments that the Congressman expresses with
respect to the people who are caught in the crossfire of this.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you. And we will be anxious to see the
next few months.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr.
Boswell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Boswell. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And in the
interest of time I don't see much point in repeating so many of
the things that have been said.
I am just curious as we think about the capital investment
that people that I represent have to do to put a crop in and so
on--and you know all about that--but what would you say to
them? What would you suggest we say to them as they contemplate
on how they deal with futures, the market, hedging funds, to
use the system? What do we tell them? What lesson have we
learned?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, first of all, I would convey the
kinds of sentiments that I spoke to the previous Congressman
about at a personal level. I believe that and have the
expectation that given some of the options that I have put into
my written testimony and oral testimony and the hard work that
regulators and the Trustee know that the missing funds will be
found. That, first and foremost, is the obligation. I would
expect and legitimately so--and these kinds of hearings help
bring out some of the elements of--where exposures exist that
should be corrected when they are understood in the light of
the facts. And then hopefully that can address some of those
holes in a way that gives people greater confidence in the
markets, going forward. There is no question that futures
markets, security markets are essential for the operations of
our economy and the global economy at large.
Mr. Boswell. Well, with that I am going to yield back, Mr.
Chairman, but I would just say to Governor Corzine, I would
that as we continue to discuss this, because of your
background, that we might call on you to make a suggestion or
two beyond what you have already done. Thank you for your time.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back the balance of
time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. King,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. King. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate this
hearing and, Governor Corzine, I appreciate your testimony as
well. I listened to some of the comments here and I didn't
think I would probably say it but I did hear from Mr. Johnson
from Illinois about personal risk being part of this. And I
know this has got to weigh heavily on your conscience. It might
be a great loss to others and may not be a significant personal
loss to you, but I just ask you do you anticipate a significant
personal loss when this has all shaken out in proportion to
those who are investors who entrusted you with their money?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, first of all, the hope, my own
expectation even at these late hours are that the money will be
recovered, but no matter the anguish that individuals feel
because they are uncertain is very serious. And for that I both
apologize and I will certainly do those things that I can to
help assess--make that process------
Mr. King. I am convinced of that, but do you anticipate a
proportional personal loss?
Mr. Corzine. I think I will repeat what I said to
Congressman Johnson.
Mr. King. Then let me just go another way here and looking
at some of the reports and I think the agriculture piece of
this thing will continue to be thoroughly examined. So I look
at the investment in the bonds of Spain, Italy, Portugal,
Belgium, and Ireland, that investment that was made and that
seemed to have triggered this. And as I look at that list, that
is the list of the countries that we have had the greatest
concern about except Greece. Was there a rationale for not
trading also in speculating in the bonds of Greece as well as
the other sovereign nations that I have talked about?
Mr. Corzine. If one did a detailed credit analysis of the
underlying sovereigns, which not only people at MF Global but
other financial analysts would have contributed, Greece seemed
as a country that could potentially--with a significant
probability go through a restructuring process.
Mr. King. Substantially less solvent than the other
countries?
Mr. Corzine. A substantially higher debt to GDP, much more
unreliable statistics on which one could------
Mr. King. Well, I know that clock is ticking and I talk
faster than most of the folks in this capital, but is the
investment in the countries, was it made with the anticipation
that Greece would be bailed out?
Mr. Corzine. The investments in those five countries were
made because there was a judgment, as I said it was a judgment
challenged by people and------
Mr. King. And was part of that judgment that Greece was
likely to be bailed out by the rest of the------
Mr. Corzine. No, no. The answer is no to that.
Mr. King. Okay. Thank you. Then I would just go back to
some of the other history that sticks in my mind here. The news
reports about the investments by the State of New Jersey into
Lehman Brothers shortly before the economic situation we all
know so well in the fall of 2008, do you have an estimate or a
number on how much money was lost over that investment into
Lehman Brothers shortly before the fall if I can refer to that?
Mr. Corzine. I don't recollect the amount of loss. And as I
think------
Mr. King. Would it be in the area of $100 million?
Mr. Corzine. It may very well have been but I would suggest
that we had an investment department that was separate from the
Governor's department.
Mr. King. Okay. And then when Governor Christie alleged
that there were hundreds of millions of dollars that were
transferred in the last hours before he was sworn in as
Governor of New Jersey and that you had spoken to him and
promised him that he had a $500 million surplus going in. It
turned out to be less than that. I think you said in a news
report $2.2 billion. I think you add the $500 million to that
so that comes to around $2.7 billion of------
Mr. Corzine. I think we had------
Mr. King.--shortfall. I wanted to give you an opportunity
publicly to respond to that. I don't know that I have seen a
response in the media.
Mr. Corzine. First of all, I think my former treasurer did
respond to those numbers and there is a difference about the
timing on when one was making those judgments. And I would have
to go back and prepare myself to speak to that.
Mr. King. Would you state, though, that the current
Governor's allegations are substantially correct or incorrect?
Mr. Corzine. I don't accept the analysis exactly as he has
framed it. There was a growing shortfall, as you know, in the
winter of 2009 and 2010. The economy was falling dramatically
and revenues were falling and estimates with regard to what
revenues would be collected were off in most states.
Mr. King. And perhaps a compulsion to take risk. Thank you
very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Cardoza, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, Governor Corzine, my grandmother, an Azorean
immigrant to this country in the 1920s, who did not benefit
from our fantastic education that both you and I benefitted
from used to give me some great advice. She used to admonish me
daily when she was still alive to always do the right thing
when nobody was looking. Can you, sir, tell us today that while
you have been the head of this organization, MF Global, that
you always did the right thing when no one was looking,
followed my grandmother's advice?
Mr. Corzine. In every effort in intent in my actions were
to do the right thing.
Mr. Cardoza. When the wheels started coming off your
company, did you set up a war room to try and deal with the
financial crisis and figure out what was going on? Or did you
bring your folks around you in the corporate room? How did you
handle yourself at that point?
Mr. Corzine. There were constant meetings, including with
the board------
Mr. Cardoza. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--in the last few days.
Mr. Cardoza. That is what I suspected. That is why I asked
the question. And my next question is was there a point in time
where you got the first inkling that there was a substantial
amount of money that had disappeared, been stolen, we don't
know what happened to it. That is one of the things that
happened. At that very second that you got the first inkling
that there was substantial loss in your corporation and that
you were going to be held liable or your company was going to
have to take this tremendous hit, what was the first thing that
you thought of and did? Did you call the police? Did you run to
the bathroom and throw up? I mean to me you lose a billion or
$2 billion, that is------
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, in those late hours--and I think
I said this earlier to the other question--really was
disbelief, stunned disbelief that this could be the case when
many hundreds of millions was reported to be missing. And go
back------
Mr. Cardoza. I understand that------
Mr. Corzine.--and check your work is the first response----
--
Mr. Cardoza. I understand but I mean did you call and tell
your CFO, expletive, expletive, expletive------
Mr. Corzine. I was with the CFO.
Mr. Cardoza. You were? Where is the money? I mean what was
the first thing that you did? Do you remember?
Mr. Corzine. The first thing that followed from this
conversation was let us get the people to recheck the figures,
make sure that we have done everything we can to appropriately
confirm what you are suggesting. It wasn't--it was--it wasn't
as if all expectations had been closed. There was still a hunt.
Mr. Cardoza. I would have probably gone to the restroom and
thrown up myself, but that is--thank you for the answer.
A few years ago when I first came to Congress, I introduced
an ethics bill that said if you break the public trust as a
Member of Congress, as a member of the public society as a
police officer, anyplace that you have the public's trust and
you commit a crime in that public trust--and this came in
response to my dealings with Ken Lay from Enron in California
as State Legislator--I said you should do double the penalty.
We passed that bill in the House. It didn't get through the
Senate. But just looking back on your career in government and
in business--because I think this applies to business as well--
when you are in a position of public trust, do you agree with
me that we have a higher standard to the public? And if we
don't rebuild that public trust in our governmental and
business institutions that we are going to have a very
difficult time in this country to succeed in the future?
Mr. Corzine. I do agree with you, Congressman. And as an
elected public official, the oath of office that I have taken
deeply impacts how I try to address the efforts I fulfilled
when I served in those offices. And I believe that to tell the
truth as you know it is the responsibility of all of us and
certainly one of those issues that I believe the public is
concerned that they don't get a fair shake on today.
Mr. Cardoza. Thank you for your answer and thank you for
being here.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Neugebauer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Neugebauer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, I want to go back to some of your earlier
testimony because I think the question was asked of you: did
you authorize the transfer of funds from the segregated
accounts to other places? And the answer that you gave was no,
I did not. You said, ``I never intended to violate any rules.''
Mr. Corzine. I would repeat that in the context that there
were people who handle the transfer of funds and I am not one
of those. There are people------
Mr. Neugebauer. That wasn't the question. The question was
did you ever in the heat of the moment in those last days when
you were trying to sell this company, trying to keep this
company afloat to make the transfer, to hopefully kind of pull
the rabbit out of the hat, did you ever authorize any of your
people------
Mr. Corzine. I never intended to authorize anyone.
Mr. Neugebauer. So you never intended to but you may have?
Mr. Corzine. If it did, it was a misunderstanding because
there is no intention under any context that I can think of
that I was authorizing tapping into segregated funds.
Mr. Neugebauer. So the answer that you gave to this
question so I don't want to mischaracterize this is you gave
orders and you don't know whether you gave an order------
Mr. Corzine. No, that is not what--since I don't have
access to records or phone records or anything that I could
rely upon, I can only say I know I had no intention to ever
authorize the transfer of segregated monies.
Mr. Neugebauer. So the answer is is you don't know whether
you did or not?
Mr. Corzine. I certainly couldn't confirm based on what I
have in--available to me today, but I know what my intentions
are, yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. So earlier in the year you were granted
primary dealer status by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
is that correct?
Mr. Corzine. Yes, sir.
Mr. Neugebauer. And you were very proud of the fact that
you all were able to achieve that and there are some reports--
and again as you said there are a lot of reports out there--but
on a conference call you were exhorting the fact that you would
really be able to take the company to a new level with this
status. What was the strategy that being a primary dealer would
give you?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I don't recall framing it the way
you would suggest------
Mr. Neugebauer. Well------
Mr. Corzine.--and matter of fact, it would be in my view
inappropriate and probably would have been criticized by the
Fed if I had. Now, I often was asked a question on calls what
does it mean to have primary dealer status?
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes.
Mr. Corzine. It does mean that you have access at financing
arrangements with some clients that you might not otherwise
have. You have the ability to transact business with people
around the globe that you would not otherwise be able to
transact business with. It does give you the chance when the
Federal Reserve is executing its open market operations to do
that directly without having an intermediary to do that, which
is certainly constructive. And I would--I am not walking away
from the fact that it is better to have than not to have in the
context of how clients and others would see you.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, but there are only I think 20
companies------
Mr. Corzine. I think there are 21 today, but 20, yes.
Mr. Neugebauer. And so what would be the criteria? I mean
that is a fairly------
Mr. Corzine. I am sorry?
Mr. Neugebauer. That is a fairly prestigious designation.
What is the criteria that your company had that would have
caused the Fed to give you that status?
Mr. Corzine. Well, first of all, the Fed tests you for a
very long time to see whether you are transacting business and
treasury securities, agency securities with estimates. Are you
financing customers? Are you doing repurchase agreements,
reverse repurchase agreements for clients so they could
facilitate access at the market? I am under the impression that
they have an under--don't recall the exact number but they have
capital requirements. They review your systems and operations
with onsite reviews and other things and observe your
participation in markets.
Mr. Neugebauer. Do you think it is a little strange that a
company that had been consistently losing money, which would
indicate to me would be a company that is deteriorating would
get such a status to that?
Mr. Corzine. My own perspective on this is is that we were
at the time and it had gone on for a better part of 18 months
then demonstrating that we were participating with clients at
levels that were significantly higher than some of the other
people recognized. We had adequate capital and while--as I
indicated in my written testimony--our historical earnings
hadn't been so good, they had gotten slightly better.
Mr. Neugebauer. But two of your rating agencies, the SEC
and FINRA, had questioned whether you had adequate capital or
not.
Mr. Corzine. Those questions came well after the
designation, which I believe was early in 2010; the FINRA
challenge was in August of 2010 if I am not mistaken. And that
was with regard to their interpretation of how the capital
haircut charges were applied to euro sovereigns.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now turns to the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Mr. Corzine, welcome to the
Committee. I must say at the outset it is really at the height
of disbelief that you as a former Senator, former Governor, you
are the former head of probably the premier, most prestigious
investment banking operation in the whole world, and to sit
there and to say that under your watch as chief executive for
$1.2 billion of customers' money, you know nothing about it.
Now, the key to finding out where my constituents' money went--
I represent Georgia, a lot of farmers. They are sitting here
watching trying to figure am I going to get my money back? The
key to this is you. You are the CEO.
Now, Mr. Corzine, who at MF Global was ultimately
responsible for determining which products the company invested
in on its behalf? Now, I would think that is you as the CEO. Am
I right about that?
Mr. Corzine. Ultimately, the Board of Directors at the
recommendation of management, which I was the lead manager of,
makes those decisions. It delegated authority and then the
company operates within those authorities.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Tell me this, what did you do
at this company? Was it run by the board? Who made these
decisions? Who made the decision to go in------
Mr. Corzine. Ultimate decisions are always at a board in a
public company on the recommendation--and I take full
responsibility for the recommendations that went before that
board, not tried to say otherwise. And so those investment
decisions are ones that--particularly as it relates to the
European sovereign RTM positions--rest in my judgment.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Rests in your area. Now,
explain to me when you came in you made that decision, and when
you came in you had been in the company a relatively short
time. And when you came in, your holdings in foreign sovereign
debt was about $1.5 billion. In 11 months--that was as of
October of last year, and now October of this year, that
holding has ballooned up to $6.3 billion in foreign sovereign
debt at a time when each of these foreign companies that you
get into debt from are teetering on disaster. Was that your
decision?
Mr. Corzine. I take responsibility for that decision.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Now, let me ask------
Mr. Corzine. In my oral statement, Congressman, though, I
would--I tried to give--I mean not--in my written statement
some perspective on why I thought it was at the time that we
took those decisions somewhat different than how one might
assess it in the current environment.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Now, Mr. Corzine, did you
commingle customer funds with your proprietary funds?
Mr. Corzine. The------
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Yes or no.
Mr. Corzine. I am going to answer this question the same
way--there was never any directed intent to commingle those
funds.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. So in other words you could
have? Throughout this hearing I can count the times you used
the words ``never intent,'' ``not to my knowledge,'' ``not to
my recollection,'' ``never intended to,'' and I understand the
position that you are in. But Mr. Corzine, we have to find that
money. We have to get that $1.2 billion and get it back out to
our customers and to my clients and my farmers in Georgia. And
as I said before, we have to get better answers than this from
you because you are the CEO.
Well, let me ask you this, Mr. Corzine. Did you use client
funds to pay for or to pay off MF Global's debts and bolster
the $6.3 billion purchase of sovereign European debt that led
to your bankruptcy?
Mr. Corzine. I am going to repeat what I said before. I
have no recollection whatsoever of client monies being used--
client monies out of the FCM being used to purchase euro
sovereigns. Again, the euro sovereign positions were held in
the broker-dealer.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Did you ever use your customer
funds to buy foreign sovereign debt?
Mr. Corzine. Client dollars that were in the FCM to my
knowledge were not financed out of the FCM.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Then why did you lobby the CFTC
against proposed changes to the CFTC regulations that would
have prevented futures commission merchants from investing
customer funds in obligations of foreign governments? If you
never did that, had no intention to do that, why did you lobby
when they wanted to put tighter controls on that?
Mr. Corzine. The meeting that you are referencing I presume
is the July 20 meeting with Mr. Gensler, which actually is a
conference call was about the percentages that--concentration
percentages which actually I was more in support of the CFTC's
recommendations, thought they should be modified a bit, but I
was more in support of, and as it related to the internal
repurchase agreements that CFTC just ruled on this last Monday.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. And if you weren't the one
responsible or had a role in playing about the misappropriation
and the loss of this $1.2 billion, somebody is. Who would that
be?
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The witness
may answer.
Mr. Corzine. As I have said repeatedly, we had people,
policies, and procedures, and as I have said in my testimony, I
don't know whether this is inadvertent. I don't know whether in
the flows of transactions that were occurring--and there were
more flows of transactions than typically occur at MF Global in
the last chaotic days. So whether someone held onto some of the
funds that were rightfully to have been delivered to MF Global,
I--without being able to look in detail into those records,
those are our options. And I don't have the ability other than
to speculate where they would be.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. David Scott of Georgia. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Conaway, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Conaway. Governor, thank you for being here.
You have testified that you weren't an expert in all
aspects of any business and no one really is but help us
understand your appreciation for the duty that FCMs have to
maintain segregated accounts. Now, was that something that you
were aware of------
Mr. Corzine. Yes, sir.
Mr. Conaway. Was there somebody in your organization that
when the report was prepared the next morning after yesterday's
close of business and that was out of whack, their job was to
come hunt you down and show that to you?
Mr. Corzine. The------
Mr. Conaway. I mean did the issue of segregated funds rise
to that level in your mind.
Mr. Corzine. If the--if there were an outage------
Mr. Conaway. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--it would be brought up in exception------
Mr. Conaway. Right. And------
Mr. Corzine.--not on the------
Mr. Conaway.--would that have been something that you would
have been made aware of or is that somebody else in your
organization?
Mr. Corzine. If there had been an unreconciled------
Mr. Conaway. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--circumstance, I believe it would have been--
----
Mr. Conaway. Brought to your attention?
Mr. Corzine.--raised to my attention.
Mr. Conaway. All right. I am just trying to get a sense of
how important MF Global's team felt segregated accounts were.
We obviously think they are very important. That is the one
area of this aspect that we are supposed to be paying attention
to.
In terms of tone from the top, many organizations take on
the attitude of their leadership with respect to compliance,
with respect to regulations and those kinds of things. The Wall
Street Journal reported that you actually placed orders
yourself on sovereign debt which is a whole different
conversation, but in the placing of those orders, did you go
through all the normal routine that anybody who has authority
to place orders on behalf of MF Global would have gone through
or did you------
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I in fact didn't place orders
although I worked with traders who would------
Mr. Conaway. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--place orders.
Mr. Conaway. And------
Mr. Corzine. And I went through normal routines and we had
special compliance oversight of my activities.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Well, that is helpful.
One of the other aspects of leading a broker-dealer at a
company in the financial services business that you are in
obviously is a liquidity risk.
Mr. Corzine. Absolutely.
Mr. Conaway. You are not telling us that just showed up in
October------
Mr. Corzine. No.
Mr. Conaway.--on your radar screen. You also had some sense
that the second quarter results were not going to be as
favorable as you wanted to see them.
Mr. Corzine. We were very well aware------
Mr. Conaway. Well------
Mr. Corzine.--that either at the end of that second quarter
or a third quarter, fiscal quarter, that the deferred tax
asset------
Mr. Conaway. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--was going to have to be reduced.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. So you are aware that during the July-
August-September time frame that you were going to get $120
million hit just from the deferred tax asset. And we don't have
to worry about what that is. But the bankruptcy filing said it
was really a contraction of your proprietary trading helped
drive much of the loss in that second quarter. But given that
you knew about the deferred tax and potentially--I don't want
to get off on that rabbit trail.
You knew that MF Global faced a liquidity risk. When did
you begin to put in place the steps necessary to protect MF
Global from a liquidity risk? And then into October when the
wreck started happening and the fur started flying, margin
calls started happening and your customers started wanting
their money back, your lieutenants are coming to you saying
this is what we got to do. Did you ask them where did we get
the money to meet those calls? Where do we get those from? In
other words, we are short $1.2 billion. Where were your
lieutenants telling you here is how we solve the problem with
respect to this run on the bank? What were they telling you?
Where were you getting the money?
Mr. Corzine. We had done stress tests about securities we
would be able to sell in the broker-dealer for purposes of
generating free-up of margin, repurchase agreements that we
would be able to close. That would accomplish that. But more
than anything else we had undrawn credit lines that were held
in reserve for crunch time------
Mr. Conaway. Why didn't that system work?
Mr. Corzine. The real answer is I don't know all of the
details of what--I really don't, Congressman. There are many
things that were presumed to have been able to generate
liquidity. For instance, did all the banks actually------
Mr. Conaway. Right.
Mr. Corzine.--live up to their delivery of the cash that
was supposed to be available------
Mr. Conaway. Line of credit.
Mr. Corzine.--by the line.
Mr. Conaway. Yes. Let me finish off. Back on the culture
issue, when things got crazy on Wednesday, Thursday, and
Friday, you had people in place who knew the difference between
segregated funds and proprietary funds. They knew ahead of time
what was right and what was wrong and character is tested in
those crucibles. Is there anything that you think you could
have ever done that would have said to them that that is okay,
that in these extreme circumstances, the disaster we are in, it
is going to be okay to breach those--the folks that actually do
it, they can't hide behind not knowing the difference. So the
team you put in place------
Mr. Corzine. I don't think anyone would interpret
anything--I don't think. You know, not on the other side of the
phone, but there was never any intent------
Mr. Conaway. Well, that is------
Mr. Corzine.--in either my language or actions------
Mr. Conaway. I understand the reasons why you keep using
the word ``intent.'' And I am not trying to pin you down. We
are not the prosecution in this instance. But the team failed.
We have had testimony that the Lehman Brothers had a
catastrophic failure and their FCM business moved the next day
without a penny. I have to believe that the chaos surrounding
the bankruptcy of Lehman was not dissimilar to the one that
happened at MF Global. Why was the team at MF Global unable to
do the right thing in the heat of the moment?
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The witness
may respond to the question.
Mr. Corzine. First of all, there is a proportionality
difference. The FCM is significantly larger------
Mr. Conaway. Okay. I see.
Mr. Corzine.--and global. Our FCM was a much bigger part of
our business than theirs. That doesn't answer your question
because I don't know the answer to that and I would be
speculating if I did.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Connecticut for
5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, in your testimony you mentioned and you
mentioned earlier the phone conference with CFTC regarding the
1.25 rule, the Dodd-Frank rulemaking. And in your testimony you
said that the principle topic of discussion was whether 1.25
should be changed to prevent FCMs from engaging in repurchased
transactions with related brokers and dealers. Earlier today,
we spent a lot of time with Commissioner Sommers about the rule
that was adopted on Monday regarding foreign sovereign debt,
and she was repeatedly pointing out to us that that rule
wouldn't have changed anything because it only applied to
customer accounts. The problem was more in the broker-dealer
accounts based on what they knew at this point.
So I guess the question I would like to ask in looking
again at MF Global's letter to the Commission regarding the
rulemaking when it was a comment that they submitted was the
rule that was adopted on Monday regarding in-house repurchase
agreements--I mean what impact could that have had in terms of
the events that you described in your testimony regarding
repurchase?
Mr. Corzine. First of all, the rule that was adopted on
Monday--and I am not quite as well versed as I would be if I
were still in the business--did not deal with foreign
sovereigns other than that they were precluded without
application for exception.
Mr. Courtney. Right.
Mr. Corzine. But they were never available for any purposes
as far as I know as well as I can recollect the rules except
for deposits that were taken from customers in foreign currency
denominated deposits.
Mr. Courtney. Okay.
Mr. Corzine. This was not the issue that not only MF Global
but the FIA, the CMA, many--most of the FCMs if not all the
FCMs were petitioning because of the cost and inefficiency that
would occur if that--those internal repos were not allowed to
be able to take place.
Mr. Courtney. Well, Chairman Gensler certainly in his
comments on Monday felt that they had taken a great step
forward in terms of trying to reduce the risk that is
surrounding these repurchase agreements. I mean are you just
saying it is irrelevant? It is a dead letter?
Mr. Corzine. Clearly, the issues of having an FCM and a
broker-dealer in the same entity certainly in a time of stress
as MF Global was experiencing in the last days, I think does
call--or raises the issue that I think Chairman Gensler was
trying to speak to in an ongoing operating basis. I probably
stand with the arguments I made, but at a time of stress, his
arguments may be much stronger.
Mr. Courtney. Well, I am glad to hear you say that because,
having been here in 2008 and when the world was collapsing and
frankly the process of enacting Dodd-Frank was like crawling
over broken glass, in terms of just doing something so complex.
I think it was our duty to try and address the fact that there
clearly were systemic problems that exposed the taxpayer and
the middle-class to the damage that could happen when these
systems malfunctioned.
And again the efforts by the Commission have just gotten
trashed in this room frankly for the last year in terms of
trying to implement Dodd-Frank. You know, I just think it is
time for us to recognize that everybody can't have it the way
they would always want it. There have to be some rules in place
to limit the high risk that, again, exposes farmers and small
businesses and people who are just trying to lead their lives
and have some confidence in these markets.
And you know what happened in this incident is that there
are going to be lots of--I am sure investigations that are
going to look for, along with the bankruptcy court and maybe
other authorities, but we as lawmakers. I mean our job here is
to try and figure out the right way to balance rules that will
prevent these things from recurring again. And frankly I am
just, in retrospect I just wish the Commission had moved faster
in terms of implementing these rules because I just think it
would have created a structure which reduces risk which, at the
end of the day, is what we have to do if we are going to have
any stability in this economy.
I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Nebraska for 5
minutes.
Mr. Fortenberry. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Governor, for your willingness to come today and
answer questions.
Governor, I was recently at an Eagle Scout ceremony and one
of the young people there stood up and he said this: he said
America depends upon the quality of her citizens. And I was
struck with the beauty, the simplicity, and the profundity of
that statement. The problem here is we can't pass enough laws
fast enough, create enough regulatory entities quick enough if
there is a collapse of the types of values that lead to
responsibility and commitment to the common good. We simply
can't do it. Therefore, it is incumbent upon those of us in
government, business, the media, education, the other
institutions that shape our culture and give us good order,
fairness, justice, opportunity, it is incumbent upon all of us
to act in the public's trust. And in this regard I am going to
ask you a few questions. Who owned MF Global? I asked the
question of the regulator prior to this. They couldn't give me
an answer. I would like to know.
Mr. Corzine. MF Global is a public company. Shareholders
broadly held the stock. There is actually a report I can give
you exactly who those people are or institutions that were the
owners.
Mr. Fortenberry. Who were those institutions if you could
identify them?
Mr. Corzine. Well, there is a whole range of large
institutions.
Mr. Fortenberry. But I would like to understand the
interconnections here of the financial industrial complex.
Mr. Corzine. Well, fidelities, mutual fund complex, there
are a number of other institutional holders like that. There
are hedge fund holders. There are individual holders. I am a
holder. There are private equity holder J.C. Flowers, which I
mentioned inside my remarks.
Mr. Fortenberry. Who hires you?
Mr. Corzine. The board of MF Global.
Mr. Fortenberry. Who?
Mr. Corzine. The board of MF Global is the hiring--
responsible hiring authority. If you are asking who introduced
me to------
Mr. Fortenberry. It would helpful to know the story.
Mr. Corzine. Some of this is in the written statement but I
had as a private investor a holding in the private equity firm
J.C. Flowers. The CEO of MF Global in March of 2010 abruptly
resigned. They were about to instigate a search for a CEO at
the board level and I presume it was suggested from the board
member from J.C. Flowers that sat on that board that they ought
to talk to me.
Mr. Fortenberry. We talked a little bit about this in your
testimony but just basically describe your job.
Mr. Corzine. As the CEO of MF Global? First of all, set
strategy. I think I spoke to--about--in my written testimony
that needed to be defined not just with myself but with our
board, needed to represent the firm externally with clients,
counterparties, regulators, and given the business strategy
that we were about, I needed to make sure that we had
personnel------
Mr. Fortenberry. And in that regard who did you hire?
Mr. Corzine. A whole host of folks. There was significant
change------
Mr. Fortenberry. Main principles?
Mr. Corzine. Well, we hired a new chief operating officer,
new internal audit, new chief risk officer, new heads of
Europe, new head of Asia, lots of------
Mr. Fortenberry. Sorry, my time is running a little short.
You have said that it was never your intention to commingle
segregated funds. How could you, in a scenario in which you
could unintentionally do that?
Mr. Corzine. Well, that would be speculative on my part.
Someone could misinterpret we have to fix this, which I said
the evening of October 30. We have to find the money.
Mr. Fortenberry. Mr. Chairman, my time is------
The Chairman. Would the gentleman yield for one question on
his line of------
Mr. Fortenberry. From the Governor or from you?
The Chairman. Just yield to me------
Mr. Fortenberry. Yes, I--if I could conclude------
The Chairman. Mr. Corzine--and then we will conclude of
course with you--what percentage of the equity or ownership in
MF Global did you own for curiosity's sake? Not a very large
amount I would assume?
Mr. Corzine. No. No.
The Chairman. Less than ten percent, less than five
percent, less than one percent?
Mr. Corzine. It was I think closer to the latter than any
of the other numbers you mentioned.
The Chairman. So a single digit or in that range somewhere?
Is that the typical nature for senior management of these kind
of firms, these very small equity stakeholders in the inner----
--
Mr. Corzine. It is not only the amount that I had bought
but it was also how my compensation was structured, which I
also went through.
The Chairman. Stock options?
Mr. Corzine. Stock options.
The Chairman. So typically in a company like this or one
that you would be a part of, over time your interest in the
company would grow through the use of stock options, a reward
for------
Mr. Corzine. Right.
The Chairman.--good management.
Mr. Corzine. Correct, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. So just from the perspective of asking
questions about the nature of your business, then, a person in
a role like that in a company just to the layman's perspective
it would appear that the more aggressive the enterprise, the
better those kind of rewards would be. Now, certainly most of
the investors are very sophisticated people, correct? They
understand the nature of the kind of enterprise that you have
been a part of------
Mr. Corzine. Most of these investors are strategic
investors.
The Chairman. In Oklahoma we would call that a high-powered
gun. I yield back to the gentleman from Nebraska.
Mr. Fortenberry. Mr. Chairman, I will just conclude by
saying this: I think what we have here is another example of
inordinate risk-taking, leveraging other people's money. We
have the possibility of an improper commingling of funds, but
the third point is I think we have another assault on the
nation's trust of a financial institution. I will yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Alabama for 5
minutes.
Ms. Sewell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to begin with a brief statement or a comment before
I start my questioning.
You know, this hearing is important today not only because
we are trying to get to the bottom of how thousands of farmers
and growers and producers currently have lost their capital and
are struggling to figure out how they are going to make ends
meet, but we are also here because this has vastly affected
hundreds of Americans who have lost their jobs directly and
indirectly because of the loss. And in these trying and
challenging economic times, it is even more important I believe
that we who have the public trust really do become good
stewards or try to be good stewards of the money and that
trust. And so my hope today is that we not only get to the
bottom of what happened to MF Global but how this affects more
broadly the financial industry generally, and in particular,
how it affects our farmers and growers.
Having said that, I spent my formative professional career
as a securities lawyer in New York City, and I can tell you
that what differentiated me as a lawyer and the investment
bankers that I represent is our appetite for risk. And so I
guess I ask you, Senator Corzine, as the CEO and Chairman of MF
Global, the direction and the appetite for risk in steering
this company, could you speak a little bit about how MF Global
was positioned prior to you getting there and what your hopes
were when you assumed the responsibility of CEO, and how you
would rate the risk appetite of the company and perhaps
yourself?
Mr. Corzine. Thank you, Congressman--Congresswoman, it is--
it primarily was a broker firm, commissions and earnings on the
balances as the basic source of revenue, although there were
some principle risk-taking. They had already begun to apply for
that primary dealership, so they were taking broker-dealer
risks and the government securities business did the same and
European sovereigns in our European operations before I came.
And one of the commonly used metrics with respect to risk is
what we call value at risk and that was roughly $5 million
before I came with an authorization or a delegation of
authority at $15 million. And we were pretty much at that level
while I was at the firm. There certainly were periods where it
was higher and there were periods when it was lower both on
reporting and internal basis.
Ms. Sewell. But the use of the repo to maturity
transactions used to mask--for lack of a better word--any
shortfalls? I mean like what was the direction that was given
by yourself as management with respect to those kinds of
transactions?
Mr. Corzine. The repo to maturity positions look like
things that we had done on repo to maturity with U.S.
treasuries, with U.S. agencies, with corporate--actually at
larger amounts than what we were talking about with the euro
sovereigns.
Ms. Sewell. But we also knew that the euro sovereigns were
becoming quickly insolvent. I mean the world events were
surrounding a lot of the eurozone countries. It was obviously
quite known to most of us, very different------
Mr. Corzine. There is clearly a difference although they
were still highly rated by agencies and, as I said in some of
the earlier remarks, my other metrics that one would judge
based on margins that were required by clearing organizations
or individuals, it was our judgment that they were--
particularly the ones that we were involved in were less risky
than would otherwise be the case. The point being------
Ms. Sewell. My time is actually kind of running out and
really my last question is what do you think would be a fair
outcome given the state of affairs currently? If you could wave
a magic wand and figure out how we solve this crisis that we
are currently facing with MF Global? What do you think would be
a fair settlement?
Mr. Corzine. I am absolutely hopeful that a full
understanding of what happened in those last few days will
review the source of where these monies are. I continue to
believe that those resources are in the hands of either
counterparties or there has been some mistaken forwarding of
those to some place that I wouldn't know. That is what I tried
to write in my remarks.
Ms. Sewell. Well, hope does spring eternal.
And I yield back the rest of my time.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time is expired.
The chair will now recognize Mrs. Schmidt for 5 minutes and
Mr. Scott should stand ready.
Mrs. Schmidt. Thank you.
Mr. Corzine, I know that you said that you weren't quite
sure about when the money was wire transferred, but Mr.
Corzine, MF Global's 10-K for the year ending March 31, 2011,
shows a net position in the price risk and default risk at $6.3
billion of the debt in Belgium, Italy, Spain, Portugal, and
Ireland, but Bloomberg reported that you pushed this foreign
sovereign debt to $11.5 billion and your hedges were
insufficient to dampen your risk. Based on this, some observers
have pointed out that MF Global would have had cash problems on
several trading days throughout 2011. Surely you were aware of
the problem so I ask you, were you, and about the wire calls?
Mr. Corzine. Congresswoman, first of all, the $11.5 is a
gross of both short and longs, reverse RTMs to maturity as well
as RTMs to maturity. And therefore, if I am reading their
reporting, and I don't know where they got their facts, but it
is a combination of the longs and shorts. I don't think that
therefore the conclusion is exactly how you would see it
because the short------
Mrs. Schmidt. At some point you had to know that there
wasn't enough money.
Mr. Corzine. The only time that we could conclude there
wasn't enough money was when the unreconciled accounts------
Mrs. Schmidt. Well------
Mr. Corzine.--were notified.
Mrs. Schmidt. Okay. Were repo to maturity transactions used
to hide or mask the risks associated with your positions in
Europe's sovereign debt? It has been reported that the use of
these transactions increased over your time as CEO, so did you
personally direct the firm to use these transactions as a means
to hide the risks?
Mr. Corzine. Congresswoman, the disclosure that you have
cited was in our reports to the public and our public
disclosure documents along with its implications for gains and
losses. And those disclosure documents were reviewed by our
outside auditors, they were reviewed by counsel, they were
reviewed by our audit committee, and discussions of those
elements were a part of public discussions with analysts and
others.
Mrs. Schmidt. Well, it has been reported by The Wall Street
Journal that, despite warnings from board members and from your
own employees, you pushed forward with aggressive and highly
leveraged positions on foreign debt, foreign sovereign debt.
Mr. Corzine, we have all been watching the eurozone crisis
unfold and there has been significant uncertainty about is
resolution so why were you so confident about these bets, and
to what degree were you willing to bet the very survival of the
firm, its employees, and most importantly, the shareholders?
Mr. Corzine. The investments that we had in the euro
sovereigns were bought and financed to their maturity. And
those positions were very difficult to be able to be unwound
and once they were in position, they had significantly less
liquidity than a security held that was not financed to its
maturity, on the other hand, significantly less risky because
financing was in place. Having financing in place diminished
the overall risk of holding a particular security.
Mrs. Schmidt. Well, that all sounds good but how did you
take a company that was in existence for almost 230 years to
bankruptcy within a year and a half of takeover? How do you
explain to all the customers, investors the reason for the
collapse of MF Global? I mean your answers sound so nice but
you riskily invested people's money without their knowledge in
a market that I wouldn't invest in.
Mr. Corzine. Congresswoman, sitting here today with
knowledge that the market has drawn the conclusion that it has
drawn and the facts are what they are, it would have been
better to have taken different judgments at the time they were
taken. But, we and I did those things that we thought were in
the best interest of shareholders and all of the stakeholders
given the inability of the old business plans that the firm was
executing on to generate the kinds of revenues that would
protect customers as well.
The Chairman. The gentlelady's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Scott, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, I want to thank you for coming before the
Committee. I don't think many people would have joined us for
as long as you have and been willing to answer the questions.
Thank you for being here.
You have repeatedly said that client funds were not used to
purchase foreign sovereigns. Were those client funds ever
pledged as collateral on the purchase of foreign sovereigns at
MF Global, though?
Mr. Corzine. To my knowledge--and again this is one of
those things that you have to get into the records to be
absolutely precise on--I am not aware of that.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. And it is apparently
from all the reports that there was commingling of funds. Just
approximately when do you believe the commingling first
occurred?
Mr. Corzine. Given all of the transactions that were
occurring in those closing days, Congressman, I don't want to
speculate. I just--I know that several of senior management
were informed at roughly the same time on Sunday night of many
hundreds of millions of dollars being unreconciled in the
accounts.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Do you believe that that
commingling started to occur in the last 10 days before the
bankruptcy?
Mr. Corzine. I am under the impression--and again I don't
have records------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Corzine.--to confirm and so it is farther than I should
go but I am--we have to--MF Global had to submit reports------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Corzine.--each day and it is, as I had suggested to one
of the previous questioners, if we had been out of balance, it
is my presumption that it would have been reported upward.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir. But those reports,
they are not audited by anybody as I understand it. They are
self-reported.
Mr. Corzine. They are self-reported. I think if I am not
mistaken a number of the regulators were on premise from the
26th on. That doesn't mean that they audited------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir.
Mr. Corzine.--all aspects but were very close------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir, but at that stage,
at the point that the regulators came in, it was pretty much
too late at that stage, wasn't it?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, it certainly was not my operating
premise that it was too late at those stages. We were
generating liquidity------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Right.
Mr. Corzine. We were drawing our liquidity facilities and
to the best of my recollection, meeting our obligations.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. If I am not mistaken, you were
still rated as investment grade less than 10 days prior to the
filing by Moody's and Fitch both. I may not be correct about
that.
Mr. Corzine. That is true, sir.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. You can correct me if--sir?
Mr. Corzine. That is true.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Well------
Mr. Corzine. I think the first rating change occurred on
Monday, October 24.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes, sir, and then------
Mr. Corzine. Moody's.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. And then they happened very
fast thereafter.
Mr. Corzine. There was another set of rating changes------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Two days.
Mr. Corzine.--Thursday if I am not mistaken.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Corzine. The 27th.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Well, you have been a
Governor, a Senator, had a very successful life, accomplished a
lot of things. I sense the pain that you recognize. This is one
of the things that your life will be judged by.
What can we make good out of this? What can you tell us?
Sitting where you are, what rules and regulations would you put
in place if you were sitting up here to prevent an MF Global
from ever happening again?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I have given it some thought, not
great thought. It is clear that in moments of stress,
organizations do not always operate in the same way that they
would in a normal operating environment. And I certainly would
look for triggers that would enhance the oversight of
organizations in those conditions.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you for joining us.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back his time.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Colorado, Mr.
Tipton, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Tipton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr.
Corzine, for joining us.
I would like to follow up on a comment that Congressman
Scott just made. The 10 days prior to the debacle, Moody's and
Fitch had MF Global rated as investment grade. Was that a good
decision 10 days prior?
Mr. Corzine. The rating agencies------
Mr. Tipton. From your knowledge of the company, was that a
good assessment by Moody's and Fitch that you were investment
grade?
Mr. Corzine. Certainly, the facts afterwards don't make
that look effective as an assessment, but at the time that they
had last reviewed and were intending to review around our
quarterly earnings announcement, at least several of them had
put new assessment directions into the works.
Mr. Tipton. There was an assessment so it was probably a
poor one.
I wanted to follow up on a comment that you made earlier in
questioning saying on October 30--and it was in regards to the
commingling of assets--you had thrown out the statement that
``we have to find the money.'' Was that your statement? Was
that the corporate mentality?
Mr. Corzine. It was all of us.
Mr. Tipton. It was all of you?
Mr. Corzine. Everyone felt an obligation to get the books
reconciled.
Mr. Tipton. Wherever it was, had to be able to find that.
I just want to get a sense truly I guess of the corporate
mentality. When you went on to head up Global, did you read
through the mission statement and believe in it? I can give you
a couple of quotes from it: ``MF Global is well capitalized and
diversified intermediary and a strong conservative managed
balance sheet. Because of our financial strength and
comprehensive risk management, clients can have confidence that
they are trading with strong counterparty.'' Was that your
sense? Did you believe in that?
Mr. Corzine. I believe that those statements were right at
the time and that we needed to enhance it with a growth
strategy that would provide for the success of the firm as
opposed to what had been in recent years------
Mr. Tipton. As a business guy, and I am a small
businessman--was a small businessman until I took this job, you
had to look at it--not trying to mix metaphors here--you had to
look at your business globally knowing that the impact of one
section of the business could impact another section of the
business as well. When you made that determination given the
comments that we were just talking about in terms of the Fitch
Moody's rating of Global 10 days prior as being investment
grade, looking out over the horizon into the eurozone for those
investments, given the foreknowledge that in this country with
$15 trillion in debt, we had had our credit rating downgraded,
did that tie back into the corporate mantra and the beliefs
that you were just saying was the original intent? Or was it a
risky investment that was going to ruin the entire operation--
----
Mr. Corzine. As I have tried to state probably more
articulately than I will do here that with the analysis and the
perspectives on how those particular sovereigns were looked at,
we thought they were prudent investments.
Mr. Tipton. Was that your personal investment? Would you
have been willing to personally risk your funds?
Mr. Corzine. I absolutely was willing to invest and was
investing in MF Global up until August.
Mr. Tipton. And I am not trying to put you on the spot and
I know this is going to be maybe a little offensive from this
standpoint but where you were stock-motivated, did that help
drive some of that decision based off of the performance of the
stock to try and get this kind of return?
Mr. Corzine. The performance is not based--is one element
but also protecting the value of the stock is another
responsibility. And as a shareholder, I would expect decisions
to reflect those concerns as well. It is not only performance.
Mr. Tipton. Okay. And I certainly agree with Congressman
Scott. I can sense from you some agony personally over this,
but believe me, talking to many of our folks in rural America,
$10,000, $20,000, $30,000, that is not a nice evening out. That
is all they have. And when we look at it globally, I think we
all have to be very distressed in terms of some of that
collateral damage, particularly now when we can't find $1.2
billion of struggling people's dollars to be able to meet their
needs.
So I am out of time, Mr. Chairman. I yield back. Thank you,
sir.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arkansas, Mr.
Crawford, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crawford. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Corzine, are you licensed to trade securities?
Mr. Corzine. Yes.
Mr. Crawford. What licenses do you hold?
Mr. Corzine. I would have to go back. I have all of the----
--
Mr. Crawford. Series 3, Series 7, Series 6, and some others
or--I figured that was the case.
Do you trade on your own account?
Mr. Corzine. Not regularly.
Mr. Crawford. Have you ever traded on your own account
using customer funds?
Mr. Corzine. On my own account using customer funds? No.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Is------
Mr. Corzine. To my knowledge, I haven't.
Mr. Crawford. Okay.
Mr. Corzine. I don't trade for my personal account.
Mr. Crawford. Has any employee to your knowledge of MF
Global ever used client funds to trade on proprietary------
Mr. Corzine. I am going to repeat what I had said------
Mr. Crawford. Right. Okay.
Mr. Corzine.--to the other folks.
Mr. Crawford. Got that. If you did have knowledge of an
employee trading on customer account, what would the penalty be
for that employee?
Mr. Corzine. I certainly--as far as I could ever imagine
they would probably be terminated.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Have you ever dismissed an employee at
MF Global for any kind of malfeasance that would be of that
nature?
Mr. Corzine. I think there is a fairly notorious trading
situation that occurred in 2008 before I joined the firm, and
there were other disciplinary actions that have been taken
through the years.
Mr. Crawford. But under your direction------
Mr. Corzine. There were some, yes.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Can you describe some of that
malfeasance that required there to be disciplinary action or
possibly termination?
Mr. Corzine. I really would like to have specifics about
that so that I don't get into talking about an individual and I
don't have my facts straight.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Okay. I just read an article that
Reuters put out about a farmer who had $200,000 in an account
with MF Global that hasn't been returned to him yet. It has
been almost a month since MF Global filed for bankruptcy. There
is no telling when he will get his money back. He has missed a
deadline for buying his seed to pre-purchase discount for next
spring's corn and soybean crops; the financial future of his
operation is certainly in peril. Most of the farmers in my
district--and I think this is true with farmers throughout the
country are really one crop failure away from bankruptcy. The
action that we have seen here with MF Global puts them that
much closer to bankruptcy themselves. As the former head of a
now bankrupt company that this man trusted--in fact, trusted to
the degree that he would rather have his money in one of those
segregated accounts than he would in a bank, what would you say
to that farmer who now is facing bankruptcy of his own or to
any farmer who may be in a similar situation?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, as I said multiple times, I think
about this every day. I could not be more regretful of the
stress that we are bringing to people's lives and I could not
be more anxious to see resolution of where those unreconciled
accounts------
Mr. Crawford. Let me ask you this. I mean you have an
impressive background with respect to financial services,
banking industry, and so on. And I am going to ask you to
speculate. I am going to ask you to think what you would do in
this situation. In all seriousness, I would like to know what
we tell farmers that are facing this. If you were in the
situation where you had potentially $200,000 or more, as
Congressman Tipton said--$20,000 or $30,000, $40,000, what
would you do if you were that farmer? As I understand it, you
also have a little history in farming?
Mr. Corzine. My father was one of those folks that went to
the grain elevator and hedged out future crops.
Mr. Crawford. And I am really not trying to--I know you
have expressed remorse here and I appreciate that, but I am in
all seriousness trying to figure out how do you advise these
farmers who are in this situation?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I am not sure I have specific
advice. I only can say that this process of seeking to find
these funds is one that absolutely needs every resource
possible to make sure that it is accomplished. I think I have
to leave it there.
Mr. Crawford. Sure. Last question. Do you have a compliance
officer at MF Global?
Mr. Corzine. Absolutely.
Mr. Crawford. Sure. And at what point did he bring this to
your attention? How often did he review the activity?
Mr. Corzine. There are a broad set of compliance issues and
internal audits and as I suggested Sarbanes-Oxley internal
audits that confirm that kinds of operations are operating the
way they are supposed to. And so those are ongoing; they are
daily.
Mr. Crawford. Okay. Thank you, sir. I appreciate it. I
yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Kansas for 5
minutes.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Senator, I will follow up on the question of the
gentleman from Arkansas. You did mention your concern about
that. If you were so concerned about making certain that your
investors were whole, how come you quit 4 days after bankruptcy
was declared?
Mr. Corzine. In a response to a board request is why I
resigned.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. And during those 4 intervening days,
what did you do to attempt to make the investors whole?
Mr. Corzine. I resigned on November 3. That is correct. It
is 2 days and I spent Tuesday at least in the early morning
hours trying to find out some of the same questions that people
are asking here with no particular positive results on that.
Mr. Huelskamp. So nobody seemed to know where the funds
were and no one would tell you?
Mr. Corzine. There were------
Mr. Huelskamp. Did you ask the question where those funds
were and what was the answer?
Mr. Corzine. People were still looking. Lots of
transactions were in train that------
Mr. Huelskamp. I appreciate that. I am short of time and I
appreciate it. I think it would be the same answer as we
received before. I want to establish a little bit of timeline.
I am trying to understand. On the 1 year anniversary of Dodd-
Frank on July 20, you conducted numerous meetings with members
of the CFTC------
Mr. Corzine. I had two conference calls with the CFTC on
those days.
Mr. Huelskamp. I have you down--according to the records at
the CFTC you had a meeting with a former employee at 1:00 p.m.
on the phone with Mr. Gensler, at 2:15 you had a meeting with
Ms. Sommers on the phone, and at 3:30 with a third
Commissioner, Mr. Chilton. Can you describe the topics of those
calls?
Mr. Corzine. To my recollection I was on the phone call--
conference call with Chairman Gensler at one and Commissioner
Chilton at the time that you brought forward. And again, as we
have suggested in both written and my response to questions,
primary subject of that conversation were repos between the
broker-dealer and the FCM.
Mr. Huelskamp. Three separate meetings according to the
CFTC with three separate Commissioners that you participated
in. Did you have any separate calls or conversations with Mr.
Gensler when you took the job at MF Global to the present time
other than what you have------
Mr. Corzine. That has been my recollection. You have my
calls, my meetings outlined.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. You never once called his cell phone?
Mr. Corzine. No.
Mr. Huelskamp. Okay. Did you ever call another member of
the Administration during this time about any of these issues?
Mr. Corzine. I am sorry, Congressman. I couldn't hear you.
Mr. Huelskamp. Did you ever call a member of the
Administration? I mean you are very close to the current
Administration. As a very generous campaign bundler, did you
ever visit with anybody in the Administration about your
business at MF Global?
Mr. Corzine. To my knowledge, I have never spoken about the
business of MF Global to anyone in the Administration.
Mr. Huelskamp. Did you visit with anybody at the Federal
Reserve?
Mr. Corzine. I have visited with people at the Federal
Reserve as I reported with respect to the primary dealer as I
testified to, a primary dealer relationship always with staff
and staff and never with either the President or Chairman or
any of the Board of Governors.
Mr. Huelskamp. On December 21 of the last year you had a
meeting with the CFTC Commissioner again about segregation and
bankruptcy. Do you recall the topic of those particular
discussions which seem very appropriate given our
conversation------
Mr. Corzine. If I am not mistaken, Commissioner Sommers
spoke about that meeting this morning and it had to do with
issues on the treatment of swaps consistent with how futures
were traded, and how Dodd-Frank would deal with those issues in
coming CFTC discussions.
Mr. Huelskamp. So no------
Mr. Corzine. Frankly, I don't remember even the specifics,
a relatively short meeting.
Mr. Huelskamp. Well, we are lucky that at least the CFTC
had a record there was a meeting. As we learned earlier,
though, apparently they don't keep notes. Does your private
secretary keep notes of these meetings that might be helpful to
understand at the Committee?
Mr. Corzine. To my knowledge, they did not.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And Senator, I appreciate your time and I appreciate the
questions but again I would like to ask the question directly
for myself. What do I tell my producers that--should I suggest
that you were contrite, you felt sorrow, but you are not going
to try to make them whole and that just good luck, we hope you
find your $200,000? Is that a pretty good summary?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, I hope you believe that I am as
intent in answering the question of where this money is as
anyone in the room.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The chair now looks to the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Ribble, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ribble. I will move over here. It has been a long
afternoon.
How many Federal regulatory agencies have some type of
oversight responsibilities for the type of business you are in?
Mr. Corzine. I haven't counted them up but it is multiple--
CFTC, SEC. There are all kinds of agencies that deal with labor
and other activities; the Federal Reserve has oversight not
regulatory responsibility. As we have become a primary dealer,
there are more and then there are whole host of self-regulatory
organizations the number of which you will speak with in the
next panel.
Mr. Ribble. How often did you have an opportunity to visit
with the regulators? How often were they there? You were there
about 18 months. Was this a regular occurrence? Did the Federal
Government have a lot of responsibility in oversight?
Mr. Corzine. A number of them would visit the firm more
broadly than just with me. Sometimes people more senior would
come and visit in offices. We tried to outline some of those.
There was one meeting which I cited where all of the regulators
or at least most of the regulators in the U.S. visited us in
June of 2010 where I addressed them for 10 minutes. And the
rest of my colleagues, at least on the operations and controls
side and finance side spoke more lengthily. I would point out
that these aren't the only regulators. Then you have
international regulators in multiple venues across the globe
that also have responsibility in oversight that participate.
Mr. Ribble. Well, then, do you think adding more
regulations and more regulators--let me change that. Do you
think we can regulate greed, incompetence, and fraud out of
existence?
Mr. Corzine. Could you repeat that question?
Mr. Ribble. Can we regulate------
Mr. Corzine. The incompetence------
Mr. Ribble. Can we regulate greed, incompetence, and fraud
out of existence? Because at the end of the day, sir, we have
to make a decision of how, going forward, we can help protect
consumers and investors from having another MF Global happen.
And my fear is that we will do what government always does--
make up more rules and send more regulators and a year from now
we will have another example. And I am wondering what the real
solution is. I am trying to figure out was there greed,
incompetence, and fraud at MF Global that no matter what we do
on this side of the dais, it still would happen.
Mr. Corzine. Whether it is for those reasons or poor
judgment or bad judgment or--mistakes will continue to happen
in the course of human events and that is inevitable. As it
relates to regulation, that is one that historically has been
more supportive rather than against. There is an enormous need
from my view and probably doesn't amount for much at the
moment, but my view to have it consolidated so that it is
more--it is less complex to manage.
Mr. Ribble. It is difficult to manage a company your size.
Mr. Corzine. With the multiple regulators that exist and
then we live in a global world that increases the complexity.
The segregation rules in London are different than the
segregation rules in U.S. futures markets. The futures markets
are different than securities markets and so the answer is yes.
A more integrated approach, at least from one man's point of
view, would make this world easier.
Mr. Ribble. I am trying to get a sense from what my
takeaway needs to be today and so I thank you. It has been a
long afternoon so I thank you for your time.
And I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from North Carolina
for her 5 minutes.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Governor Corzine, I have a couple questions for you for
clarification. The question was posed to you why did you resign
on November 3 and you indicated that it was at the request of a
board member or was this a------
Mr. Corzine. The leading--the lead director.
Mrs. Ellmers. The lead director. And that person's name?
Mr. Corzine. Ed Goldberg.
Mrs. Ellmers. Ed Goldberg. Thank you.
Now, I know we have talked about where we feel and where
the responsibility lies and you have identified that it could
be procedural, the money is gone. Who do you hold responsible
and accountable for this money being gone?
Mr. Corzine. As the CEO of an organization, I hold
responsibility that the implementation of policies, procedures
and the people we had in place to execute on these issues
lies--the buck stops here on that score. The details of how
that gets executed are an organizational issue that is broad-
faced. We had people certainly were prepared and were--at least
from all reports to me as best I can recollect--executing
appropriately on those rules. Again, at the chaotic final days
and hours, I think you have a different set of conditions in
place.
Mrs. Ellmers. I would like to go back, too, to the
relationship that you have with Chairman Gensler. I know that
he apparently worked for you while you were at Goldman Sachs
and he also worked at Goldman Sachs, is that correct?
Mr. Corzine. That is correct.
Mrs. Ellmers. And I believe that means that there have been
a couple of years that you have had a relationship--a couple of
years of a relationship since that time.
Mr. Corzine. We had--Chairman Gensler and I had other
interactions. He was on Senator Sarbanes' staff when I was a
Senator. I was aware of and in contact with him on an
occasional basis but not on a frequent basis in any stretch of
the imagination.
Mrs. Ellmers. Would you describe your relationship as
friendly? Would you pick up the phone and call him and just
say, hey, how are you doing?
Mr. Corzine. We were not the kind of folks that were
checking in on each other week to week, month to month, maybe
not even year to year. I think one of the newspapers reported
he neither attended my recent wedding or I attended a tragic
loss in his family.
Mrs. Ellmers. Thank you.
And my last comment I would like to associate myself with
one of the comments that were made very recently when you said,
``in retrospect, decisions that are made in crisis are usually
not very good decisions.'' And that that may have had a part in
this. And I would just like to state that I do believe that as
well and that is one of the reasons that I believe Dodd-Frank
is detrimental to the financial industry in this country.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back her time.
The chair now recognizes the last Member for questions for
5 minutes, the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. McIntyre.
Mr. McIntyre. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you for
your patience today with the questions.
According to Janet Tavakoli, in substance, your repo to
maturity transactions were total return swaps which were off
balance sheet and a type of credit derivative. MF Global
retained the price and default risk. The head of the FCC is now
probing the accounting treatment and the disclosure. The
Financial Accounting Standards Board recently decided that repo
to maturity is the only kind of repo transaction to get off
balance sheet treatment. And Janet Tavakoli says that this is a
form-over-substance ruse to dodge using the term ``total return
swap'' since these transactions are well known as a means of
using leverage. Would you say that her characterization is
accurate and why or why not?
Mr. Corzine. Congressman, there is a lot in that statement.
Mr. McIntyre. Right. That is why I wanted to give you a
chance to respond.
Mr. Corzine. My view is that a better analogy would be
matchbook transactions where repurchase agreements against
reverse repurchase agreements were put on the books of a
broker-dealer or an institution as opposed to total return
swap. You mentioned that you retain the price movement. You
only retain the price exposure to the extent that it implicates
margin--variation margin in the exchange.
The total return swap--and again I am--don't want to be
expert and I am certainly not expert with regard to the
accounting issues on this--would reflect the price appreciation
or depreciation in these RTM positions, both the ones that were
held with respect to government--U.S. Government securities,
agencies incorporates or whether it was in these euro
sovereigns had no price risk other than as it implicated
margins. And you did, however--as the analyst or the consultant
said--retain the default risk, the default and actually
restructuring risk.
But I think--I don't think it is a clear analogy and at
some conditions some people would say total return swaps are a
way to take price risk off the balance sheet. This is not a way
to do that. This is a way to take matchbook risk, substantially
less off balance sheet but it is not an analogy that I would
identify with.
Mr. McIntyre. All right. Thank you.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The chair
would now like to recognize the Ranking Member for a unanimous
consent request.
Mr. Peterson. Mr. Chairman, I have some quick questions
that were submitted to me by Ms. Kaptur, who spent a good part
of the hearing today--she is interested and has some questions
for Mr. Corzine. So without objection, I would like those
questions be submitted and have him respond in writing.
The Chairman. Seeing no objections, the questions will be
accepted and submitted.
Seeing no other questions or requests, Mr. Corzine, thank
you for your appearance today. You are now dismissed.
Mr. Corzine. Thank you, sir. I thank the Committee.
The Chairman. And while the next panel is preparing to come
to the table, I would like to note that our witnesses on the
third panel will be Mr. John Fletcher, General Manager of
Central Missouri AGRIService LLC, on behalf of the National
Grain and Feed Association, Marshall, Missouri; Terrence Duffy,
Executive Chairman of the CME Group, Incorporated, Chicago,
Illinois; Mr. William J. Brodsky, Chairman and CEO, the Chicago
Board Options Exchange, Chicago, Illinois; Mr. Dan Roth,
President and CEO, National Futures Association, Chicago,
Illinois; Mr. Stephen Luparello, Vice Chairman, the Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority, Washington, D.C.; Mr. Gerry
Corcoran, Chairman and CEO of R.J. O'Brien & Associates, on
behalf of the Commodity Markets Council, Chicago, Illinois.
Now, gentleman that you are in place, in the spirit of the
importance and the relevance of this Committee, I would ask you
to rise and raise your right hand. Please state your name for
the record.
Mr. Fletcher. John Fletcher.
Mr. Duffy. Terrence Duffy.
Mr. Roth. Dan Roth.
Mr. Corcoran. Gerry Corcoran.
Mr. Luparello. Stephen Luparello.
Mr. Brodsky. William Brodsky.
The Chairman. Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you
are about to give before this Committee in the matters under
consideration on this day, December 8, 2011, is the truth, the
whole truth, and nothing but the truth so help you God?
Mr. Fletcher. I do.
Mr. Duffy. I do.
Mr. Roth. I do.
Mr. Corcoran. I do.
Mr. Luparello. I do.
Mr. Brodsky. I do.
The Chairman. I do.
Mr. Fletcher, begin whenever you are ready.

TESTIMONY OF JOHN FLETCHER, GENERAL MANAGER,
CENTRAL MISSOURI AGRIService LLC, Marshall, MO; ON
BEHALF OF NATIONAL GRAIN AND FEED ASSOCIATION

Mr. Fletcher. Good evening, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Peterson and Members of the Committee that are still here. My
name is John Fletcher. I am General Manager of Central Missouri
AGRIService LLC in Marshall, Missouri. Our firm purchases 15
million bushels of corn and soybeans annually from about 150
producers in our trade territory. We work closely with
producers on marketing and risk management strategies and we
thank you for the opportunity today to give National Grain and
Feed Association's perspective on the MF Global bankruptcy and
its ripple effects across agribusiness and production
agriculture.
After listening to the questions of previous panelists, we
realize that most of you have a good grasp of where things are
today, so I will keep my remarks quite short.
MF Global Holdings bankruptcy has been a shock to our
industry and to my firm. We have believed for decades that risk
to segregated customer funds was virtually zero and now we have
learned the hard way that this is not the case. Our number one
goal at this point is the return of funds and property to the
customers as quickly as possible. It is important to realize
that everyone--it is important for everyone to realize that
assets held by a brokerage firm in segregated accounts like
warehouse receipts, treasury bills, shipping certificates for
cash are not really debts of the brokerage firm. They are
assets owned by the depositor and held in trust by the firm.
And by law these funds should be segregated and not used for
other purposes.
It is difficult to--this is no different than if a failed
bank held a deed of trust on a piece of property. The failure
of the bank doesn't make the property evidenced by the deed of
trust an asset of the failed bank. Title documents like
warehouse receipts are property of the specific customers and
should be returned without requiring surcharges for customers
to buy back their own property. At the end of this, customers
must be made whole and any outcome--any other outcome will
result in a damaging loss of confidence in our risk management
system.
Looking ahead, it is very important to re-establish
confidence in futures markets and the safety of customers'
funds and property being held by these brokers. We need to know
just what happened at MF Global and whether changes need to be
made so that producers, agribusinesses, and the lenders who
support the entire risk management process are confident that
funds used will be available back to the customer.
Serious questions need to be answered by regulators and
self-regulatory organizations that they oversee. Changes may be
needed to restore confidence in the use of exchange-traded risk
management tools. MF Global's failure has left customers unsure
of whether segregated funds will ever be safe. It may be that
some other entity other than the FCMs should be responsible for
holding and safeguarding segregated funds. Should some form of
insurance coverage be provided to--on commodities as well as
securities? Are additional changes needed in the ways
segregated customer funds are allowed to be invested? Should
exchanges bear some responsibility for customer funds lost in
the case of bankruptcy or malfeasance by a clearing member?
Just to be clear, we are not proposing legislation or new
regulatory authority at this point, but these issues need to be
examined carefully and quickly. Ultimately, our goals are
twofold--to ensure that assets of MF Global customers are
returned quickly and to make sure this situation does not
happen again. We must be confident that the system works and it
properly safeguards customer funds and that customers have full
confidence in the exchange-traded tools.
Again, National Grain and Feed appreciates the opportunity
to share its views today. We--this concludes my remarks and I
am glad to take questions.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Fletcher follows:]

Prepared Testimony of John Fletcher, General Manager, Central Missouri
AGRIService LLC, Marshall, MO; on Behalf of National Grain and Feed
Association
Good morning, Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and Members
of the Committee. My name is John Fletcher. I am General Manager of
Central Missouri AGRIService LLC in Marshall, Missouri. Our firm
purchases about 15 million bushels of corn and soybeans annually from
100-150 producers in our trade territory, with whom we work closely on
marketing and risk management strategies. We also provide a range of
feed, fertilizer, seed and crop protection products and services to our
farmer-customers. Thank you for the opportunity today to provide the
NGFA's perspective on the MF Global bankruptcy and its ripple effects
across agribusiness and production agriculture.
My firm is a member of the National Grain and Feed Association
(NGFA), the national nonprofit trade association representing
agribusinesses that include grain elevators, feed manufacturers,
oilseed processors, flour mills, biofuels producers and related
businesses. We estimate that the 1,050 NGFA-member firms nationwide
operate more than 7,000 facilities and purchase, store, process and
export well in excess of 70% of U.S. annual grains and oilseeds
production. Many of our member firms are country elevators that work
very closely with their farmer-customers to merchandise their crops and
manage their risk.
The MF Global Holdings bankruptcy has been a shock to our industry
and to our firm. We have believed for decades that risk to segregated
customer funds held by members of the clearinghouse was virtually zero.
Now, we know that was not the case.
Immediately following the October 31 bankruptcy filing, MF Global
customers struggled with lack of access to futures positions, no access
to funds in their accounts, having accounts transferred to new futures
commission merchants (FCMs), and understanding how and why various
adjustments to account balances took place. In those early days, there
was a dearth of information to help customers manage their financial
exposure and resume normal risk management activities.
Today, former MF Global customers continue to deal with the
aftermath of the situation. Customers now have access to hedge
accounts, but only about sixty percent of initial margin funds needed
for the transferred positions have been transferred to the new
accounts. We welcomed the SIPA Trustee's proposal last week for an
additional distribution of funds and property that would bring the
value of customer distributions to about \2/3\ of original account
values for all customers. However, many firms still will have
significant amounts of margin funds and excess cash tied up with the
Trustee--or missing. Even at a relatively small firm like Central
Missouri AGRIService, we are trying to manage a $600,000 deficit in the
value of our account. We are fortunate to have close relationships with
our lenders, who have responded with strong support of their ag sector
customers.
We were pleased to see that the Trustee recently announced a claims
process for former commodities customers of MF Global. However, that
process looks to be complicated and cumbersome. Even the seemingly
simple task of informing the Trustee of the amount a commodities
customer is claiming is not straightforward. Should a customer use his
account equity on October 31 when the bankruptcy was filed to establish
a claim? Or should that customer use the account equity at the close of
business 4 days later when the bulk account transfer took place? The
difference can be hundreds of thousands of dollars. We need
clarification from the Trustee and the exchanges on proper reporting of
such claims.
Ultimately, the number one goal of the NGFA is to advocate the
return of funds and property to customers as quickly as possible. By
law, these customer funds were to be segregated and not used for other
purposes. Title documents like warehouse receipts are property of
specific customers and should be returned without requiring a surcharge
for customers to buy back their own property. At the end of this
process, customers must be made whole--any other outcome will result in
a damaging loss of confidence in our risk management system. We urge
this Committee, regulators and exchanges, and the Trustee to make
return of customer funds and property the highest priority.
Make no mistake--the U.S. risk management system for agribusiness
and producers has been one of the industry's strengths and competitive
advantages over the last century. The ability to hedge risk on an
exchange has allowed thousands of businesses like mine to offer
producers a wide range of cash forward contracts that help optimize
income from markets. Many individual producers also hedge their risk
through use of futures and options on a regulated exchange. To this
point, we have done so with confidence. We knew we could lose money on
a trade, but we also thought we knew that our funds were safe with a
member of the clearinghouse.
Looking ahead, it will be very important to re-establish confidence
in futures markets and the safety of segregated customer funds and
property. As part of that process, we need to know just what happened
at MF Global and whether changes need to be made so that producers and
agribusiness--as well as their lenders who support the entire risk
management process--are confident that their funds are being protected
and always will be available.
We suggest that serious questions need to be answered by regulators
and the self-regulatory organizations they oversee. What customer
protections currently are in place to safeguard segregated customer
funds? Were audit procedures properly implemented in a timely way? How
often were accounts audited, and who was responsible for enforcing
compliance? Questions like these need to be examined to determine
exactly what happened and how customer funds apparently were
misappropriated.
Very importantly, changes may be needed to begin restoring
confidence in future use of exchange-traded risk management tools.
Weaknesses in customer protections brought to light by MF Global's
failure have left customers unsure of whether segregated funds will
continue to be fully available. It may be that some entity other than
FCMs should be responsible for holding and safeguarding segregated
customer funds. Rather than a clearing firm, should the clearinghouse
or the exchange itself or some independent third party perform that
role? Should SIPC insurance be expanded to provide coverage for
commodities as well as securities? Or is there some private-sector
solution that would better provide insurance against any future losses?
Are changes needed in the ways segregated customer funds are allowed to
be invested? Should exchanges bear some responsibility for customer
funds lost in the case of bankruptcy and/or malfeasance by a clearing
member?
We make no judgments or recommendations on these questions today--
and to be clear, we are not proposing that legislation or additional
regulatory authority are needed--but the issues need to be examined
carefully and quickly.
Ultimately, our goals are twofold: to pursue all possible actions
that will ensure that assets of MF Global customers will be returned
quickly, and to make sure this situation never happens again. The U.S.
agricultural sector relies heavily on regulated exchanges for risk
management. The ability of both commercial and producer hedgers to use
futures markets to manage price risk depends on lenders agreeing to
meet margin calls, which demands full confidence by all lenders in the
safety of those funds. We must be confident the system works, that it
properly safeguards customer funds, and that customers can have full
confidence in continuing to utilize exchange-traded tools.
Again, the NGFA appreciates the opportunity to share its views
today. That concludes my prepared remarks, Mr. Chairman. I would be
happy to respond to any questions.

The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy?

TESTIMONY OF HON. TERRENCE A. DUFFY, EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN, CME
GROUP INC., CHICAGO, IL

Mr. Duffy. Chairman Lucas, Members of the Committee, I am
Terry Duffy, Executive Chairman of the CME Group.
Mr. Corzine's firm, MF Global, has put market users in a
tragic position. Let me start by saying our efforts with
respect to the unprecedented loss of customer segregated funds
caused by MF Global have been to assist these customers and
minimize market disruptions. My testimony summarizes reports
from our staff who were onsite at MF Global along with the CFTC
in the days immediately preceding this bankruptcy. My written
testimony expands on this introductory statement and includes
substantial background material.
About the middle of the week of October 24, MF Global had
announced poor earnings and was downgraded by several credit
firms sparking rumors that it would sell its brokerage
business. CME was the designated self-regulatory organization
for MF Global with responsibility for auditing its futures
business. On Thursday, October 27, two of our auditors went to
MF Global's Chicago office to review MF Global's daily
segregation report for the close of business on Wednesday,
October 26. Wednesday's segregation report, which is not
available until Thursday, showed full compliance. Our auditors
asked for the material necessary to check the numbers on the
report against general ledger and third-party sources and began
the process of tying out the numbers for Wednesday's report.
That substantial review process of the Wednesday
segregation report continued on Thursday and Friday. MF
Global's segregation report for Thursday, October 27, which was
delivered to CME on Friday the 28th also stated that MF Global
remained in full compliance with segregation requirements. In
fact, it showed that the firm held $200 million in excess
segregated funds.
On Sunday, the CFTC informed us that they were aware of a
draft segregation report for the close of business for Friday,
October 28, which showed more than a $900 million shortfall in
required segregation. The CFTC and the CME staff and auditors
returned to the firm on Sunday, October 30, and were informed
by MF Global employees that this discrepancy was caused by ``an
accounting error.'' Our auditors working with the CFTC devoted
the rest of the day and night on Sunday to find this so-called
``accounting error.'' No such error was ever found. Instead, at
about 2:00 a.m. Monday morning, October 31, MF Global informed
both the CFTC and CME at approximately the same time that the
shortfall was real and that customer segregated funds had been
transferred out of segregation to the firm's broker-dealer
accounts.
However, on Monday, October 31, the day the SIPC Trustee
took over, MF Global revised its segregation report for
Thursday, October 27, indicating that the alleged $200 million
in excess segregated funds should have been reported as a
deficiency of $200 million. This shortfall in segregation on
Thursday, October 27, was hidden by the inaccurate report, a
telling sign that regulators were being kept in the dark.
It remains to be seen whether this failure to disclose
permitted additional segregated funds to be improperly
transferred. Throughout this time, the firm and its employees
were under the direction and control of MF Global's management.
Transfers of customer funds effectuated by MF Global management
for the benefit of MF Global constitutes very serious
violations of our rules and that of the CFTC regulations.
We met our obligations to all other clearing firms and
their customers. Also, at all times, we held $1 billion in
excess of the required amounts of customer segregated funds on
behalf of MF Global's customers. I also want to be clear about
the purpose of the CME's Guaranty Fund. The Guaranty Fund does
not belong to CME. It is the property of the member firms and
exist to prevent the systemic risk that might arise when a
clearing firm defaults to the clearinghouse. The Guaranty Fund
ensures that the clearinghouse can satisfy its obligations to
its counterparties. It may not be used to cover losses suffered
by customers of a failed clearing member firm.
Given that, all CME Group's efforts have been directed
towards speeding customer access to their trading accounts,
transferring their positions, and providing the Trustee with
the $550 million guarantee from CME Group to encourage him to
quickly release customer funds that were securely held at CME
Clearing.
I also want to make mention there is not another
clearinghouse or exchange in the United States or abroad that
put up any such guarantee that CME did. The federally mandated
Customer Segregation Program has been in place since 1936. In
that time, prior to the MF Global failure, no customer has ever
lost their segregated funds because of the failure of a
clearing member of the CME.
Moving forward, we intend to work with Congress,
regulators, and industry leaders to strengthen customer
safeguards at the firm level.
I thank you very much and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Duffy follows:]

Prepared Testimony of Hon. Terrence A. Duffy, Executive Chairman, CME
Group Inc., Chicago, IL
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, Members of the Committee,
thank you for the opportunity to testify on the events surrounding the
recent collapse of futures commission merchant (``FCM'') and broker-
dealer (``BD'') MF Global, Inc. (``MFG''). I am Terry Duffy, Executive
Chairman of CME Group (``CME Group'' or ``CME''), which is the world's
largest and most diverse derivatives marketplace. CME Group includes
four separate exchanges--Chicago Mercantile Exchange Inc. the Board of
Trade of the City of Chicago, Inc., the New York Mercantile Exchange,
Inc. and the Commodity Exchange, Inc. (together ``CME Group
Exchanges''). The CME Group Exchanges offer the widest range of
benchmark products available across all major asset classes, including
futures and options based on interest rates, equity indexes, foreign
exchange, energy, metals, agricultural commodities, and alternative
investment products. CME also includes CME Clearing, a derivatives
clearing organization and one of the largest central counterparty
clearing services in the world; it provides clearing and settlement
services for exchange-traded contracts, as well as for over-the-counter
(``OTC'') derivatives transactions through CME Clearing and CME
ClearPort
'
.
Introduction
As the Committee knows, on the morning of October 31, the
Securities Investor Protection Corporation (``SIPC'') filed a petition
with a Federal District Court in New York to place the futures
commission merchant/broker-dealer arm of MFG into bankruptcy, which was
immediately granted by the court. While over the course of our
exchanges' histories clearing members have filed for bankruptcy
protection or been placed into bankruptcy involuntarily, the MFG
bankruptcy is unprecedented in that it is the first time (i) there has
been a shortfall in customer segregated funds held by one of our
clearing members as result of the clearing member's improper handling
of customer funds and (ii) our clearing house was unable to transfer
all customer positions and property in an FCM bankruptcy due to missing
customer funds in a segregated customer account under the control of
the FCM. Indeed, this is the first time in the industry's history that
a customer has suffered a loss as a result of a clearing members'
improper handling of customer funds.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ As recent examples, in both Refco and Lehman, which had large
FCM operations, while non-commodities customers of Refco and Lehman
were significantly impacted by the bankruptcy proceedings, the
regulated commodity customer accounts were transferred to new FCMs
without any disruption. We had no reason to believe this situation
would be any different at MFG until the segregation shortfall was
discovered.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
MFG's customers' funds held by CME clearing house were securely
held; in fact, we held $1 billion in excess funds on behalf of those
customers. Our number one priority is and has been to return to every
MFG customer its rightful property. Our ability to do that, however, is
limited. Since MFG was placed into bankruptcy, as a matter of law, the
bankruptcy Trustee has been in control of the process and all decisions
regarding MFG assets and the money, securities and property of its
customers. Indeed, we have worked diligently with the bankruptcy
Trustee to transfer MFG customer accounts to other FCMs along with a
portion of the customers' collateral on deposit with CME Clearing. To
date, CME Group with the bankruptcy Trustee's permission has
successfully transferred all (approximately 15,000) MFG customer
accounts to other FCMs. The portion of customer collateral transferred
to the new FCMs to margin customer positions was a decision by the
bankruptcy Trustee and outside the control of CME Group. CME Group
continues to take steps and work with the bankruptcy Trustee to
facilitate the release of additional available customer funds.
There are ongoing investigations by the Department of Justice, the
FBI, the CFTC, and the SEC into the events surrounding the MFG
bankruptcy, including efforts to locate the missing segregated customer
property and determining who was responsible for permitting the removal
of that customer property from MFG's segregated accounts. Although we
do not yet have these details, and are affirmatively prohibited from
publicly divulging information obtained in connection with these
Federal investigations, I would like to share with you what CME Group
does know and can share. To this end, I will briefly address the
timeline of events in the days leading up to MFG's bankruptcy and the
efforts to return to MFG's customers property that is rightfully
theirs. Before I do that, I would like to provide the Committee with
some background information regarding the clearing model in the futures
industry, including the role and obligations of FCMs and derivatives
clearing houses.
The Futures Commission Merchant
An FCM is an individual or organization that (i) solicits or
accepts orders to buy or sell futures contracts or options on futures
contracts and (ii) accepts money or other assets from customers to
support such orders. As such, FCMs are agents or intermediaries for
their customers. Among other things, the Commodity Exchange Act
(``CEA''), which is the main statute governing the FCM's legal
obligations, expressly states that all money and other property of any
customer received to margin or guarantee a derivative contract cleared
though a derivatives clearing organization belongs to the customer and
may not be commingled with the FCM's own trading accounts.
With respect to ensuring that such customer collateral received by
the FCM is segregated, the CEA, applicable regulations of the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'') and our clearing house rules
require that money and other customer property must be separately
accounted for and may not be commingled with the funds of the FCM or be
used to margin, secure, or guarantee any trades or contracts of any
person other than the person for whom the same are held. Additionally,
CME Clearing has rules on its books directly addressing FCMs'
obligations in this regard.
In practice, an FCM maintains a number of customer segregated
accounts at custodians approved by the CFTC. As a customer establishes
positions, the FCM transfers collateral from one of its customer
segregated accounts to a customer segregated account maintained and
controlled by the clearing house. In many cases, the FCM collects
margin from its customers in excess of what is required by the clearing
house to support the customer positions cleared through the clearing
house; this ``excess margin'' is held in an account controlled by the
FCM for the benefit of its customers.
Derivatives Clearing Houses
A clearing house acts as the seller to every buyer and buyer to
every seller of every cleared contract. Twice a day it pays winners and
collects from losers so that debt is eliminated from the system and
systemic risk is minimized. When a firm fails to pay its losses, the
clearing house must still pay the firms with profitable positions. The
Guaranty Fund is one of the principal means to make such payments
possible.
Each clearing member contributes assets and agrees to pay an
assessment, based on its risk profile, for the sole purpose of covering
any loss suffered by the clearing house when it makes good on its
commitment to honor its contracts despite the default of another
clearing member. This guaranty is designed to protect against systemic
risk that could arise if the default of one clearing member leads to
the failure of other clearing members. It is worth noting that the
assets in and committed to the Guaranty Fund do not belong to the CME,
they belong to the clearing members who have contributed them.
Nearly 65 different U.S. FCMs hold approximately $155 billion in
U.S. customer collateral and nearly $40 billion in collateral held for
trading on foreign exchanges--much of which is not placed with
regulated clearing houses. As of March 2011, the total amount of
customer funds held by the top 30 FCMs was more than $163 billion. No
clearing house, however large, could effectively or economically
guarantee all such funds and all such activity.
CME also was the designated self-regulatory organization (``DSRO'')
for MFG. As MFG's DSRO, CME was responsible for, among other things,
conducting periodic audits of MFG's FCM-arm and sharing any and all
information with the other regulatory bodies of which the firm is a
member. CME conducted audits of MFG pursuant to standards and
procedures established by the Joint Audit Committee (``JAC'') \2\ and
reported such results to the CFTC. CME conducted audits of MFG, and all
firms for which it was the DSRO, at least once every 9-15 months. The
last audit was as of the close of business on January 31, 2011. This
regulatory audit began subsequent to the audit date and was completed
with a report date of August 4, 2011.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The JAC is a representative committee of U.S. futures exchanges
and regulatory organizations which participate in a joint audit and
financial surveillance program that has been approved and is overseen
by the CFTC. The purpose of the joint program is to coordinate among
the participants numerous audit and financial surveillance procedures
over registered futures industry entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nothing is more important to CME Group than protecting customer
funds and this is exactly what our audits are designed to ensure. We
reviewed the manner in which segregated funds were invested and
required certain modifications which were immediately implemented. All
other audit points were relatively minor and were immediately
corrected. During this same period, MFG's accounting and management
controls were also reviewed by its CPA, which certified its books and
records as of March 31, 2011, and by securities regulators, who
required certain accounting treatment changes.
The Days Preceding MFG's Bankruptcy
During the week of October 24, 2011, MF Global announced losses and
suffered credit rating downgrades, which sparked rumors of its efforts
to sell its brokerage business. On Thursday, October 27th, two of our
auditors made an unannounced appearance at MFG's Chicago offices to
review the daily segregation report for the close of business on
October 26th--the report stated that segregation was intact. Our
auditors asked for the material necessary to reconcile the numbers on
the segregation report to the general ledger and to third party
sources. These procedures continued through Friday evening. At the time
they left the office they had noted only immaterial discrepancies and
we saw no indication that segregated funds were missing as of Wednesday
October 26th. The segregation report for October 27th, which we
received on the afternoon of the 28th, asserted that the firm remained
in full compliance with segregation requirements.
Our auditors returned on Sunday, October 30th because we learned
from the CFTC that the draft segregation report for Friday, October
28th, which had been provided to the CFTC that day, showed a $900
million dollar shortfall in segregation caused by an ``accounting
error.'' Our auditors, working with the CFTC, devoted the rest of the
day and night Sunday to find the so-called accounting error. No such
error was ever found. Instead, at about 2 a.m. Monday morning, MFG
informed the CFTC and CME that customer money had been transferred out
of segregation to firm accounts. Transfers of customer funds for the
benefit of the firm constitute serious violations of our rules and of
the Commodity Exchange Act. MFG was taken over by a SIPC Trustee on
Monday. However, before the SIPC Trustee stepped in Monday, the
segregation report for Thursday, October 27th, which had shown not only
full segregation compliance but also $200 million in excess segregated
funds, was corrected by MFG to show a deficiency of $200 million in
segregated funds. Apparently based on MFG's segregation reports,
additional transfers out of segregation occurred on Friday.
MFG's Bankruptcy, the Trustee and CME Group's Guarantee to the Trustee
As previously noted, prior to MFG's bankruptcy, a shortfall was
discovered in the customer segregated funds held at MFG. For this
reason, unlike prior bankruptcies by FCMs, customer positions and
property were not able to be ported to another solvent clearing firm.
Since MFG was placed into bankruptcy, as a matter of law, the SIPC
Trustee has been in control of the process and all decisions regarding
MFG assets and the money, securities and property of its customers. The
Trustee is holding and/or has control of a substantial pool of customer
property, but must be cautious about making a distribution before he
completes all of his forensic work.
At the time it was placed into bankruptcy, MFG should have had
about $5.5 billion in customer segregated money, securities and
property, but only held $5 billion. Approximately $2.7 billion of the
$5 billion had been transferred to clearing houses in the form of
collateral necessary to support positions held by MFG customers.
Approximately $2.3 billion of the $5 billion in customer segregated
funds was subject to MFG's sole control because those funds were not
needed to collateralize open positions on any exchange or clearing
house. Approximately $2.5 billion was securely-held by CME Clearing. Of
that amount, CME Clearing held nearly $1 billion of so-called excess
collateral on behalf of MFG customers.
The information available suggests that there might be a shortfall
in segregated funds, which currently could be between 13% and 19% of
segregated funds, if the information proves correct. The Trustee must
also consider that the shortfall may be even greater and that if he
distributes based on that assumption and it turns out to be incorrect,
some customers might get better treatment than others, in contravention
of the Bankruptcy Code and CFTC Regulations.
To encourage the Trustee to make a prompt distribution of property
to customers, CME Group made a $550 million guarantee to the Trustee.
The guarantee is not a payment made to customers, but rather a pledge
of funding to the Trustee to provide him the flexibility to return more
customer assets to customers now. In the event that an interim
distribution by the Trustee gives customers more cash than they would
have been entitled to in the claims process under the Bankruptcy Code
and CFTC regulations, CME Group has proposed that our guarantee would
be used to make the customer segregation asset pool whole for the
amount of any over-distribution, up to $550 million. As a result of the
guarantee, we believe the Trustee should be protected if he decides now
to distribute to every customer at least 75% of its account value. We
believe these extraordinary measures are needed because an interim
distribution by the Trustee could be delayed even further without them.
On November 29, the Trustee filed a motion with the Bankruptcy
Court seeking permission to make a third interim distribution of
customer funds in the coming weeks. Though details of the timing and
amount of the distributions are still being worked out, the Trustee has
stated that CME Group's financial guarantee will enable him to return
more than \2/3\ of the value of frozen customer segregated accounts, up
to an additional $2.1 billion, in roughly 2 to 4 weeks. The Trustee has
stated that this distribution will include trapped account balances,
dishonored checks and distributions with respect to warehouse receipts
and other customer property at MFG. Beginning next week, another $2.0
billion+ is expected to be released in reliance on our guarantee.
Separately, CME Group also announced that CME Trust would make its
$50 million in assets available to CME Group market participants that
suffered losses due to MFG's improper handling of funds held at the
firm level. The CME Trust was established in 1969 to provide financial
protection to customers in the event a CME Group member firm was unable
to meet its obligations to customers. CME Trust is providing virtually
all of its capital, $50 million, to CME Group market participants
suffer losses as a result of MFG's improper handling of customer funds
at the firm level. Unlike the $550 million CME Group guarantee, which
is a limited guarantee in connection with the goal of accelerating
interim distributions by the Trustee, the $50 million from the CME
Trust will cover CME Group customer losses due to MFG's misuse of
customer funds. We note that there also are civil and criminal
penalties for misusing segregated funds as MFG did here, which, if
recovered, would be used to address the current shortfall.
Conclusion
Our audit and spot check of MFG were performed at the highest
professional level; the transfer of segregated funds out of the
appropriate accounts was disguised from all regulators. CME Group has
and continues to take extraordinary measures to minimize the impact
that this unprecedented event has had on the futures industry and its
participants. MFG appears to have broken a number of rules and
obligations to protect customer collateral resulting in customer
losses.
Nothing is more important to CME Group than protecting customers.
CME has worked diligently to permit customers to liquidate positions,
transfer accounts and recover a significant portion of the value of
their accounts. We provided the Trustee comfort with a $550 million
guarantee, so that he could expedite the release of funds to customers
without loss to the bankruptcy estate. Customers, however, are
justifiably frustrated that they do not yet have access to their own
money.
Some might conclude that the system failed because of this one
instance when customers have been injured despite the prescribed system
of segregation. Regulatory failures happen, unfortunately. Banks fail
and the FDIC provides sometimes inadequate protection to depositors.
The taxpayers get tapped. Securities firms fail and SIPC is irrelevant
to any large account holders. The laws prohibit Ponzi schemes, yet
hundreds are detected every year after the public has been robbed and
the money evaporated. Insider trading happens every day. Enron
explodes, Lehman fails. Insurance companies fail and policy holders
lose. While it is clear that action is necessary to restore customer
confidence and protect against future failures, the fact is that MFG
broke rules by moving customer segregated funds out of an account over
which it had control. A firm failed to comply with applicable rules,
but that does not mean the segregation system is a failed system. To be
clear, the customer segregation regime in the futures industry was not
the cause of the losses that customers are suffering from today.
We look forward to working with the industry, regulators and
Congress to explore potential improvements to increase security of
customer funds held by FCMs and restore confidence in the futures
industry.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Duffy.
Mr. Brodsky, whenever you are ready.

TESTIMONY OF WILLIAM J. BRODSKY, J.D., CHAIRMAN AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, CBOE HOLDINGS, INC. AND CHICAGO BOARD
OPTIONS EXCHANGE, INC., CHICAGO, IL

Mr. Brodsky. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Peterson, and Chairman Lucas
and Members of the Committee, I am William Brodsky. I am
Chairman and CEO of the Chicago Board Options Exchange, and I
would hope that my written statement will be entered into the
record.
CBOE Holdings owns and/or operates four exchanges--three
securities exchanges and one futures exchange. Our regulatory
division provides comprehensive regulatory services to each of
these exchanges to a broad array of market surveillance
mechanisms by conducting examinations of member firms and by
conducting examinations of exchange members.
As the Securities Exchange Commission has designated us as
the designated examining authority for MF Global, CBOE
continues to work closely with the SEC with FINRA and other
regulators to critically evaluate the events leading up to and
following the bankruptcy of MF Global. We take our self-
regulatory responsibility very seriously and we have the
deepest sympathy for the customers of MF Global whose funds are
currently frozen or may be missing as a result of the
bankruptcy.
As background, let me make note that MF Global was both a
securities broker-dealer under the jurisdiction of the SEC and
the futures commission merchant under the CFTC as you have
heard earlier today. On the securities side, MF Global is also
a FINRA member and therefore subject to FINRA's rules and
oversight. On the futures side, as you know, CME Group serves
as the designated self-regulatory organization of FINRA.
Although some of MF Global's activities were on the
securities side, the largest share by far took place on the
futures side both by number of accounts and by value of
customer assets of MF Global and many times more than that of
the securities side.
There are not only different regulators but different rules
for trading securities and futures. CBOE's oversight role as
DEA pertains to the securities trading at MF Global, and I will
briefly discuss the Federal regulatory scheme that exists. And
I think for the purpose of time I will leave that out because
it is in my written statement.
The customers of a failed brokerage firm on the securities
side get back all their stocks and bonds, all the securities in
the account registered--that are in their name or in the
process of being registered. Once this step is taken, the
firm's remaining customer assets are then divided on a pro rata
basis with funds shared in proportion to the size of their
claims. If sufficient funds are not available in the firm's
customer accounts to satisfy the claims, then the reserve funds
of SIPC are used to supplement the distribution up to the
ceiling of $500,000 per customer, which includes cash of up to
$250,000 a customer. Additional funds may be available to
satisfy the remainder of customer claims.
On November 30, 2011, the SIPC Trustee appointed for the
estate of MF Global filed a Motion to Transfer the majority of
the remaining 330 securities accounts to another broker-dealer.
Under the terms of the proposed purchase agreement with that
broker-dealer and approved by the Bankruptcy Court,
approximately 85 percent of the customers assigned to MF
Global's customer account will be fully reimbursed for the
amount in equity claims. The remaining customers with net
equity claims of about $1.5 million will receive recoveries
ranging between 60 and over 90 percent, depending on the size
of their claim. Additionally, these customers not receiving
full refund may be able to recover the full amount of their
remaining claim depending on the outcome of the litigation.
This process applies to securities accounts. Commodity
futures contracts are among the investments that are ineligible
for SIPC protections unless they are in a portfolio margin
account defined as customer property under the Acts.
Now, turning to the events leading up to MF Global's
bankruptcy as understood at this point in the ongoing
investigation, on or about May 31 we became aware of the
exposure of MF Global to the European sovereign debt when
reviewing the company's audited financial statements. In the
footnotes of the financial statements, there was a discussion
of the accounting treatment of the repo agreements and reverse
repo agreements when the maturity date of the underlying
collateral is the same as the maturity date of the agreements.
A couple of weeks later, on June 14, the SEC conducted a Rule
17h risk assessment program with MF Global. As is ordinary
practice, CBOE and FINRA participated in this conference call
and throughout July and August 2011 there were a number of
conversations, including two or more with these parties
including MF Global, SEC, FINRA, and CBOE regarding MF
sovereign debt exposure and discussions about how that risk of
exposure should be accounted for by the firm in calculating its
required net capital.
Although there may have been some room for debate about
whether these agreements were properly left of the balance
sheet, CBOE, FINRA, and the SEC agreed that it was appropriate
to apply net capital charges to these positions considering the
significant market and credit risk. MF Global subsequently held
further conversations with the SEC staff arguing that it should
not have to take a capital charge for the sovereign debt, but
by the second half of August, FINRA, CBOE, and the SEC
ultimately affirmed that a net capital charge was appropriate.
Because the securities regulators determined that it was
necessary and appropriate for MF Global to apply this net
capital charge retroactively, MF Global determined that it was
a net capital deficiency as of the end of July 2011. However,
the firm was able to continue to operate at this point because
it had taken a number of preemptive steps to increase its
capital in anticipation of the regulators affirmation that the
net capital charge would have prevailed.
While the securities regulators continued to discuss the
sovereign debt exposure with MF Global, CBOE separately
initiated its own investigation of MF Global on August 22,
2011. And as is common practice, CBOE's examination focused on
the most recent complete month, which was July 2011. Beginning
in August of 2011, CBOE's staff requested and received a
variety of financial data from MF Global and these various
computations were received daily at least through the end of
October 2011.
In addition, our staff reviewed a variety of financial
statements from the firm throughout this time determining the
financial health of the firm. It is important to note that up
until the end of the period, the financial information that we
received from MF Global on a daily basis never showed a deficit
of any kind. On September 18, CBOE formally requested documents
pertaining to the financial investigation of the European debt
portfolio.
Although MF Global routinely showed significant excess
capital, the firm was placed under a higher level of
surveillance by CBOE beginning back in December of 2010 and for
every month thereafter primarily as a result of repeated
monthly and quarterly losses. CBOE shared these closer-than-
normal surveillance reports with SIPC and the SEC and the
Options Clearing Corporation and the National Securities
Clearing Corporation. CBOE's staff has been onsite at the firm
every day for the past couple of months. We have spent
significant time piecing together all the money wires and
transfers that occurred during the week of October 24 to
October 31, including the funding of daily settlement needs and
the funding of customer withdrawals, bank reconciliations, and
the manner in which margin calls on European sovereign debt was
met.
We shared all of this information with the SEC, the CFTC,
and SIPC. CBOE, along with other regulators, continues to piece
together the wires that were creating the shortfall in the
segregated futures accounts in order to obtain a comprehensive
understanding of the events that led to MF's bankruptcy. We and
other regulators continue to consult with each other and share
information as we learn it. CBOE continues to work with the
SEC's Chicago office and in turn communicates daily with the
SEC's headquarters.
In conclusion, CBOE and other regulators are still
gathering and examining information needed to make a full
assessment of the matter and to define and address the lessons
learned from the MF Global bankruptcy. In addition to a
comprehensive investigation, we believe that the issues
surrounding the MF Global also provide the impetus for
regulators to consider whether their rules and policies that
should be adopted or amended to add to a greater level of
protection of customer assets in broker-dealers and FCMs during
bankruptcy scenarios. Any such rules or policies should
necessarily also focus on ensuring that customer assets can be
transferred as quickly as possible in those types of events.
We intend to take this opportunity to determine whether
there any other improvements that should be made in terms of
cooperation and communications among regulators when faced with
a financially troubled firm subject to the oversight of
multiple entities. We hope that the foregoing narrative is
helpful to the Committee's understanding of the events leading
up to and surrounding the bankruptcy. We are committed to
assisting the Committee and its staff in its continued inquiry.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Brodsky follows:]

Prepared Testimony of William J. Brodsky, J.D., Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer, CBOE Holdings, Inc. and Chicago Board Options
Exchange, Inc., Chicago, IL
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, I am William J. Brodsky,
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of the CBOE Holdings, Inc. and its
principal subsidiary, the Chicago Board Options Exchange, Incorporated
(CBOE). For the past 37 years, I have served in leadership roles at
major U.S. stock, futures and options exchanges, including 14 years in
my current role as CBOE Chairman and CEO and 11 years as CEO of the
Chicago Mercantile Exchange. I also recently completed a 2 year term as
Chairman of the World Federation of Exchanges whose membership includes
over fifty of the largest stock, options and futures exchanges in the
world.
In addition to operating CBOE, which is the leading securities
options exchange in the United States, CBOE Holdings also operates C2,
which is a fully electronic options exchange, runs the CBOE Stock
Exchange as a facility of CBOE, and owns and operates CBOE Futures
Exchange. CBOE's Regulatory Division provides comprehensive regulatory
services to each of these exchanges by conducting a broad array of
market surveillances on those markets, by conducting various
examinations of members of those exchanges, and by conducting
investigations of the members of those exchanges based on the results
of its surveillances, its examinations, or based upon complaints. In
addition, all of the nine U.S. options exchanges, including CBOE and
C2, are participants of a national market system plan, i.e., the
Options Regulatory Surveillance Authority (ORSA). ORSA was formed so
that the U.S. options exchanges could jointly fulfill their statutory
obligation to surveil for instances of insider trading involving listed
options. The participants of ORSA have selected CBOE to be the
exclusive regulatory services provider to look for insider trading in
listed options on behalf of all of them.
Now, turning to the specific matter that is the subject of these
hearings, we would first like to state that we have the deepest
sympathy and concern for those customers of MF Global, Inc. (MFGI) \1\
whose funds are currently frozen or may be lost or missing as a result
of the recent MF Global bankruptcy. We take our self-regulatory
responsibilities very seriously and, as one of the regulators
responsible for overseeing MFGI, we have devoted many resources over
the last few months to working with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA),
and other regulators to carefully evaluate the events leading up to and
following the filing for bankruptcy by MF Global. We will attempt to
describe in greater detail below the steps the CBOE has undertaken to
date. In addition, we would like to assure the Committee that we will
continue to make available all staff resources necessary to assist in
an expeditious and thorough investigation of all matters related to the
events at MF Global with the hopes that a resolution can be found to
return as many customer funds as quickly as possible.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ MF Global, Inc. is a wholly-owned subsidiary of MF Global
Holdings USA, Inc. The ultimate parent is MF Global Holdings Ltd. MF
Global, Inc. is a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and
Exchange Commission. MF Global, Inc is also registered with the
Commodities Futures Trading Commission as a futures commission
merchant. When referencing the MF Global structure generally in this
testimony, we will use the term ``MF Global.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although some of MFGI's activities that are the subject matter of
this inquiry took place in the securities markets, by far the larger
share of its activities took place in the futures markets. To clarify
CBOE's role in overseeing MFGI, we believe it is instructive to first
discuss briefly the Federal regulatory scheme for the oversight of
securities firms as established by law. There are two primary financial
responsibility rules that are designed to protect customers' assets
held in a securities account: the Securities and Exchange Commission's
uniform net capital rule (Rule 15c3-1) and the SEC's customer
protection rule (Rule 15c3-3). The net capital rule focuses on
liquidity and is designed to protect securities customers,
counterparties, and creditors by requiring that broker-dealers have
sufficient liquid resources on hand at all times to satisfy claims
promptly. Rule 15c3-3, or the customer protection rule, is designed to
ensure that customer property (securities and funds) in the custody of
broker-dealers is adequately safeguarded and generally segregated from
the firm's own funds and securities. By law, both of these rules apply
to the activities of registered broker-dealers, but not to unregistered
affiliates. Assuming a securities firm complies in all respects with
the operation of these two rules, securities customers should be able
to recover all of the value of their funds and paid for securities in
their account at that broker-dealer.
Securities customers are afforded further protection through the
Securities Investor Protection Corporation (SIPC), which was created in
1970 as a nonprofit, non-government, membership corporation, funded by
member broker-dealers. The primary role of SIPC is to return funds and
securities to investors if the broker-dealer holding those assets
becomes insolvent. Customers of a failed brokerage firm get back all
securities (such as stocks and bonds) that already are registered in
their name or are in the process of being registered. Once this step is
taken, the firm's remaining customer assets are then divided on a pro
rata basis with funds shared in proportion to the size of claims. If
sufficient funds are not available in the firm's customer accounts to
satisfy claims within these limits, the reserve funds of SIPC are used
to supplement the distribution, up to a ceiling of $500,000 per
customer, including a maximum of $250,000 for cash claims. Additional
funds may be available to satisfy the remainder of customer claims
after the cost of liquidating the brokerage firm is taken into account.
SIPC generally covers notes, stocks, bonds, mutual funds and other
investment company shares, and other registered securities. Among the
investments that are ineligible for SIPC protections are commodity
futures contracts (unless in portfolio margining accounts and defined
as customer property under the Securities Investor Protection Act). As
the Committee knows, a SIPC Trustee has been appointed for the estate
of MF Global. On November 30, the SIPC Trustee filed a motion to
transfer the majority of the remaining approximately 330 non-affiliate
securities accounts to another broker-dealer. Under the terms of the
proposed purchase agreement with the acquiring broker-dealer, if
approved by the bankruptcy court, approximately 85% of customers with
MFGI custody securities accounts will be fully reimbursed for the
amount of their net equity claims. The remaining customers with net
equity claims above $1.25 million would receive recoveries ranging from
60% to over 90% of those claims, depending upon the size of their
claim. Additionally, these customers not receiving a full refund may
yet be able to recover up to the full amount of their remaining claim
depending on the outcome of the SIPC liquidation.
Supporting the Federal securities regulatory scheme, of course, is
the oversight of the securities firms by securities exchanges and FINRA
to check that firms are, in fact, complying with the financial
responsibility rules. Section 19(g)(1) of the Securities Exchange Act
of 1934 (Act) requires every self-regulatory organization (SRO)
registered as either a national securities exchange (e.g., CBOE) or a
national securities association (e.g., FINRA) to examine its members
and persons associated with its members to ensure compliance with the
Act, the rules and regulations thereunder, and the SRO's own rules,
unless the SRO is relieved of this responsibility pursuant to Section
17(d) or Section 19(g)(2) of the Act. With respect to a common member
(i.e., one that is a member of more than one SRO), Section 17(d)(1)
authorizes the Commission to relieve an SRO of the responsibilities to
receive regulatory reports, to examine for and enforce compliance with
applicable statutes, rules, and regulations, or to perform other
specified regulatory functions.
To implement Section 17(d)(1), the Commission adopted Rule 17d-1
under the Act. Rule 17d-1 authorizes the Commission to designate a
single SRO as the designated examining authority (DEA) to examine
common members for compliance with the financial responsibility
requirements imposed by the Act, or by Commission or SRO rules. When an
SRO has been designated as a common member's DEA, all other SROs to
which the common member belongs are relieved of the responsibility to
examine the firm for compliance with the applicable financial
responsibility rules. On its face, Rule 17d-1 deals only with an SRO's
obligations to enforce member compliance with financial responsibility
requirements.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Rule 17d-1 does not relieve an SRO from its obligation to
examine a common member for compliance with the SRO's own rules and
provisions of the Federal securities laws governing matters other than
financial responsibility, including sales practices and trading
activities and practices. As such, CBOE also has responsibility to
oversee MFGI's trading activity on the CBOE. CBOE is also a party to a
Rule 17d-2 agreement with FINRA by which FINRA has assumed
responsibility under the Act for overseeing the sales practice
activities of common members, including MFGI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Commission designated CBOE to act as the DEA for MF Global,
Inc. and CBOE has acted in this capacity with respect to MFGI (and its
predecessors) since March 2003. CBOE is currently the designated
examining authority for 160 registered broker-dealers. As a designated
examining authority, the CBOE is responsible for enforcing the
financial, margin, and books and records requirements of the SEC, the
Federal Reserve Board and CBOE. This is accomplished through routine
financial monitoring (on, at minimum, a monthly basis), routine main
office examinations, and special investigations. During the time CBOE
has served as the DEA for MFGI (and its predecessors), CBOE has
conducted nine routine examinations of MFGI and three financial
investigations to investigate specific matters. CBOE has taken
disciplinary action against MFGI five times as a result of these
examinations and investigations.
Of course, MFGI is both a broker-dealer under the jurisdiction of
the SEC and a futures commission merchant under the jurisdiction of the
Commodities Futures Trading Commission. Consequently, MFGI has been
subject to examination by both securities and futures regulators, but
the number of accounts and the value of the customer assets are many
times greater on the futures side than they are on the securities side.
On the futures side, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) serves as
the Designated Self Regulatory Organization (DSRO). In addition, FINRA
has been involved in overseeing MFGI on the securities side as MFGI is
a member of FINRA and is subject to FINRA's rules and oversight.
For the benefit of the Committee, I would like to discuss our
understanding of how the issue of MF Global's exposure to European
sovereign debt in the form of repurchase agreements came to be known
and the various steps that were taken by CBOE and other regulators to
oversee the risk of that exposure. CBOE became aware of the exposure of
MF Global to European sovereign debt on or about May 31, 2011 from
reviewing the company's annual audited financial statements. In the
footnotes to the financial statements there was a discussion of the
accounting treatment for repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase
agreements when the maturity date of the underlying collateral is the
same as the maturity date as the agreements. The firm believed that
generally accepted accounting principles allowed these agreements to be
treated as sales and not to be recognized as assets and liabilities on
MFGI's balance sheet. Because the repurchase agreements did not appear
on the financial statements, those agreements did not appear on the
FOCUS Report \3\ submitted to regulators.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ FOCUS Report is an acronym for Financial and Operational
Combined Uniform Single Report. The uniform regulatory report (Form X-
17A-5) filed periodically by all broker-dealers pursuant to SEC Rule
17a-5. The reports detail capital, earnings and other pertinent
information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A couple of weeks later, on June 14, 2011, the SEC conducted its
Rule 17h risk assessment program meeting with MFGI.\4\ Pursuant to
ordinary practice, CBOE and FINRA participated in this conference call
meeting. At this meeting, MF Global discussed organizational and
management changes within the Firm, its strategic direction, financial
information, risk management, current litigations, and some information
about the European sovereign debt. Throughout July and August 2011,
there were a number of conversations held involving two or more of
these parties (MFGI, SEC, FINRA, and CBOE) regarding the sovereign debt
exposure and discussions about how the risk of this exposure should be
accounted for by the firm in calculating the required net capital,
which the firm was required to keep to protect against market risk. It
is our understanding that the SEC staff indicated that MFGI would need
to take a net capital charge for these repurchase agreements due to the
market risk exposure that they created for the MF Global entity.
Although there may have been some room for debate about whether these
agreements were properly left off of the balance sheet, CBOE
nonetheless agreed with FINRA and the SEC that it was appropriate to
apply a net capital charge to these positions given the significant
market and credit risk posed by them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Rules adopted under Section 17(h) of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934 require broker-dealers that are part of a holding
company structure with at least $20 million in capital to file with the
Commission disaggregated, non-public information on the broker-dealer,
the holding company, and other entities within the holding company. The
purpose of the Broker-Dealer Risk Assessment program is for staff in
the SEC's Division of Trading and Markets to assess the risks to
registered broker-dealers that may arise from affiliated entities,
including holding companies and keep apprised of significant events
that could adversely affect broker-dealers, customers and the financial
markets.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The firm held further conversations with SEC staff in August
suggesting that it should not have to take a net capital charge for the
sovereign debt exposure. Ultimately, by the second half of August,
however, FINRA, CBOE and the SEC all affirmed the determination that a
net capital charge was appropriate. Because the securities regulators
determined that it was necessary and appropriate for MFGI to apply this
net capital charge retroactively, MFGI determined that it was in net
capital deficiency at the end of July 2011. MFGI, however, was able to
continue to operate at this point because the company had taken a
number of steps to increase its net capital in anticipation that
affirmation of a net capital charge would prevail. Among the steps that
MFGI took to remain in net capital compliance included: a capital
infusion from its parent company (MF Global Holdings USA, Inc.), the
transfer of some sovereign bond positions to MF Global Finance USA, Inc
as a reverse repo-to-maturity transaction, and the liquidation of
foreign affiliates' open futures positions, which had the effect of
reducing the firm's required net capital. It should also be noted that
on August 31, 2011, CBOE joined CME in a meeting with MF Global for an
overview of the transactions and the charge. CME agreed with the
decision that had been made by the securities regulators requesting the
adjustment to the firm's net capital.
During the time that the securities regulators were discussing the
sovereign debt exposure issue with MFGI, CBOE separately initiated its
own examination of MFGI on August 22, 2011. CBOE determined that it
would review the European sovereign bond portfolio dating back to the
beginning of 2011 to check whether the retroactive application of the
increased capital charge would have had the effect of causing MFGI not
to be in compliance with its financial responsibility rules
retroactively. CBOE staff was on-site in MFGI's offices starting on
September 7th and as is common practice, CBOE's examination focused on
the most recent month in which all of the books have been closed, in
this case July 2011. CBOE sent a formal request for documents
pertaining to the financial investigation of the European Sovereign
Debt portfolio on September 19, 2011. MF Global provided the requested
documents on September 23, 2011.
Another primary focus of CBOE's examination (as is the case with
all annual financial and operational examinations of this type) was to
determine whether MFGI was appropriately segregating its customer funds
in securities accounts in compliance with SEC Rule 15c3-3. CBOE spent
considerable time looking closely at these issues. Any potential rule
violations that the CBOE and SEC may identify to date could become the
subject of disciplinary action against individuals at MFGI through the
ongoing investigation.
Beginning on August 26, 2011, CBOE staff requested and received a
variety of daily financial information from MFGI. These various
computations were received daily through the end of October 2011. In
addition, CBOE staff reviewed a variety of financial documents from the
firm throughout this time to determine the financial health of the
firm. It should also be noted that the financial information we
received from the firm on a daily basis never showed a deficit of any
kind. In fact, until the bankruptcy filing, MFGI never reported excess
net capital of less than $100 million for any month-end since April
2008 (with the exception of its July 2011 revised net capital
calculation mentioned above) and always maintained open funding from
its parent if needed. Although MFGI routinely showed significant excess
net capital, through CBOE's monthly closer-than-normal (CTN)
surveillance reports (which CBOE generates from the monthly FOCUS
reports), MFGI has been on a level of higher surveillance by CBOE for
every month since December 2010 for various reasons. These monthly CTN
write-ups are shared with SIPC, the SEC, the Options Clearing
Corporation, the National Securities Clearing Corporation, and other
securities self-regulatory organizations. During the final days of
October, however, news about MF Global's exposure to sovereign debt
surfaced, its stock price declined, and its credit rating was
downgraded. Nevertheless, we received a preliminary net capital
computation for Friday, October 28th on Saturday, October 29th which
indicated the firm was still in net capital compliance. Just two days
later, on Monday, October 31, staff at MF Global sent an e-mail stating
a ``significant shortfall in segregated futures accounts.'' That same
day MF Global Holdings, Ltd. and MF Global Finance filed for
bankruptcy.
Almost every day for the last couple of months, CBOE staff has been
on site at the firm continuing to review all elements of the firm's
Rule 15c3-3 computation. We have also spent significant time piecing
together all the money wires and transfers that occurred during the
week of October 24th to 31st, 2011, including the funding of daily
settlement needs, the funding of customer withdrawals, bank
reconciliations, and the manner in which margin calls on the European
Sovereign debt was met. We also have shared this information with the
SEC, the CFTC, and SIPC. We, along with the other regulators, have been
piecing together the wires that created the shortfall of the Segregated
Futures accounts and have been consulting with each other on the events
as we learn them. We are continuing to work with the SEC Chicago
office, which in turn communicates daily with staff in SEC
headquarters.
In conclusion, CBOE is still gathering information and we will need
to learn more before we are able to make a full assessment of this
matter and to be able to define and address any ``lessons learned.'' We
believe that the issues surrounding the MF Global bankruptcy provides
an impetus for CBOE, FINRA, and the statutory regulators to discuss
amongst ourselves whether there are rules or policies that should be
adopted or amended to add a greater level of protection to customer
assets in broker-dealer or FCM bankruptcy scenarios. Any new or amended
rules or policies should necessarily also focus on ensuring that
customer assets can be transferred as quickly as possible in these
types of events. We also intend to take this opportunity to determine
whether there can be any improvements in the nature of the cooperation
among regulators when faced with a financially troubled firm subject to
oversight by multiple entities.
We hope that the foregoing narrative was helpful to the Committee's
understanding of the events leading up to and surrounding the
bankruptcy of MFGI. We stand ready to continue to assist the Committee
and its staff with its continued inquiry.

Mr. Conaway [presiding.] Thank you, Mr. Brodsky.
Mr. Roth for 5 minutes.

TESTIMONY OF DANIEL J. ROTH, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, NATIONAL FUTURES ASSOCIATION, CHICAGO, IL

Mr. Roth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My name is Dan Roth and I am the President of National
Futures Association and I appreciate the opportunity to be here
today to talk about the types of regulatory changes which might
be necessary in light of MF Global. And clearly, Mr. Chairman,
some regulatory changes are going to be necessary.
Congress recognized a long time ago that efficient futures
markets are vital to our economy, that efficient futures
markets depend on liquidity, and that that depends on public
confidence. The whole point of the regulatory structure for the
U.S. futures industry is to ensure that that public confidence
is intact.
For a long time, the futures industry enjoyed a great
reputation for financial integrity, a reputation that survived
the crisis of 2008. But now, as a result of MF Global, that
reputation and public confidence has taken a great hit and it
is up to all of us that are involved in the regulatory process
to take a top-to-bottom look at what we do and how we do it and
try to figure out a better way to do it and try to make sure
that we re-earn that public confidence.
I think that that inquiry about how we can do things better
falls into two separate categories. I think we have to look at
the steps that we can take to try to prevent insolvencies from
occurring in the future; and second, how we deal with those
insolvencies when they do occur. I have outlined in my written
testimony what NFA's role in the current regulatory structure
and how we monitor our firms for seg compliance. What I would
like to do today is just basically talk about a couple of the
seven or eight ideas that I included in my written testimony.
With respect to preventing insolvencies, I think the two
points to start out with are obvious and I am sorry to take
time to restate the obvious. But first, if a person is intent
upon violating the law, if a person is intent upon committing a
felony, there is no regulatory practice that will in every
instance prevent that person from doing just that. And second,
I think one of the best tools that we have to prevent this type
of conduct is to deter that type of conduct through vigorous
enforcement of the existing law. Just under the Commodity
Exchange Act, it is a violation--it is a felony violation to
misappropriate customer segregated funds punishable by up to 10
years in prison. And I know we have an ongoing investigation
but I am hopeful and confident that if that investigation
uncovers criminal activity, that that activity will be
prosecuted vigorously.
But vigorous prosecution of the existing rules isn't going
to be enough to get us where we want to go. That is not going
to be enough to restore public confidence in the financial
integrity of these markets. I have again outlined a couple of
different things that I think need to be discussed and
considered in my written testimony.
I think we have to look at how we monitor our firms for
compliance with segregated fund requirements. We are the DSRO
for about 26 non-clearing FCMs. Those firms file daily
segregation reports with us. We get more detailed reports on a
monthly basis outlining not only what their seg funds numbers
are but where those funds are invested and what type of
instruments. We spot-check for compliance with seg funds
requirements by verifying to outside depositories of the
balances that are reported to us. We do that in the course of
our regular audits of FCMs, and we do that when we are doing
the audit for a number of date that we spot-check throughout
the year.
I think we could do more on that. I think we could do more
systematic and more regular surprise spot-checks of that type
of stuff. And we would be happy to talk with the Commission and
with Congress to see how that could be improved. We also
discuss in the written testimony ideas such as requiring FCMs
to maintain a certain amount of excess segregation possibly the
idea of a third-party depository. And there are a number of
different items. And I think my basic point is that I am not
advocating any of the items that are listed in the testimony,
but they are all items which require very serious, very
thoughtful consideration so that we can try to restore public
confidence to these markets.
With respect to handling insolvencies when they do occur,
in 1985, the CFTC asked NFA to do a study of customer account
protection issues in the light of a failure of a firm called
Volume Investors. And in 1986 we submitted that report to the
CFTC. That data that was in that report I think made clear that
no customer funds had ever been lost to--due to insolvency by a
clearing FCM. With respect to non-clearing FCMs, the report
presented that that I think--from which people concluded that
the losses had been so infrequent and so small that a
formalized response mechanism like an insurance program might
not be appropriate.
Well, that was then and this is now and things may have
changed and I think all of the issues that were discussed in
that 1986 report have to be revisited and have to be revisited
in some detail.
With that, Mr. Chairman, we look forward to working with
the industry, with the Commission, and with Congress to try to
restore that public confidence that is so vital to our markets.
Thank you.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Roth follows:]

Prepared Testimony of Daniel J. Roth, President and Chief Executive
Officer, National Futures Association, Chicago, IL
My name is Daniel Roth and I am the President and Chief Executive
Officer of National Futures Association. NFA is the industry-wide,
self-regulatory organization for the futures industry. Our 4,000 Member
firms include futures commission merchants, commodity pool operators,
commodity trading advisors and introducing brokers. The recent demise
of MF Global has dealt a severe blow to the public's confidence in the
financial integrity of our futures markets. This is much more than an
academic argument. Thousands of customers have suffered and continue to
suffer from a breakdown in the regulatory protections they have come to
expect. Their frustration with the situation is completely
understandable. Reestablishing the public's confidence is essential to
our futures markets, which, in turn, are an essential part of our
nation's economy.
All of us involved in the regulatory process have to work to
restore that confidence and that effort must begin with identifying and
implementing regulatory changes to try to prevent such insolvencies
from occurring and to better respond to them when they do occur. Even
while the MF Global investigation is ongoing, we should be able to
identify certain frailties of the current structure that will need to
be addressed. No ideas should be off the table in this process. At the
same time, though, we should not hastily discard regulatory approaches
that have been historically sound and I would note that the basic
concept of self-regulation has served our markets and our nation very
well for a very long time. Until this investigation is complete, we
will not know the full facts of exactly what went wrong at MF Global.
What I do know, though, is that no system of regulation can in every
instance prevent people intent on breaking the law from doing so, and
that is why the Commodity Exchange Act provides that stealing customer
funds is a felony punishable by up to 10 years in prison. With that in
mind, I would like to outline today some of the possible regulatory
changes that need to be considered.
First, though, let me describe NFA's current role in the regulatory
structure, in particular with regard to FCMs. Our 4,000 Member firms
include approximately 70 FCMs that hold customer funds. The largest of
these are members of one or more exchanges and therefore members of
multiple Self-Regulatory Organizations (SROs). Pursuant to CFTC rules,
the SROs have formed a Joint Audit Committee. For FCMs that have
multiple SROs, the Joint Audit Committee assigns one SRO to be the
primary regulator, what is referred to as the Designated Self-
Regulatory Organization or DSRO. With very limited exceptions, NFA acts
as the DSRO for 26 FCMs that hold customer funds and that are not
clearing members of any exchange. On a daily basis each of these firms
must report to NFA the amount of funds required to be held in
segregation; the amount actually held; customer debit information; open
trade equity for both customer and proprietary futures trading; long
and short option value for customer accounts; and debits and deficits
for non-customers such as employees or affiliates of the firm. Firms
for which NFA is the DSRO must also file a Segregated Investment Detail
Report (SIDR report). This report lists the types of investments in
which customer segregated funds are held. These reports must be filed
either monthly or whenever there is a material change in the
information. Our systems for the daily segregation reports and the SIDR
reports generate alerts whenever there is a change in information
regarding segregated funds that could signal a problem with the firm.
Each FCM is also subject to two annual examinations, one by an
outside CPA that produces an annual certified report and the other by
its DSRO. Let me assure you that those annual examinations focus
extensively on testing for segregation compliance and confirming to
outside sources the segregated fund balances reported by the FCM. We
also act as the exclusive SRO for all commodity pool operators,
commodity trading advisors and most introducing brokers.
Although we were not the DSRO for MF Global, we participated with
other members of the Joint Audit Committee to receive regular updates
on MF Global's condition in the week prior to its bankruptcy. When the
shortfall in customer segregated funds became known, we focused on the
five FCMs for which we are the DSRO that had customer funds on deposit
with MF Global. Our goal was to ensure that those FCMs could satisfy
their obligations to their customers and that they were in compliance
with all segregation and capital requirements. We worked closely with
the CFTC in that effort and continue to monitor those firms, all of
which appear to be in compliance.
We have also identified 150 commodity pools operated by NFA Member
firms that had funds on deposit with MF Global. We have worked with
those Member firms to ensure that their pool participants are receiving
adequate disclosures regarding the impact of MF Global's failure on the
pools and to ensure that redemption requests from participants are
being handled fairly. We also have 261 introducing broker Members who
either had a portion of their own capital on deposit with MF Global or
who satisfied their capital requirements by operating pursuant to a
guarantee agreement with MF Global. Introducing brokers do not hold
customer funds. We have, though, monitored those IBs to ensure that
they either have new guarantee agreements or have sufficient net
capital to satisfy their regulatory requirements.
With respect to the regulatory changes that have to be considered,
there are two broad issues to be addressed. First, what changes can be
made to rules or regulatory practices that would be better designed to
prevent customer losses due to an FCM's insolvency. Second, since we
cannot completely eliminate the possibility of FCM insolvencies, how
can we improve the way we handle those insolvencies to limit the impact
on customers and the markets. The following list of topics is certainly
not exhaustive but should be among the topics under discussion.
Prevention of FCM Insolvencies
Gross Margining--Should the CFTC require all clearinghouses to
collect margin on a gross rather than net basis?
Commingling of Customer Segregated Funds--FCMs are prohibited from
commingling customer funds with the firm's assets but may commingle
funds from different customers in the same segregated account.
Though not an issue in MF Global, this can expose customers to loss
due to the default of another customer. Various alternatives to
this approach have been discussed.
Monitoring for Segregation Compliance--Should SROs change the
manner in which they monitor Member firms for compliance with
segregation requirements? Should SROs perform unannounced spot-
checks to confirm balances to outside sources more frequently?
Should FCMs be required to have an independent CPA conduct
unannounced segregation compliance exams annually? Should SROs
periodically test to see if there have been intraday transfers of
customer segregated funds that could arouse suspicion? Should
information be made publicly available about how each FCM invests
its customer funds?
Mandatory Excess Segregation--Most FCMs deposit some of their own
funds as excess customer segregated accounts to act as a buffer in
case some customers go into a debit position. Should FCMs be
required to maintain a certain minimum in excess segregated funds?
Internal Controls--Should there be either specified requirements or
best practice guidance on the types of internal controls that
should be in place for the authorization to transfer segregated
customer funds above a certain threshold level?
Third Party Depositories--Some have suggested that customer funds
not needed to margin positions at the clearinghouse should be held
not by the FCM but by a third party depository.
Notice to Regulators--Should an FCM be required to give notice to
either its DSRO or the CFTC when the firm makes any transfer of
customer segregated funds, including intraday transfers, above a
certain threshold?
Responding to FCM Insolvencies
Implementation of some of the changes described above could obviate
the necessity of a formalized response mechanism, such as some form of
customer account insurance. On the other hand, the changes described
above may not be sufficient to restore public confidence, and we need
to examine the pros and cons of establishing a formalized mechanism to
address customer losses due to an FCM insolvency. Any such study will
have to address each of the following broad issues:

Goal of the Insolvency Response Mechanism--Would the mechanism be
designed to compensate customers for their losses, along the lines
of a SIPC type program, or to facilitate the immediate transfer of
open positions to a financially stable FCM?
Administration of the Mechanism--If there should be a formalized
insolvency response mechanism in place, should it be government
sponsored, administered by an industry organization or accomplished
through private insurance?
Funding the Mechanism--If the response mechanism is some form of
industry administered fund, the question of how to fund it depends
on who would be covered. Would it be desirable to limit the
beneficiaries to the public customers, i.e., non-members of the
exchange of the insolvent FCM?
Limitations on Compensation--Regardless of whether the mechanism is
administered by an industry group or by the government, what
restrictions or limitations on customer compensation would be
appropriate? Should such a mechanism follow the SIPC model and
compensate 100% of customer losses up to a certain limit? Would
that form of protection address the needs of the institutional
participants that form the bulk of the industry's customer base?
Should the mechanism make a pro rata distribution to customers?
Should there be a limit as to the amount of coverage related to any
one FCM insolvency?

We should also consider how the bankruptcy laws should apply to a
firm that is both an FCM and a broker-dealer but is primarily engaged
as an FCM. That is the fact pattern here and we should consider whether
a SIPC administered bankruptcy proceeding is the most appropriate means
of dealing with such an insolvency.
The basic point here, Mr. Chairman, is that there is work to be
done. The failure of MF Global will require significant regulatory
changes to bolster public confidence in our markets. The list of
possible options is long. The issues are complex and their importance
is profound. The process of weighing those choices must be deliberate
and careful but we must not lose time in starting that review. NFA
hopes to play a constructive role in that process and we look forward
to working with the industry, the CFTC and with Congress to ensure that
what emerges is a better regulatory model.

Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Roth.
Mr. Luparello?

TESTIMONY OF STEPHEN LUPARELLO, VICE CHAIRMAN,
FINANCIAL INDUSTRY REGULATORY AUTHORITY,
WASHINGTON, DC.

Mr. Luparello. Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today.
My name is Steve Luparello and I am the Vice Chairman of
the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, or FINRA. When a
firm like MF Global fails, there is great value in reviewing
the events leading up to that failure and examining where rules
and processes might be improved. I commend the Committee for
having this hearing to do just that. Clearly, the continued
impact of MF Global's failure on customers who cannot access
their funds is of great concern and every possible step should
be taken to transfer and restore these accounts as quickly as
possible.
With respect to oversight of MF Global's financial and
operational compliance, which is most relevant to today's
hearing, FINRA shares oversight responsibilities with the
Chicago Board Options Exchange and the SEC. For broker-dealers
that are members of multiple SROs, the SEC assigns a designated
examining authority, or DEA, to examine for, among other
things, the firm's compliance with the Commission's net capital
and customer protection rules. For MF Global, that DEA is CBOE.
When FINRA is not the DEA for one of its registered broker-
dealers, we work closely with the DEA and routinely analyze the
firm's FOCUS report filings and annual audited financial
statements as part of our ongoing oversight of the firm. While
that monitoring focus is on a broad range of issues, it is
particularly relevant to note that our financial surveillance
team placed a heightened focus on exposure to European
sovereign debt beginning in spring 2010. During April and May
of that year, our staff began surveying firms as to their
positions in European sovereign debt as part of our monitoring
in this area.
In a review of MF Global's audited financial statements
filed with FINRA on May 31 of this year, our staff raised
questions about a footnote disclosure regarding the firm's repo
to maturity portfolio. During discussion with the firm, FINRA
learned that a significant portion of that portfolio was
collateralized by approximately $7.6 billion in European
sovereign debt. According to U.S. GAAP, RTMs are afforded sale
treatment and therefore not recognized on the balance sheet.
Notwithstanding that accounting position, the firm remained
subject to credit risk throughout the life of the repo.
Beginning in mid-June, FINRA along with CBOE had
discussions with the firm regarding the proper treatment of the
RTM portfolio. Our view was that while reporting the repos of
sale may have been consistent with GAAP, this should not be
treated as such for purposes of capital rule given the market
and credit risk these positions carried. As such, we asserted
that capital needed to be reserved against the RTM position.
FINRA and CBOE also had discussions with the SEC about our
concerns. The SEC agreed with our assertion that the firm
should be holding capital against these positions. The firm
fought that interpretation through the summer appealing
directly to the SEC before eventually conceding in late August.
MF Global infused additional capital and made regulatory
filings on August 31 and September 1 that notified regulators
of the identified capital deficiency and the change in the
capital treatment of the RTM portfolio. Following this, FINRA
added MF Global to alert reporting, they heightening monitoring
process whereby we require firms to provide weekly information
on net capital and reserve formula computations.
During the week of October 24, as MF Global's equity price
declined and its credit rating was cut, FINRA increased the
level of surveillance on the firm. At the end of that week,
FINRA was onsite at the firm with the SEC and CBOE as it became
clear that MF Global was unlikely to continue to be a viable
standalone business. Our primary goal was to gain an
understanding of the custodial locations of customer securities
and worked closely with potential acquirers in hopes of
avoiding SIPC liquidation. As it has been widely reported, the
discrepancy discovered in the segregated funds on the futures
side of the firm ended those discussions.
While FINRA believes that financial security rules of the
SEC combined with SIPC create a good structure for protecting
customer funds, firm failures provide opportunities for review
and analysis of where improvements may be warranted. FINRA has
proposed two rules that we believe would assist us in our work
in monitoring the financial status of firms. One of the
proposals would expedite the liquidation of a firm, and most
importantly, the transfer of customer assets. Firms would need
to contractually require their clearing banks and custodians to
provide transaction fees to the firm, regulators, and SIPC
after the commencement of a liquidation. The rule would also
require firms to maintain current records in a central
location. The other proposal would require FINRA-regulated
firms to file additional financial and operational schedules or
reports as we deem necessary to supplement the FOCUS filing
report.
FINRA shares your commitment to reviewing MF Global's
collapse. We will review our rules and our procedures but would
also participate in a coordinated review with our fellow
regulators to provide a broader assessment of where current
processes may be enhanced.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to share our views and
I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Luparello follows:]

Prepared Testimony of Stephen Luparello, Vice Chairman, Financial
Industry Regulatory Authority, Washington, DC.
Chairman Lucas, Ranking Member Peterson and Members of the
Committee:

I am Steve Luparello, Vice Chairman of the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority, or FINRA. On behalf of FINRA, I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
When a firm like MF Global fails, there is always value in
reviewing the events leading to that failure and examining where rules
and processes might be improved. I commend the Committee for having
this hearing to do just that. Clearly the continued impact of MF
Global's failure on customers who cannot access their funds is of great
concern, and every possible step should be taken to transfer and
restore those accounts as quickly as possible.
Like many other financial firms today, MF Global's operations
included multiple business lines, engaging multiple regulatory schemes
and crossing national boundaries. We and the other regulators here
today will explain our roles in overseeing the various parts of the
firm. We all share the goal of restoring funds to customers. While
FINRA's role in that process is limited at this stage, we are committed
to continuing to provide assistance wherever we can.
FINRA
FINRA is the largest independent regulator for all securities firms
doing business in the United States, and, through its comprehensive
regulatory oversight programs, regulates both the firms and
professionals that sell securities in the United States and the U.S.
securities markets. FINRA oversees approximately 4,500 brokerage firms,
163,000 branch offices and 636,000 registered securities
representatives. FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities
business--from registering industry participants to examining
securities firms; writing rules and enforcing those rules and the
Federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public;
providing trade reporting and other industry utilities and
administering the largest dispute resolution forum for investors and
registered firms.
In 2010, FINRA brought 1,310 disciplinary actions, collected fines
totaling $42.2 million and ordered the payment of almost $6.2 million
in restitution to harmed investors. FINRA expelled 14 firms from the
securities industry, barred 288 individuals and suspended 428 from
association with FINRA-regulated firms. Last year, FINRA conducted
approximately 2,600 cycle examinations and 7,300 cause examinations.
One of our regulatory programs that is particularly relevant to
today's hearing is our financial and operational surveillance. Through
this program, FINRA reviews FOCUS (Financial and Operational Combined
Uniform Single) reports that broker-dealers file on a monthly basis as
required by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). These reports
detail a firm's financial and operational conditions and allow FINRA to
closely monitor a firm's net capital position and profitability for
signs of potential problems.
FINRA's activities are overseen by the SEC, which approves all
FINRA rules and has oversight authority over FINRA operations.
Oversight of MF Global
Like many financial firms today that operate simultaneously in
multiple channels, MF Global was not solely a broker-dealer, but also a
futures commission merchant or FCM. As such, multiple government
regulators and self-regulatory organizations (SROs), including FINRA,
had a role in overseeing various parts of the firm's operations.
With respect to oversight of MF Global's financial and operational
compliance, which is most relevant to today's hearing, FINRA shares
oversight responsibilities with the Chicago Board Options Exchange
(CBOE) and the SEC, especially in terms of the firm's compliance with
the net capital rule. For broker-dealers that are members of multiple
SROs, the SEC assigns a Designated Examining Authority, or DEA, to
examine the firm's financial and operational programs, including the
firm's compliance with the Commission's net capital and customer
protection rules. For MF Global, that DEA is the CBOE. As such, CBOE
conducted the regular examinations of the firm for capital compliance.
There are two primary SEC rules for which financial examinations
evaluate compliance, the net capital and customer protection rules. The
primary purpose of the SEC's net capital rule, 15c3-1, is to protect
customers and creditors of a registered broker-dealer from monetary
losses and delays that can occur if that broker-dealer fails. It
requires firms to maintain sufficient liquid assets to satisfy customer
and creditor claims. It accomplishes this by requiring brokerage firms
to maintain net capital in excess of certain minimum amounts. A firm's
net capital takes into account net worth, reduced by illiquid assets
and various deductions to account for market and credit risk. This
amount is measured against the minimum amount of net capital a firm is
required to maintain, which depends on its size and business. The net
capital rule is intended to provide an extra buffer of protection,
beyond rules requiring segregation of customer funds, so that if a firm
cannot continue business and needs to liquidate, resources will be
available for them to do so.
The SEC's customer protection rule, 15c3-3, has two components,
reserve formula computation and possession or control, and was designed
to ensure the safety of customers' assets. The objective of the reserve
formula computation is to protect the customer funds in the event the
broker-dealer becomes financially insolvent. Possession or control
requires that the broker-dealer obtain prompt possession or control of
customers' fully paid for and excess margin securities, ensure that
customers' assets held by a broker-dealer are properly safeguarded
against unauthorized use and separate firm and customer related
business.
Fewer than 20 FINRA-regulated broker-dealers have a DEA other than
FINRA, but in those cases, we work closely and cooperatively with the
DEA when questions or issues arise. Even when we are not the DEA for
one of our regulated broker-dealers, FINRA monitors and analyzes the
firm's FOCUS report filings and annual audited financial statements as
part of our ongoing oversight of the firm. That was the case with MF
Global.
While that monitoring focuses on a broad range of issues, it is
particularly relevant to note that our financial surveillance team
placed a heightened focus on exposure to European sovereign debt
beginning in spring 2010. During April and May, our staff began
surveying firms as to their positions in European sovereign debt as
part of our ongoing monitoring of regulated firms.
In response to our outreach on this issue, MF Global indicated in
late September 2010 that the firm did not have any such positions. We
later learned that the firm began entering into transactions that
carried European debt exposure in mid-September 2010. While the firm's
response was consistent with GAAP accounting rules that repo-to-
maturity (RTM) transactions are treated as a sale for accounting
purposes, the lack of a complete response delayed us in detecting the
firm's exposure.
MF Global's Exposure to European Sovereign Debt
In a routine review of MF Global's audited financial statements
filed with FINRA on May 31 of this year, our staff raised questions
about a footnote disclosure regarding the firm's RTM portfolio. RTMs
are essentially transactions whereby the maturity date of a firm's bond
position held in its inventory matches the maturity date of the repo.
During the course of discussions with the firm, FINRA learned that a
significant portion of that portfolio was collateralized by
approximately $7.6 billion in European sovereign debt. According to
U.S. GAAP, RTMs are afforded sale treatment and therefore not
recognized on the balance sheet. Notwithstanding that accounting
position, the firm remained subject to market and credit risk
throughout the life of the repo.
Beginning in mid-June, FINRA had detailed discussions with the
firm, in which CBOE also participated, regarding the proper treatment
of the RTM portfolio and we asserted that not enough capital was
reserved against the RTM. While the SEC has issued guidance clarifying
that RTMs collateralized by U.S. Treasury debt do not require capital
to be reserved, there is no such relief for RTMs collateralized by debt
of non-U.S. governments. We researched whether the firm retained
default risk on the positions, and concluded that it did. Our view was
that while recording the RTMs as sales was consistent with GAAP, they
should not be treated as such for purposes of the capital rule given
the market and credit risk those positions carried. As a result, we
asserted that capital needed to be reserved against the RTM.
FINRA and CBOE also had discussions with the SEC about our concerns
that the firm was not holding capital against its RTM portfolio. The
SEC agreed with our assertion that the firm should be holding capital
against the positions. The firm fought this interpretation throughout
the summer, appealing directly to the SEC, before eventually conceding
in late August.
The firm infused additional capital and filed an amended July FOCUS
report on August 31 to report a $150 million capital deficiency in
July. The firm also provided notification, pursuant to SEC Rule 17a-11,
of its capital deficiency to the SEC, CBOE and FINRA as well as to the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), pursuant to CFTC Rule
1.12. The net capital deficiency in the amended July FOCUS report was
reported on the CFTC's website. In addition, on September 1, the firm
amended its Form 10-Q filing with the SEC to identify the change in net
capital treatment of the RTM portfolio.
In September, FINRA added MF Global to ``alert reporting,'' a
heightened monitoring process whereby we require firms to provide
weekly information on net capital, inventory, profit and loss as well
as reserve formula computations.
On October 19, the Intermarket Financial Surveillance Group (IFSG),
which is comprised of securities and futures regulators and self-
regulatory organizations, had its annual meeting. The IFSG was
established in 1989 in order to enhance the coordination and monitoring
efforts of both securities and commodities regulators. Through an
information sharing agreement, SROs provide each other with financial
surveillance data and related information on an as-needed basis. In
addition, SRO representatives meet annually to discuss relevant capital
and customer protection issues. Exposure to European sovereign debt was
one of the topics at the October meeting and FINRA raised MF Global's
positions during the discussions.
During the week of October 24, as MF Global's equity price declined
and its credit rating was cut, FINRA increased the level of
surveillance over the firm. We requested detailed information about the
firm's balance sheet and liquidity; we received updates about the loss
of lending counterparties and customers; and we spoke to clearing
organizations about the margin required to settle trades. At the end of
that week, FINRA was on site at the firm, with the SEC, as it became
clear that MF Global was unlikely to continue to be a viable standalone
business. Our primary goal was to gain an understanding of the
custodial locations for customer securities and to work closely with
potential acquirers in hopes of avoiding SIPC liquidation. As has been
widely reported, the discrepancy discovered in the segregated funds on
the futures side of the firm ended those discussions.
MF Global Bankruptcy and Liquidation Proceeding
On October 31, 2011, MF Global Holdings, Ltd. and MF Global, Inc.
filed for bankruptcy and entered into SIPC liquidation. Since that
time, FINRA has provided assistance as requested by the SEC and the
Trustee.
On November 4, 2011, FINRA assisted the Trustee in alerting broker-
dealer firms via e-mail that the Trustee was accepting proposals for
the transfer of approximately 450 customer securities accounts of MF
Global to another member of SIPC.
We have also assisted the Trustee by providing information about
other broker-dealers to which MF Global securities customer accounts
may be transferred.
Proposed Rules to Enhance Financial Surveillance and Expedite the
Return of Customer Funds and Securities in the Event of
Liquidation
While FINRA believes that financial oversight rules of the SEC,
combined with SIPC, create a good structure for protecting customer
funds, firm failures provide opportunities for review and analysis of
where improvements may be warranted. FINRA has proposed two rules that
we believe would assist us in our work to monitor the financial status
of firms. One of the proposals, approved by FINRA's Board in September
of this year, would expedite the liquidation of a firm and most
importantly, the transfer of customer assets. This rule is focused on
enabling a more orderly resolution when a firm must cease operations.
Specifically, it would require firms to contractually require their
clearing banks and custodians to continue providing transaction feeds
to the firm after the commencement of liquidation avoiding the recent
reconciliation problems experienced by MF Global in its final days of
business.
The rule would require the clearing agencies and custodians to
provide read-only access to the firm's records to the regulators and
SIPC, with the goal of providing a more timely transfer of customer
assets. The rule would also require carrying or clearing firms
regulated by FINRA to maintain and keep current certain records in a
central location to facilitate a more rapid and orderly transfer of
customer accounts to another broker-dealer as well as a more orderly
liquidation in the event the firm can no longer continue to operate.
The other proposed rule, approved by FINRA's Board in July 2010,
would require that FINRA-regulated firms file additional financial or
operational schedules or reports as we deem necessary to supplement the
FOCUS report. The rule would provide FINRA with the framework to
request more specific information regarding, among other things, the
generation of revenues and allocation of expenses by business segment
or product line, the sources of trading gains and losses, the types and
amounts of fees earned and the nature and extent of participation in
securities offerings. As part of the rule filing, we have proposed a
supplemental statement of income to the FOCUS reports, in order to
capture more granular detail of a firm's revenue and expense
information.
We are also working to develop an off balance sheet schedule, which
could highlight exposures to regulators on a more timely basis.
We believe these proposals would enhance our ability to closely
oversee the financial operations of firms we regulate and to more
quickly and efficiently assist in transfers or liquidations when firms
must close their doors.
Conclusion
FINRA will continue to work with our fellow regulators and Congress
as the liquidation process for MF Global proceeds. We share your
commitment to reviewing the events involved in the firm's collapse,
relevant rules and coordination with other regulators to identify the
lessons learned and potential policy or procedural adjustments that may
be warranted.
We realize that it is critical to continually evaluate the customer
protection regime to ensure that it is designed as well as it can be to
ensure prompt restoration of customer funds in the event of a firm
collapse. To that end, we would be glad to participate in a broader
review, in coordination with the SEC, CFTC, self-regulatory
organizations and others to provide an overall assessment of where
current rules and processes may need enhancements.
Again, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Conaway. Thank you, Mr. Luparello.
Mr. Corcoran?

TESTIMONY OF GERALD F. CORCORAN, CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD AND
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, R.J. O'BRIEN &
ASSOCIATES, CHICAGO, IL; ON BEHALF OF COMMODITY MARKETS COUNCIL

Mr. Corcoran. Chairman, Members of the Committee, good
evening. My name is Gerry Corcoran and I am the Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer of R.J. O'Brien & Associates, a duly
registered FCM.
Today, I am honored to speak on behalf of both RJO and the
Commodity Markets Council. I would like to thank you for
hosting this critical hearing and for including RJO and CMC.
The CMC is a trade association bringing together commodity
exchanges with their industry counterparts. The activities of
CMC members represents the complete spectrum of commercial
users for all futures markets.
At R.J. O'Brien, we are especially proud of our
agricultural roots, our commitment to the agricultural
community, and our leadership in the futures industry. We are
passionate about the business and the important role we play in
helping individuals, farmers, agribusinesses, corporations, and
institutions manage their risk. Founded in 1914, RJO is a
privately owned futures commission merchant. With our origins
in the cash butter and egg business, today we are the oldest
and largest independent futures brokerage and clearing firm in
the United States. We are the only remaining founding member of
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and our Chairman emeritus,
Robert J. O'Brien, served on the board during the years when
agricultural future markets blossomed and the financial futures
markets were born.
Throughout our history, RJO has stood side by side with our
clients, exchanges, and regulators during every significant
market event this industry has seen.
Since the MF Global bankruptcy filing and default, RJO has
worked hand in hand with the CME Group and the other domestic
exchanges to provide a home for a substantial number of MF
Global accounts and brokers. In a matter of days, we assumed a
bulk transfer of over 20,000 accounts without incident, and our
shareholders provided an infusion of approximately $50 million
of capital to ensure that we would be sufficiently capitalized
for this unexpected event.
At the same time, we worked very hard to ensure that our
long-standing clients continued to receive the outstanding
service to which they are accustomed to. Our management and
staff worked literally around the clock for 25 straight days in
a massive effort that involved coordination of systems,
processes, and people and sometimes working with incomplete
data and rapidly changing circumstances. We fully recognized
that the clients of MF Global had just experienced a traumatic
event, and we did everything we could to provide vehicles for
addressing their questions and providing reassurances as soon
as we had answers.
And so while the investigation continues into the causes of
the MF Global bankruptcy and the whereabouts of segregated
assets, I am certain, very certain we cannot let this event
destroy the long-term trust and confidence upon which the
market participants rely. This is an industry that is vitally
important not only to the interests of the agribusiness
community but to the world. Obviously, the industry must move
quickly to restore trust and confidence but in a measured and
thoughtful fashion. It is incumbent on all interested parties--
whether you are a legislator, a regulatory organization, an
exchange, an FCM, or even a customer--to work together to
strengthen the financial safeguards of the futures industry.
To that end, I am going to briefly offer some suggestions
which are further detailed in my written testimony that is
available to you.
So how can an FCM fail? The catastrophic failures of FCMs
in my experience are surrounding two events: either a
proprietary trading loss--large proprietary trading loss or
catastrophic loss by a customer, in both cases, erode the
entire capital of the futures firm and puts them
undercapitalized and in many cases out of business. This is the
only case in the history of the futures industry where customer
segregated funds were violated.
The R.J. O'Brien model of business is principally an
agency-only model. We do not participate in any material
proprietary trading and so we believe that that is a very, very
safe way to operate a business where its customers cannot be
violated by proprietary trading losses of a firm.
The second event that could cause an FCM default is a very
catastrophic customer loss. That is a case where a customer
lost an excessive amount of money on the balance sheet of an
FCM and failed to meet their margin requirement to answer that
call or to fulfill that loss. We believe that it should be
seriously considered whether FCMs should maintain an agency-
only model. And we also believe and recommend that regulation
should be prescribed that customers that have very large margin
calls in excess of a threshold would have to meet those margin
calls within 24 hours. This would ensure that an FCM would not
be waiting more than 24 hours to find out if a customer's
default was going to exist.
Another suggestion that we have is that in some cases and
in the cases of MF Global, MF Global was a combined FCM broker-
dealer. We might suggest and we might consider that being a
combined broker-dealer and an FCM is a model that should no
longer exist. One of the reasons I say this is because
operating as a combined broker-dealer FCM, there are certain
capital advantages that a combined entity may receive compared
to the capital requirements of a separately owned broker-dealer
and a separately owned FCM. In some parlance this might be
called double-dipping on the capital base or even one might
call it a leverage on the capital base of a combined company.
Another suggestion--and it has been spoken to--the NFA has
this in place already--is the daily reporting of segregation
reports to all the DSROs. I mean it has been duly noted here
that it is the obligation of the FCM to report a failure of
segregation, but I think in the age of technology and the
abundance of caution, it would be no problem for FCMs to submit
daily segregation reports electronically to their DSRO.
And finally, I would say this: in the case of R.J. O'Brien,
since we are principally an agency model, the vast majority of
our capital is invested in the segregated--with and along with
the segregated assets of our customers. Today, we have over
$175 million of excess segregated assets, all of which is the
capital of our firm. We believe there should be a threshold
that all FCMs contribute a portion of their capital into the
customer segregated asset domain. In doing so, it would be
protecting the customers further, you would be protecting the
assets of the FCM that protects the underlying customers
because these assets would also be subject to being invested
under Rule 1.25 as amended.
This concludes my thoughts for this evening. I thank you
and I compliment you and the Committee for putting this
together. RJO and CMC will work alongside with regulators,
legislators, customers, and exchanges alike to find the best
ways to strengthen the financial safeguards of the futures
industry.
[The prepared testimony of Mr. Corcoran follows:]

Prepared Testimony of Gerald F. Corcoran, Chairman of the Board and
Chief Executive Officer, R.J. O'Brien & Associates, Chicago, IL; on
Behalf of Commodity Markets Council
I. Introduction
Chairman Lucas, Members of the Committee, good morning. My name is
Gerry Corcoran, and I am the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of
R.J. O'Brien & Associates (``RJO''). Today I am honored to speak on
behalf of both RJO and the Commodity Markets Council (``CMC''). I would
like to thank you for hosting this critical hearing and for including
RJO and the CMC.
The CMC is a trade association bringing together commodity
exchanges with their industry counterparts. The activities of CMC
members represent the complete spectrum of commercial users of all
futures markets. CMC member firms trade regularly on CME Group, ICE
Futures U.S., the Kansas City Board of Trade and Minneapolis Grain
Exchange. CMC provides the access, forum and action for exchanges and
exchange users to take a leadership role in addressing global market
and risk management issues in various sectors, including agriculture,
energy, finance, transportation and infrastructure.
At R.J. O'Brien, we are especially proud of our agricultural roots,
our commitment to the agricultural community and our leadership in the
futures industry. Personally, I am passionate about this business and
the important role we play in helping individuals, farmers,
agribusiness, corporations and institutions manage their risk.
Founded in 1914, RJO is a privately owned futures commission
merchant (``FCM''). With our origins in the cash butter and egg
business, today we are the oldest and largest independent futures
brokerage and clearing firm in the United States. We are the only
remaining founding member of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, and our
Chairman Emeritus, Robert J. O'Brien, served on its Board during the
years when agricultural futures products blossomed and the financial
futures markets were born. Throughout our history, RJO has stood side
by side with our clients, exchanges and regulators during every
significant market event this industry has seen.
II. Impact of the MF Global Bankruptcy on RJO, its Customers and the
Futures Industry in General
The primary purpose of statutory segregation requirements for FCMs
under the Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA'') is to ensure FCM obligations
are not met with customer funds; and, in the case of an FCM insolvency,
segregation requirements are also designed to protect customer monies.
When a futures broker such as MF Global defaults, the entire industry
is affected--the customers of the defaulting broker, the clearing
organizations in which the defaulting broker participates, as well as
other brokers that are members of the clearing organization. Typically,
customer trades and the associated collateral held at a defaulting FCM
must be moved to a new FCM. Moving customer trades and collateral
requires significant coordination by affected participants throughout
the industry, and transparency with respect to the location and booking
of customer accounts and collateral is a crucial ingredient for a
successful response to the default of an FCM.
MF Global was required by Federal law [CEA and Commodity Futures
Trading Commission (``CFTC'') regulations] to maintain adequate
segregated funds to cover its liability to all of its customers who had
a positive net liquidating value in their segregated account balances.
As has been reported, the total pool of MF Global segregated funds is
insufficient to cover that customer liability, and though the precise
amount of the deficiency is at present unknown, all indications point
to the amount exceeding $600 million. Part 190 of the CFTC regulations
sets forth the process for handling the pro rata distribution of funds
to customers in the event its FCM is the subject of a U.S. bankruptcy
liquidation proceeding and has a shortfall in segregated funds held to
keep its customers whole. This is the process that is currently
underway and overseen by the Trustee.
This process is completely different from and bears no relationship
to clearinghouse default rules.
Clearinghouse default rules and procedures are in place to protect
the financial integrity of the clearing members on the opposite sides
of trades in the event a defaulting clearing member fails to pay the
variation call necessary to satisfy and make whole the opposite parties
to the defaulting firm's trades. These rules ensure that, in the case
of MF Global, had the firm not been able to meet its margin call to the
clearinghouse and had there been a shortfall of margin collateral on
deposit at the clearinghouse to satisfy all clearing members on the
opposite sides of MF Global's customer positions, then in accordance
with each clearinghouse's rules, other financial resources would be
deployed to cover the shortfall.
MF Global did not default to any clearinghouse.
Clearinghouses met their obligations to all other clearing member
firms and their customers and have undertaken welcomed efforts toward
speeding customer access to their trading accounts, transferring their
positions and providing the Trustee with support to encourage him to
quickly release customer funds. Transfers of customer funds,
effectuated by MF Global for the benefit of the firm and resulting in a
segregated fund deficiency, constitute very serious violations of CFTC
and Self-Regulatory Organization (``SRO'') rules and regulations.
Since the MF Global bankruptcy filing and default, RJO has worked
hand in hand with the CME Group and the other domestic exchanges to
provide a home for a substantial number of MF Global accounts and
brokers. In a matter of a few days, we assumed a bulk transfer of
20,000 accounts without incident, and our shareholders provided an
infusion of approximately $50 million of capital to ensure that we
would be sufficiently capitalized for this unexpected event. At the
same time, we worked very hard to ensure that our long-standing clients
continued to receive the outstanding service to which they are
accustomed. Our management and staff worked literally around the clock
for 25 days straight in a massive effort that involved coordination of
systems, processes and people, and sometimes working with incomplete
data and rapidly changing circumstances. We fully recognized that the
clients of MF Global had just experienced a traumatic event, and we did
everything we could to provide vehicles for addressing their questions
and providing reassurances as soon as we had answers. This effort
included tripling the size of our client services staff, creating a
dedicated hotline to answer questions from incoming clients and
brokers, and establishing a website with continuous updates on the
changing circumstances.
Unfortunately, these efforts, along with those of the Trustee, the
CFTC and Designated Self-Regulatory Organizations (``DSROs''), have not
mitigated the substantial loss of trust and confidence by market
participants as a result of the MF Global bankruptcy. I believe that
FCMs, exchanges and regulators alike would acknowledge that trust in
the futures industry has been severely impaired. In the past 5 weeks,
at our firm alone, we've received more requests from clients for our
financial data than we have in the last 3 years combined. We have
addressed more than 1,000 inquiries seeking assurances that this won't
happen at our firm. We continue to witness cash withdrawals to remove
excess balances because there is a lack of confidence in the system as
a whole.
So while the investigation continues into the causes of the MF
Global bankruptcy and the whereabouts of segregated assets, one thing
is clear. MF Global did not respect the sanctity of the segregated
funds system. This violation forces us to engage in a discussion of
policy recommendations which would not otherwise have been necessary.
Looking ahead, I am certain, very certain of this: we CANNOT let this
event destroy the long-term trust and confidence upon which market
participants rely. This is an industry that is vitally important not
only to the interests of the agricultural community, but to the world.
In order to restore trust, we strongly encourage the MF Global
Bankruptcy Trustee to conclude its investigation and facilitate the
prompt return of all available customer segregated funds as soon as
possible. We also believe the industry must move quickly to restore
trust and confidence but in a measured and thoughtful fashion. It is
incumbent on all interested parties--whether you are a legislator, a
regulatory organization, an exchange, an FCM or even a customer--to
work together to strengthen the financial safeguards of the futures
industry.
III. The Cause of MF Global's Failure is Uncertain
RJO and CMC believe the businesses of all CMC members depend upon
the reliable implementation of customer asset protection requirements
by FCMs, clearing agencies and depositories. We likewise opine it is
crucial for regulators, the MF Global Trustee and law enforcement
authorities to conduct a full investigation. At this point, facts
indicate there may be a shortfall of customer funds that could exceed
$600 million. Again, reestablishing trust and confidence in the futures
markets is of paramount importance. Fact-finding investigations should
focus on this issue and seek to determine whether the asset protection
shortfall was the result of abuse by MF Global or others. CMC and RJO
urge Congress, the MF Global Trustee, and the applicable regulatory
authorities to examine closely the circumstances surrounding the
movement of customer collateral at MF Global to determine whether any
abuse took place. If segregation violations occurred, measures should
be carefully considered to enhance oversight, enforcement, or sanctions
to further deter such violative behavior in the future.
Although we offer several ideas for thoughtful consideration and
discussion, we urge Congress and the regulators to be cautious in any
steps you may take to address the MF Global bankruptcy. We recommend
you carefully measure the cost and market implications that may be
associated with any changes.
IV. Strengthening the Customer Asset Protection Regime in the Futures
Industry
At this early stage of the process and after a dialogue with CMC
members and RJO customers, we are certain there are no possible
``fixes'' for the asset protection regime that would ensure safety of
customer assets with 100% certainty. The ideas we raise today all offer
some advantages and some disadvantages, and we highlight them for
consideration by policymakers and regulators; however, we do not wish
to endorse any specific proposal until all stakeholders have the
appropriate factual information available.
A. Separation of Proprietary Trading by FCMs
On this point, I am speaking strictly on behalf of RJO, which
operates on an ``agency'' only model and does not engage in proprietary
trading. This model has served our customers well for almost 100 years.
Customer protection should continue to be the bedrock upon which the
industry has been built. We at RJO suggest those FCMs who want to
conduct proprietary trading utilize other FCMs or create a separately
capitalized special purpose FCM for this activity. Doing so will
require the same oversight afforded to customer accounts, including
proper margining at all times.
B. Improvements to the FCM Net Capital Regime
The remainder of my testimony reflects the views of both RJO and
CMC. In the absence of a finding of abuse of the customer asset
protection regime, the industry should evaluate the adequacy of the
current FCM capital regime in terms of whether the risk capital
required adequately reflects the risk of an FCM default. We offer the
following ideas for consideration towards more accurately reflecting
that risk.
1. ``Double-Counting'' of Funds by Dually Registered FCM/Broker-Dealers
to Satisfy Capital Requirements
FCMs are required to maintain liquid assets in excess of their
liabilities to provide resources for the FCM to meet its financial
obligations as a broker in the futures market. These capital
requirements also are intended to ensure an FCM maintains sufficient
liquid assets to wind-down its operations by transferring customer
accounts in the event the FCM defaults.
Currently, FCMs that are dually registered as a broker-dealer are
permitted to rely on the same funds to satisfy the broker-dealer's net
capital requirement and the FCM's capital requirement. The rules of the
CFTC generally permit an FCM that is dually registered as a broker-
dealer to satisfy its capital requirement through compliance with the
capital requirements imposed on the firm by the Securities and Exchange
Commission (``SEC'') in light of the firm's registration as a
securities broker-dealer. The CFTC's rules therefore tend to treat the
capital requirements of FCMs and broker-dealers as equivalent, yet such
equivalent treatment may not be appropriate.
The amount of risk capital that may be reasonable for a particular
FCM, in light of the credit and market risks faced by the FCM in its
house and customer accounts, may be lower or much higher than the
comparable risk capital requirements applicable to the firm as a
broker-dealer. The deemed equivalence of broker-dealer capital
requirements, which generally do not turn on risk associated with
customer futures positions as do FCM capital requirements, may require
reevaluation.
2. Maintaining Capital in Segregation
The inquiry into the role of capital of an FCM in protecting
futures customers should also evaluate whether a certain proportion of
funds designated as capital (e.g., 50%) should be required to be placed
in a segregated account dedicated to capital protection. Maintaining
capital in segregation could generally contribute to the liquidity
position of FCMs.
3. Low Concentration Risk Charges May Incentivize FCMs to Leverage
Exposures to Single Credit Risks
Where the concentration risk capital charge associated with
exposures to a single issuer is too low, FCMs may have inappropriate
incentives to leverage their exposure to such issuers. As the
bankruptcy of MF Global made clear, excessive concentration of a firm's
exposure to specific credit risks--in the case of MF Global, European
sovereign debt--significantly increases risk to a firm's capital base.
When evaluating whether the current mix of risk capital considerations
(including legal risk, credit risk, liquidity risk, custody and
investment risk, concentration risk, default risk, operational risk,
market risk and business risk) adequately delivers a risk capital
requirement and protects the firm and its customers against losses,
regulatory agencies should take care to consider whether the
concentration risk ratio should be limited to 50% of excess adjusted
net capital for all credit risk exposures, excluding U.S. Treasury
securities.
C. Enhanced Monitoring and Reporting With Respect To FCM Segregation
Practices
It may be worth discussing whether SROs and regulators should
conduct more frequent audits of FCM segregation practices. Such
exercises might increase transparency to customers of potential asset
protection issues an FCM may be experiencing, promote enhanced risk
management practices, and potentially provide the regulators with an
early-warning mechanism. Accordingly, policymakers might consider
imposing discrete reporting obligations that would mandate regulatory
reporting by FCMs in the event of a decline below specified thresholds
(e.g., 25%) of customer-segregated to customer non-segregated assets.
D. Customer Trading Practices Also Impact Customer Asset Protection
While this point does not directly relate to the MF Global
situation, it is worth considering in the context of the financial
stability of FCMs. Significant losses by a customer of an FCM can also
result in catastrophic losses to the FCM itself. Improved customer
collateral management could potentially be achieved by ensuring the
adequate maintenance of customer collateral levels. An idea we offer
for deliberation is to require accounts which exceed certain margin
thresholds on an intra-day basis to fund their account through direct
wire transfer, thereby ensuring intra-day margin calls are met.
E. A Potential Requirement for Individual Segregation of Customer
Accounts
The industry's objective must be to establish safe, liquid markets
and to protect the assets of customers who rely on futures brokers to
access the market. We believe the industry has spent considerable time
discussing full physical segregation of customer accounts. While such a
concept is worthy of study, it is too complicated to help in the near
term, and resources would be better spent on solutions that are
achievable and deployable in relatively short order to increase the
safety and stability of the market today.
V. Conclusion
In summary, I would state that the failure of MF Global has had a
great impact on futures markets, and the need to restore market
confidence is urgent. However, the cause of the collapse is
unascertained at this moment, and there is currently an investigation
underway to determine the same. The facts need to unearthed before
concrete policy measures, if any, are taken. Meanwhile, in the spirit
of discussing constructive and thoughtful ideas with lawmakers and
regulators, CMC and RJO offer for your consideration, the following
ways to strengthen the customer asset protection regime in the futures
industry:

Improving the FCM net capital regime,

Enhancing monitoring and reporting with respect to FCM
segregation practices,

Considering the impact of customer trading practices on
customer asset protection, and

Potentially requiring individual segregation of customer
accounts.

CMC and RJO thank the House Agriculture Committee for the
opportunity to testify on this important matter. We look forward to
working with Congress and the regulatory authorities as we learn more.
Mr. Chairman, we compliment you and the Committee's efforts, and we
look forward to answering any questions you may have on this vital
topic that impacts our industry.
Please do not hesitate to contact Christine Cochran of CMC at
[Redacted] or via e-mail at [Redacted], or Gerry Corcoran of RJO at
[Redacted].
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify.

Mr. Conaway. Well, thank you, gentlemen. I appreciate that.
Under leave of the Chairman, I will go first.
First off, my compliments to all six of you for sitting
here from 9:30 until this afternoon and during this. It shows
your commitment to this business, so thank you very much for
doing that.
Mr. Duffy, just as an aside, I don't know that I have ever
had a more straightforward statement as to things that you
think happened that didn't happen. So thank you for that
straightforwardness.
Both Mr. Duffy and Mr. Luparello, you had auditors and/or
representatives watching the fight. You heard the Chairman say
it was chaotic, those last 2 or 3 days. Did you get anecdotal
evidence back from your folks who observed that in terms of
just--if you listen to Mr. Corzine, he has a scene that is
almost unimaginable. That is obviously auditors looking for
those kinds of panics. Did your people see that, Mr. Duffy? Did
your folks see that?
Mr. Duffy. I did not receive any reports back from any of
the auditors that were in there the last final days that there
was chaos or panic until when they were notified that the
accounting--supposedly accounting error was now transferred
into--from the segregated pool to the broker-dealer. When MF
Global told us that, I think that is more when the panic set
in.
Mr. Conaway. So your statement that that happened came from
MF Global's folks------
Mr. Duffy. MF Global told CME and CFTC at the same time at
2:00 in the morning that they transferred customer segregated
funds into MF Global's broker-dealer account.
Mr. Conaway. All right. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Luparello, did your team sense anything out of the--I
mean it is obviously chaotic but anything------
Mr. Luparello. That is exactly right. I would say not
necessarily panic but it was a chaotic scene that week and over
that weekend. And the reports I was getting back from my team
onsite as the firm was trying to deal with customers that
seemed to be uncertain about what was next as well as potential
counterparties and acquirers. There was an awful lot going on.
I think the panic------
Mr. Conaway. Yes.
Mr. Luparello.--did not set in until there was a
realization that there was a shortfall in the customer
segregation funds.
Mr. Conaway. And that is on Saturday/Sunday when------
Mr. Luparello. Correct.
Mr. Conaway.--customers don't--they are not answering the
phone for customers at that point in time.
Given what your team observed and both of you have been in
the business a long time, does that create an excuse of some
sort to transfer segregated funds out of the segregated
accounts into the proprietary accounts? Is that any kind of
excuse whatsoever for that to happen?
Mr. Luparello. No.
Mr. Conaway. Either one of you think that could happen by
accident, the folks who actually triggered those trades,
triggered that movement didn't know in fact that they were
doing something they weren't supposed to?
Mr. Luparello. You know, I think given the chaos of the
situation and without knowing the facts as they have progressed
from that point on, as we have been in more of a support role
with the SIPC Trustee, there are certainly possibilities that
funds could have not been received that should have been
received, or could have been wired out that shouldn't have been
wired out. But from an intent standpoint, I would say the
answer to that is clearly no.
Mr. Conaway. All right. Mr. Duffy, do you get a sense that
that is business as usual in those circumstances?
Mr. Duffy. I don't believe business as usual is to transfer
customer segregated funds out of their accounts into broker-
dealer accounts, sir.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Corcoran, thank you for coming
today. Given that the market I think self-heals far better than
regulatory fixes that come in after the fact, would an FCM-only
agency--wouldn't you be able to pitch that as being safer and
more competitive? And wouldn't that give you in fact a
competitive advantage that would work for your customers to
make their own choices as to how they wanted to take risks
versus going with an MF Global which had a mixed arrangement
that you could play off and say hey, you are not going to have
that risk? Would the market fix itself in this instance?
Mr. Corcoran. It is very possible that the market itself
will fix itself in a sense and that customers will look very
closely at FCMs, how they conduct their business. And hopefully
from the outcome of these hearings and other factors related to
this event, there will be further transparency to FCMs'
investment of customer assets and customers should have more
transparency and be able to make a wiser selection of which FCM
is safer for them.
Mr. Conaway. Sure. Mr. Roth, Mr. Fletcher, in the time left
what we hear is this: that the market is spooked, that the
market is not working, but the truth of the matter is we have
had a month of activity. Do you sense the folks trying to put
in perspective the MF Global reg versus the broader history of
how safe these transactions have been in the past and are
beginning to move back toward their normal functioning?
Mr. Fletcher. It will move back towards the normal
function, but it won't be the same. My company, for example,
had accounts with MF Global and with Newedge. When we are done
settling down from this, we will probably have our business
divided amongst five or six companies rather than just one or
two just to minimize that risk.
Mr. Conaway. Okay. Mr. Roth, what about your folks real
quick?
Mr. Roth. Yes, I would agree with Mr. Fletcher that trading
activity may return to normal but there are going to be
residual effects of an erosion in confidence that are going to
affect the markets. I think we need to look for solutions that
can be market-driven, they can be regulatory solutions, but we
need to find solutions to try to restore that public
confidence.
Mr. Conaway. Thank you, gentlemen. I yield back.
The Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you. I am going to yield briefly to Mr.
Boswell.
Mr. Boswell. Well, thank you very much. Because of a
conflict I am going to have to go, but I have talked with some
of you previously and I concur with some of the things that
have already been said. I am concerned very much about the
futures hedging, the whole planning process that our ranchers
and farmers and others must depend on. This is a big setback, a
big loss, but I guess until the bankruptcy part is settled, it
is going to be kind of hard to determine what can be recovered
as we go into that. But I think we are going to have a lot of
contact with you as the days lay ahead to get this sorted out.
And I appreciate the sincerity. But it must be done. We have no
disagreement on that.
So with that, Mr. Ranking Member, I will yield back and
also give you my 4 minutes or whatever I had left.
Mr. Peterson. Thank you, Mr. Boswell.
And yes, I have been thinking about some of these changes
and was actually thinking about putting a bill in this
afternoon, but I held back because I think we need to find out
a little bit more about this. I think we need to seriously
examine whether we should put these segregated accounts with a
third party. And I know that is going to apparently cause some
people to go ballistic, but we need to look at that.
I think this double capital issue needs to be looked at.
You know, that doesn't seem to make any sense to have people
use the same capital. So hopefully, the Committee can spend
some time looking at this and working with people and try to
get the understanding of what the best solution would be. What
I do not want to do personally is any kind of a thing where we
are going to set up any kind of an insurance fund or anything
like that. I am against that. I think that is a bad idea.
But the other thing I am concerned about, and it relates to
Dodd-Frank. You know, we exempted the end-users from some of
these requirements and there are bills in to try to fix what
some people are afraid of is happening there, but as near as I
can tell it is not us that is causing the problem. It is the
prudential regulators which we don't have any control over in
terms of whether there is going to be margin and capital
requirements on the end-users.
But my concern is that you could potentially--if we exempt
end-users completely from the swap dealer and major swap
participant regulations, then you are going to also exempt them
from segregating those funds. And if you had a situation where
one of those organizations went bankrupt, you would have the
people involved in that in the same situation that these folks
are in here today. And I am not sure we want to create a
situation like that. So, Mr. Fletcher, you are an end-user I
guess. You know, do you have concerns about that, now all of a
sudden you are going to be doing business with somebody that is
not regulated, the money is not segregated?
Mr. Fletcher. Well------
Mr. Peterson. If they do something and go down and------
Mr. Fletcher. My firm is a grain elevator and most--nearly
all of the business that we do is actually futures contracts to
hedge purchases that we------
Mr. Peterson. So you don't do swaps?
Mr. Fletcher. No.
Mr. Peterson. Well. I guess it wouldn't affect you
directly, but you understand what I am getting at?
Mr. Fletcher. Sure.
Mr. Peterson. So I think we need to take a look at that as
well because people say this is never going to happen. Part of
how we got into a lot of these different issues is because back
in the CFMA in 2000, the argument was, well, these are all a
bunch of rich people and they are all gambling with each
other's money and it is nobody's business what they are up to.
And you know, they almost took the country down and now they
have put a bunch of people in jeopardy here. So obviously they
can't control themselves so we need to make sure that we don't
leave any loopholes here. So with that, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back.
The Chairman [presiding.] The gentleman yields back his
time. The chair recognizes the gentleman from Georgia who has
been very patient. Proceed, Mr. Scott.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for being here today and I am somebody
who has a Series 7 and less than 12 months ago was in that
highly regulated industry and still maintain my license to this
day. And so I guess when I see what has happened here, it is
pretty clear to me that rules were broken, laws were broken.
And again, I want to make sure we do whatever has to be done to
protect the consumer, but we also don't want to do so much that
it creates a burden on the ethical people that are out there
conducting business.
So with that said, if I could just ask a couple of quick
questions. Mr. Duffy, do you think that what happened at MF
Global, was it standard operating procedure or did they get to
the end of their rope and say, we are going to make one big bet
here and if the bet goes right we will be okay and if it goes
wrong, we won't?
Mr. Duffy. I can't even comment on this, sir. I have no
idea what was going through their heads in the final moments. I
have only gotten the reports back from my legal folks of what
happened and that is what I factually reported out to the
Congress.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Do you believe that if we had
more audits of the reports, the segregated fund reports, would
doing more audits of those reports, whether we did every firm
on a monthly basis, would that have prevented this?
Mr. Duffy. Well, it is important to note that we do audit
each and every firm every year. So we have 50 auditors on staff
at CME Group that we use to audit them. On the segregation
reports, which I think is what you are referring to, I did say
in my oral testimony where I demonstrated where people
falsified reports so------
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes.
Mr. Duffy.--even though we tied out these reports, but if
they give you the real report afterwards, it is a bit of a
problem. So that is--I don't know if you could ever stop--I
think to what Mr. Roth said--if there is corruption and people
are convinced that is the way they are going to do it, that is
what they are going to do. So we have done everything that we
feel that we can to prevent this type of activity, but again,
it happened.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. But if they know that they are
more likely to be audited in the future, that would be a
deterrent.
Mr. Duffy. I think the penalties need to be stiffer. I
truly believe that. I think the penalties are too loose and
they need to be implied--applied and they just need to be
stricter penalties.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. All right. And I will
leave it at that. Thank you for coming today. I know it has
been a long day. And Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder
of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back. The chair now
recognizes the gentleman from Texas for 5 minutes, Mr.
Neugebauer, sir.
Mr. Neugebauer. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Duffy, I had to step out of the room but I wanted to
make sure that you got an opportunity if you haven't already to
explain the efforts that CME Group has taken to increase the
speed for many of those customers to get their money back
because that is something you didn't have to do but your firm
has stepped up. Did you have a chance to------
Mr. Duffy. I didn't walk them through all the steps,
Congressman. I am happy to do it. The original--when this first
happened we were trying to desperately get the accounts
transferred to Mr. Corcoran's firm. Obviously, it took a
significant amount of--but the most important thing was to get
the monies that the Trustee had into the participants' hands.
And our board made a decision not based off of large hedge
funds or institutional dealers. Our board really made a
decision off of the farmers and ranchers who needed those
monies back into their accounts. So we put up originally a $200
million guarantee to encourage the Trustee to give as much
money back as possible. That was slowing the process so we
upped it to $550 million to encourage the Trustee to pay up to
75 cents of every dollar and if he fell short, CME would eat
the $550 million loss.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, and I commend you for that because it
has been I think pointed out in this testimony today that a lot
of small farmers and ranchers got quite a bit of their
operating capital tied up in--it puts a hardship on them.
Mr. Brodsky, you mentioned that along the way over the last
I guess year or so you have had concerns about MF Global. And I
know that FINRA has had some similar concerns and so did you
all have discussions together about that?
Mr. Brodsky. Yes, there were a variety of meetings and
conversations, particularly between FINRA, CBOE, and the SEC on
the broker-dealer side. And in fact when MF Global was pushing
not to allow--or to cause the--us to not charge their capital
for the concentration they had in the sovereign debt
securities, the three of us got together and said we are not
agreeing with you; you must do it. And that was something that
we came to, and again, they pushed and we pushed back. And
ultimately, the SEC has the final word and it was their
decision that obviously we concurred in that they had to take
a--recognize that even though it might not have been the way
they would have wanted it to happen.
Mr. Neugebauer. And so was the CFTC, did you all ever bring
them into that conversation?
Mr. Brodsky. I am not aware that they were at that point.
This is the--I would call the issue of the bifurcated
regulation that you have. And on the SEC side, you tend to see
the securities regulators working together though I do know
that in the recent past the SEC and the CFTC have worked
together. But I think when the earlier conversations were
taking place, I think it was just among the securities
regulators.
Mr. Neugebauer. Yes, because under Dodd-Frank, we have set
up FSOC and one of the charges to FSOC was there was going to
be more cooperation and collaboration. This way when regulators
are talking, everybody that could be impacted--so from the
testimony that was issued today, I am beginning to think that
evidently Secretary Geithner in his role as facilitator has
some work to do in that area because we didn't seem to have the
same levels of conversation going on at the CFTC as it seems
that was going on at the Chicago--with the three entities------
Mr. Brodsky. One of the suggestions we made in our
testimony is that once we get through all the heavy work that
we have to do to understand what happened that we as regulators
should all sit together and determine whether there should be a
more formalized kind of coordination in matters like this. So I
think there was some--I am sure there was room for improvement.
And in addition, under Dodd-Frank there are certain
mandates in the bill that require that the SEC and CFTC
identify areas where they should harmonize regulations. There
is no deadline to that but I certainly support that as a very
positive objective of Dodd-Frank.
Mr. Neugebauer. And that harmonization is an important part
of that as well so that we don't put a bigger strain on the
industry.
But I will say this--and I think Mr. Duffy pointed this
out--since 1936 I think this is the first time that accounts
have been commingled and there has been a loss. So I think one
of the things we want to do here is we want to go on a fact-
finding mission, make sure we understand all of the things that
were going on so that--there will be some people that want to
jump out there and create some more regulation. I am not sure
that anything that was passed under Dodd-Frank would have
prevented what happened here from happening. As alleged here,
maybe some people broke the rules. And so when people break the
rules, it doesn't matter how many rules you have.
So I think it is good and we look forward--I think some of
you will be at our hearing next week. We want to make sure we
have a thorough understanding of all of the pieces here before
we jump to any conclusions.
And Mr. Chairman, I want to commend you for holding this
hearing today. I think it was a very productive hearing, but
what it did point out is there are still a lot of things we
don't know and we need to know.
The Chairman. The gentleman is exactly right and I expect
with good efforts we will know more of those things shortly,
won't we?
With that, the gentleman yields his time back and I yield
myself 5 minutes.
Mr. Brodsky, you testified that the CBOE had taken
disciplinary action against MF Global five times as a result of
examinations and investigations. What kind of activity did you
find that was worthy of a discipline? And what kind of
disciplinary actions did you take since we are discussing
consistencies of management?
Mr. Brodsky. In the course of our regulation of MF Global
going back to 2003, there were a variety of actions, several of
which resulted in financial penalties and censures. And there
were I would say more technical things that happened but there
were several times, as I said--I would say one, two--at least
five and several of them resulted in fines and censures.
The Chairman. Okay. Mr. Fletcher, you commented as I was
coming in the room I think to Mr. Conaway's question something
about how you would address dealing with these issues in the
future, and your response was I believe spread your business
out?
Mr. Fletcher. Yes. And I have thought about that
afterwards. I would spread mine out but in the case of my
customers, that is not an acceptable answer to them. I have
probably 30 to 35 customers of mine who have individual
brokerage accounts with--and as it happened, every one of them
was with MF Global that I am aware of. They are--they have an
IB that has a significant presence in our area and that is
really not an option for them, because, they may be trading two
to five to ten contracts, you know. My company is going
hundreds of them; I can spread my stuff out. They can hardly do
that.
The Chairman. So going from there, what would you say would
be the single-most important action regulators could take to
try and restore confidence in the futures markets?
Mr. Fletcher. I am here testifying for National Grain and
Feed Association and we, as an association, haven't come to a
conclusion on what the best action would be. If you asked me
that personally, the first thing that comes to my mind is
having third party fiduciary holding the segregated funds that
had an arrangement with CME to pay margins as necessary rather
than a brokerage firm doing it.
The Chairman. Fair enough.
Mr. Duffy, when CME conducted the audit of MF Global the
week of October 24, did the CME check the balances of the
accounts with the depositories holding those funds or rely
solely on the statements from MF Global's daily segregation
reports?
Mr. Duffy. What is important to note is that we did not do
a full audit on the week prior to the bankruptcy. What we did
was send in auditors to check the segregation reports to make
sure that they tied out against third parties and ledgers and
the third parties being the banks. When we did the initial
report Wednesday--it takes a couple days to go through it when
we are tying these out--we had most of it tied out between 85
and 95 percent of the tie-outs were done against the banks and
the monies were there from Wednesday. So again if these
transfers occurred from after Wednesday, we would not have
known it. We were still tying out Wednesday on Thursday and
Friday.
The Chairman. When was the first time you were contacted
regarding any doubts about whether customer segregated funds
were intact at MF Global by anyone?
Mr. Duffy. The only time I was contacted was I will say
Chairman Gensler called me on Friday prior to the Sunday or
Monday bankruptcy and he asked me if I had any concerns about
MF Global's capital. I said I have no knowledge; you will have
to call our clearinghouse because I have no knowledge of that.
So then I learned of a problem with their capital on Sunday
evening early that it was an accounting error of roughly $900
million, and then I was not informed until Monday morning of
the 31st that it was no longer an accounting error and it had
been transferred to the broker-dealer.
The Chairman. So Chairman Gensler contacted you on Friday
before.
Mr. Duffy. He contacted me along with their head of
clearing and asked me if we had any concerns with MF Global's
capital and I said I would have no reason to be. You would have
to contact their folks in clearing and risk.
The Chairman. Did he offer anymore comments that------
Mr. Duffy. That was the end of my conversation.
The Chairman. Fascinating. Mr. Luparello, based on press
reports, it appears that FINRA raised red flags back in June
regarding the risk-building within MF Global. Can you describe
those risks and how you came to identify them?
Mr. Luparello. Yes. The analysis we did of their audited
financials filed in June had a footnote disclosure about the
large repo to maturity on the European sovereign debt. That
started the analysis that we shared with CBOE and eventually
the SEC that the firm was not taking the proper haircuts on
those positions. That conversation, as we have discussed,
culminated in August with the firm taking those additional
haircuts and disclosing them both in their periodic filings as
a listed company and also in their FOCUS filings.
The Chairman. Thank you. My time has expired.
For the final period of questioning I turn to the gentleman
from Virginia, Mr. Goodlatte.
Mr. Goodlatte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This has been a
long day and I appreciate you and the Ranking Member holding
this hearing. And we certainly had a comprehensive exposition
of the issues. I don't know if we have gotten all the answers
that we need but certainly this has been worthwhile to assure
folks that we and the industry are paying attention to the
concerns that have been raised by the debacle at MF Global.
Mr. Roth, in your testimony you mention that FCMs are
required to report on a daily basis the amount of funds
required to be held in segregation and the amount actually
held. Was MF Global fulfilling this requirement?
Mr. Roth. Congressman, I think my testimony says that for
the FCMs for which NFA is the DSRO, we require those firms to
file the daily seg statements with us. We were not the DSRO for
MF Global so not--MF Global was not making any filings with
NFA.
Mr. Goodlatte. Do they have a similar obligation to any
other entity?
Mr. Roth. Well, the CME was the DSRO and I am sure the CME
has its own means of monitoring compliance with segregation
requirements, but they would not have been filing their reports
with NFA.
Mr. Goodlatte. So you say the CME------
Mr. Roth. CME was the DSRO.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay.
Mr. Roth. And I am saying I am sure the CME monitors in its
own way compliance with segregation requirements, but MF Global
would not have been filing reports with NFA because we were not
their DSRO.
Mr. Goodlatte. Got you. So I should direct that question to
Mr. Duffy?
Mr. Duffy. We were--I am sorry.
Mr. Roth. Go ahead.
Mr. Duffy. We were receiving regular updates from MF Global
on their segregation report, and as I said in my testimony,
they showed excess funds of $200 million all the way through
Friday afternoon and then until the report came back to us on
Monday when they gave us the real report and said it was a $200
million deficit with the same date from the prior Thursday's
report. So I know it is a little confusing, sir, but they were
giving us updates. We were--I was just telling the Chairman
before you walked in we were doing tie-outs of those
segregation reports to the bank ledgers and other means to make
sure that the money was matching up.
Mr. Goodlatte. So is what you are telling me that they were
providing you with false information up until they corrected
all that with their------
Mr. Duffy. I can only tell you what I have been shown by
our attorneys, sir. We had two reports, one dated I believe
October 27--and you can--they can correct me if I am wrong on
the date--that we received I believe on Friday that showed a
$200 million excess of segregated funds. Once they decided to
tell us not to look for the accounting error of $900 million
anymore, that it has been transferred into their broker-dealer
account, they submitted another segs daily with the same
October 27 date that showed a $200 million deficit and not a
$200 million gain------
Mr. Goodlatte. So------
Mr. Duffy.--excess funds.
Mr. Goodlatte. But it doesn't stand to reason that that all
occurred over that weekend.
Mr. Duffy. It doesn't stand to reason. All I can tell you
is that we received one report on Friday that said they had
$200 million in excess funds and the same report we got on the
following Monday dated from that Friday now showed a $200
million deficit in segregated funds.
Mr. Goodlatte. So that is when you first became aware that
the amount required to be held in segregation was not the
amount actually held?
Mr. Duffy. I became aware of the amount that was a deficit
on Sunday evening that there was a $900 million shortfall. They
called it an accounting error. They informed us at 2:00 in the
morning that it was not an accounting error; they transferred
the money to their broker-dealer. So that is when I found out
that there was a problem.
Mr. Goodlatte. Some news reports state that MF Global had
been commingling funds for several days if not weeks. If this
proves to be true, could MF Global have ensured in their daily
report that there were enough funds in the segregated accounts?
Mr. Duffy. Could they have--I am sorry, sir?
Mr. Goodlatte. Could they have ensured that that was the
case without giving you false information?
Mr. Duffy. Again, we were tied out 85 to 90 percent of the
third party tie-outs from the Wednesday daily report on
Thursday and Friday and it did show that they were in excess
segregation of $200 million.
Mr. Goodlatte. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Duffy. Thank you.
Mr. Goodlatte. Mr. Roth, I will go back to you. You state
in your written testimony that self-regulation has served our
markets and our nation well for a very long time. Would you
elaborate on why market participants should remain confident in
the current system?
Mr. Roth. Well, I would point out a number of different
things. One thing is that the self-regulators are subject to
pervasive oversight by the CFTC. The CFTC comes in and does
rule enforcement reviews of NFA all the time. They have
reviewed every one of our regulatory programs. And as part of
that review, the CFTC conducts audits of firms we have just
audited to make sure that our audits were comprehensive and
complete. And to my knowledge, they had never had any sort of
material finding or any sort of problem with the audits that we
have done. So I don't think the problem is who is doing the
audits. I think the audits that have been done by the SROs have
been comprehensive and complete, but there is no system that is
foolproof. And as I mentioned earlier in my testimony, if
someone is intent upon committing a violation of the Act, it--
there is no regulatory system that can prevent them from doing
that.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. And then I will go back with your
permission, Mr. Chairman, one last question for Mr. Duffy on
that very point.
CME finished an audit of MF Global on August 4 and then
another audit a week before MF Global filed for bankruptcy. Did
these audits ever turn up anything of concern?
Mr. Duffy. Congressman Goodlatte, the audit you are
referring to that was complete on August 4 started in January.
These audits take several months to do. There were some minor
discrepancies but nothing out of the ordinary that they
immediately fixed when we reported the audit to them of which
we sent the letter to Mr. Corzine and he was sent the letter of
our--copy of our audit. Then, we did not do a full audit the
week prior to bankruptcy. As I said, we sent auditors in to do
tie-outs of segregation reports. Full audits take 4 to 5
months.
Mr. Goodlatte. So going back to the audit that was
completed on August 4, does that lead you to conclude that
these problems occurred over a short period of time toward the
end of October or do you think the audit was insufficient that
was completed------
Mr. Duffy. Again, I am not an auditor. I can only go by
what the reports say. It was started in January, it was
completed in August, there were some minor discrepancies, they
were fixed immediately by the firm. That is the last I had
heard of it.
Mr. Goodlatte. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. The gentleman's time has expired.
All time for questions has expired. Does the Ranking Member
have any closing remarks?
Seeing none from the Ranking Member, I would simply note
that this is not the last hearing nor certainly the last time
this issue or the laws related to it will be addressed. We have
discovered fascinating information that unfortunately still
leaves many, many questions unanswered.
With that, the chair would like to dismiss the panel. And
under the rules of the Committee, the record of today's hearing
will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive additional
material and supplemental written responses from witnesses and
to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Committee on Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 5:57 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Supplementary material Submitted by Hon. Jill Sommers, Commissioner,
Commodity Futures Trading Commission
During the December 8, 2012 hearing entitled, Hearing To Examine
the MF Global Bankruptcy, requests for information were made to Hon.
Jill Sommers. The following are the information submissions for the
record.
Insert 1
Mr. Huelskamp. Thank you. And I wish you would share with the
other Commissioners that obviously, if you were unaware, that
looks rather suspect and reflects poorly on him as a Chairman
of the Commission to invent something such as a statement of
nonparticipation, which no one seems to know what it is other
than he has already participated.
And another question I have, on July 20, which was the 1 year
anniversary and then-deadline for the Dodd-Frank requirements,
there were four conference calls and I believe you participated
in one with MF Global. And could you describe what occurred in
those conference calls?
Ms. Sommers. I don't believe I participated in a conference
call with MF Global in July.
Mr. Huelskamp. You are correct. I am sorry. That was in
December. I know there were four conference calls. I apologize.
I had the wrong date on that.
Ms. Sommers. In December of 2010 I had a meeting in my office
with MF Global.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes. Was Jon Corzine in on that meeting?
Ms. Sommers. He was.
Mr. Huelskamp. And were there notes kept of this particular
meeting?
Ms. Sommers. Perhaps. I don't recall whether I took notes. It
was approximately a 15 minute meeting.
Mr. Huelskamp. Yes. I might ask if you would provide those to
the Committee.

Attached is a record of the meeting with MF Global on December 21,
2010, which lists possible agenda items for the meeting and reflects
that Jon Corzine and Laurie Ferber, General Counsel of MF Global,
attended. The only note taken at the meeting was an addition to the
agenda to reflect that the subject of disruptive trading practices was
discussed.
attachment

Insert 2
Mr. Huelskamp. Well, it indicated to discuss segregation and
bankruptcy with MF Global on 12/21 of 2010, I would think that
would be a particularly important subject as we continue here.
But one other item as far as Mr. Gensler's meetings with Mr.
Corzine, which one did occur on July 20. Do we have notes of
what they discussed? And I think this is very strange. I was
unaware until today that Mr. Gensler actually used to work for
Mr. Corzine at Goldman Sachs and that seems very suspect,
certainly, to my constituents. So if I might have an answer to
that question.
Ms. Sommers. I can pass that on. I don't know if there are--
----
Mr. Huelskamp. We do not know if there are any notes of this
closed-door meeting?
Ms. Sommers. To Mr. Gensler's meeting I do not know if there
are notes.

I have referred Representative Huelskamp's request for notes to
Chairman Gensler's office.
______

Submitted Statement by National Pork Producers Council
Introduction
The National Pork Producers Council (NPPC) is an association of 43
state pork producer organizations and serves as the voice in
Washington, D.C., for the nation's pork producers. The U.S. pork
industry represents a significant value-added activity in the
agriculture economy and the overall U.S. economy. Nationwide, more than
67,000 pork producers marketed more than 110 million hogs in 2010, and
those animals provided total gross receipts of $15 billion. Overall, an
estimated $21 billion of personal income and $34.5 billion of gross
national product are supported by the U.S. hog industry. Economists Dan
Otto and John Lawrence at Iowa State University estimate that the U.S.
pork industry is directly responsible for the creation of 34,720 full-
time equivalent pork producing jobs and generates 127,492 jobs in the
rest of agriculture. It is responsible for 110,665 jobs in the
manufacturing sector, mostly in the packing industry, and 65,224 jobs
in professional services such as veterinarians, real estate agents and
bankers. All told, the U.S. pork industry is responsible for more than
550,000 mostly rural jobs in the U.S.
Exports of pork continue to grow. New technologies have been
adopted and productivity has been increased to maintain the U.S. pork
industry's international competitiveness. As a result, pork exports
have hit new records for 18 of the past 20 years. In 2011, so far, the
U.S. pork industry has exported nearly $5 billion of pork, which added
$57 to the price producers received for each hog marketed. Net exports
this year represent about 20 percent of pork production. The U.S. pork
industry today provides 21 billion pounds of safe, wholesome and
nutritious meat protein to consumers worldwide.
Profile of Today's Pork Industry
Pork production has changed dramatically in this country since the
early 1980s. Technology advances and new business models changed
operation sizes, production systems, geographic distribution and
marketing practices.
U.S. pork farms have evolved from single-site, farrow-to-finish
(i.e., birth-to-market) production systems that were generally family-
owned and small by today's standards to multi-site, specialized farms
that generally are still family-owned. (There are still many single-
site operations.) The changes were driven by the biology of the pig,
the business challenges of the modern marketplace and the regulatory
environment. Separate sites helped in controlling troublesome and
costly diseases and enhanced the effect of specialization. Larger
operations can spread overhead costs, such as environmental protection
investments and expertise, over more farms and buy in large lots to
garner lower input costs. The change in sizes has been the natural
result of economies of scale.
Marketing methods have changed as well. As recently as the early
1980s, a significant number of hogs were traded through terminal
auction markets. Many producers, though, began to bypass terminal
markets and even country buying stations to deliver hogs directly to
packing plants to minimize transportation and other transaction costs.
Today, hardly any hogs are sold through terminal markets and auctions,
and the vast majority of hogs are delivered directly to plants.
Pricing systems have changed dramatically, too, from live-weight
auction prices to today's carcass-weight, negotiated or contracted
prices, with lean premiums and discounts paid according to the
predicted value of individual carcasses.
Today, the prices of a small percentage of all hogs purchased are
negotiated on the day of the agreement. All of the other hogs are sold/
priced through marketing contracts or are packer produced in which
prices were not negotiated one lot or load at a time but determined by
the price of other hogs sold on a given day, the price of feed
ingredients that week or the price of lean hog futures on the Chicago
Mercantile Exchange (CME). These risk-management mechanisms are entered
into freely and often aggressively by producers and packers alike to
ensure a market for and a supply of hogs, respectively, and to reduce
the risks faced by one or both parties.
All of this means the days of rising at dawn to simply feed and
care for ones pigs are over. In addition to that daily task, today's
pork producers--many of whom have at least a bachelor's degree in
animal science, business, economics or similar discipline--must be very
proficient at managing the prices they pay for their inputs, i.e., corn
and soybean meal, and at calculating the prices they'd like to receive
for their hogs when they sell them.
There are a number of ways that pork producers manage their risk,
but the most common is use of the futures market--at least for a
percentage of the pigs they sell each year.
How Futures Market Works
The futures market, which has been used for nearly 150 years,
provides an efficient and effective way to manage, or transfer, price
risk. It also provides price information that is used as a benchmark in
determining the value of a particular commodity or financial instrument
at a specific time.
The market's benefits, risk transfer and price discovery, reach
every sector of the world economy, where changing market conditions
create economic risk in the diverse fields of agricultural products,
foreign exchange, imports, exports, financing and investments.
In the agricultural industry, futures contracts are bought and sold
to protect producers from the volatility in the commodities market.
Hundreds of different strategies are used, but all establish a price
level now for items such as feed grains to be delivered later,
providing what amounts to insurance against adverse price changes. This
is called hedging.
A relatively small amount of money, known as initial margin, is
required to buy or sell a futures contract. So, for example, on a
particular day, a margin deposit of just $1,000 might allow for the
purchase or sale of a futures contract covering $25,000 worth of
soybean meal. (These transactions, however, must be backed by the
financial resources of the purchaser; the buyer must be able to execute
the contract.)
The margin deposit simply locks in the price--based on that
particular day's market for, say, soybean meal--that will be paid at a
future date. Using the example above, suppose on Dec. 20, 2011, soybean
meal is selling for delivery in March at $100 a ton. A pork producer
buys a futures contract for 250 tons--$25,000--with a $1,000 margin
deposit.
If at delivery time the price in the market has risen to $110 a
ton, the producer will need to pay the soybean meal supplier $27,500
(250 tons times $110 per ton), or $2,500 more than the price at the
time the futures contract was bought. But that higher cost is offset by
the profit the producer makes selling the $100-a-ton futures contract;
the contract is worth $10 a ton more, or $2,500.
The margin required to buy or sell a futures contract is solely a
deposit of good faith that can be drawn on by a brokerage firm to cover
losses that a customer may incur. If the funds in a margin account are
reduced by losses to below a certain level--known as the maintenance
margin requirement--a broker will require an additional deposit of
funds to bring the account back to the level of the initial margin.
(Additional funds also may be required if an exchange or brokerage firm
raises its margin requirements.) Requests for additional funds are
known as margin calls.
Had the price of soybean meal in the example above dropped by $10 a
ton, selling for $22,500, the producer would have a margin call of
$2,500 (250 tons times $10 per ton).
Because accounts must maintain the initial margin deposit, margin
calls may occur numerous times throughout a futures contract's time
span, even, theoretically, every day.
Minimum margin requirements for a particular futures contract at a
particular time are set by the commodities exchange, such as the CME,
on which the contract is traded. Exchanges continuously monitor market
conditions and risks and, as necessary, raise or reduce their margin
requirements. Individual brokerage firms may require higher margin
amounts from their customers than the exchange-set minimums.
Pork Producers Use Futures To Manage Risk
U.S. pork producers use futures contracts to manage risk--that is,
the price volatility of commodities--and to bring a semblance of
stability to their business. Indeed, in today's financially uncertain
times, most agricultural lenders, who provide pork operations with
working capital--and even lines of credit to purchase futures
contracts--require producers to employ risk management tools such as
futures contracts.
It is important to point out that pork producers (and other farmers
and ranchers) use the futures market to ensure the viability of their
business and, thus, to produce pork; they are not speculators who
``play'' the market simply for the profits they can make--using futures
contracts as financial--and who never take delivery of product for
which they purchase or sell a futures contract.
Without futures contracts or other risk-management tools, producers
would lose flexibility and revenue, and consumer prices would increase,
testified one witness at the Dec. 13 hearing of the Senate Agriculture,
Nutrition, and Forestry Committee.
Livestock producers must hedge against increases in the prices they
pay for feed grains and against decreases in the prices they receive
for their animals. And most of them use hedging to plan for the next
year or more. Some producers, for example, already have purchased
futures contracts for feed grains on which they will take delivery in
early 2013.
Here's how one pork producer hedges his risk:
The producer pays a broker $1,400 for each futures contract,
locking in the price of corn and soybean meal--contracts are for 5,000
bushels of corn and for 100 tons of soybean meal--and setting the sales
price of his hogs--a contract covers 40,000 pounds of carcasses, which
is about 200 pigs. (The prices are locked in on the date the contracts
are bought.)
This producer hedges his risk on about \1/3\ of the 350,000-400,000
hogs he markets each year, or about 150,000 pigs. (The other hogs are
priced through contracts with a meat packer; the feed grain prices are
set through contracts with feed mills, which, in turn, manage their
risk, using the futures market.) That means hundreds of futures
contracts, with between $1.3 million and $1.5 million--the initial
margin--to cover them deposited with a broker. The producer also has
with a lender a line of credit that can be tapped should he need to
deposit additional funds to meet margin calls. Every day, the producer
must be aware of--and sometimes act on--the market fluctuations in
prices.
If corn and soybean meal prices in the market go up and hog prices
go down, the producer will have excess funds in his account. If the
feed grain prices go down and hog prices go up, the producer will have
a shortfall in funds, and the broker will issue a margin call for
additional funds to be deposited.
Producers of all sizes achieve risk management through the futures
market without directly using a broker. Some producers, for example,
sell pigs to be delivered at a future date to a packer or buy feed
grain to be delivered in a month or two from a supplier. The risk
associated with those transactions are borne by the packer and the feed
grain supplier, which manage their risk in the futures market.
It must be noted that having commodities exchanges in the United
States is vitally important not only to livestock and poultry producers
and other farmers but to consumers. If producers had to use an exchange
in, say, Brazil, the price of commodities would be set by that
exchange--certainly still determined by supply and demand--but the
total cost would be higher because of transportation fees. This would
raise producers' costs of getting a hog to market, and some part of
that, no doubt, would be passed along to consumers in the form of
higher retail pork prices. (NOT SURE ABOUT THIS.)
Implications for Pork Producers of MF Global's Bankruptcy
Many agricultural producers, including U.S. pork producers who
produce at least 20 percent of U.S. hogs, had funds with MF Global.
Most, if not all, of them, however, did not deposit their funds
directly with the clearing broker. They opened futures trading accounts
with an ``introducing'' broker, which put the funds into MF Global,
which had the financial wherewithal to make large transactions in the
commodities exchanges.
Most producers were unaware of their connection to MF Global, so
they were stunned to learn in early November, when the clearing broker
filed for bankruptcy, that their futures accounts were frozen and funds
were ``missing.''
The seriousness of the MF Global debacle cannot be understated. Had
such a loss of customer funds happened during a worse economic
climate--2008-2009, for example, when pork producers were losing $24
per hog and 50 percent of their equity and more than several went out
of business--there likely would have been widespread bankruptcies in
the agricultural industry and severe food supply issues.
It has been reported that financial market participants were not so
shocked by the size of MF Global's loss but by the fact that retail
investors lost money in ``customer accounts,'' which were supposed to
be segregated, or at least there were supposed to be restrictions on
how funds in the accounts could be used by the clearing broker. (It was
far from comforting for producers to hear former MF Global CEO Jon
Corzine testify Dec. 8 before the House Agriculture Committee, ``I
simply do not know where the money is.'')
It remains unclear exactly how customer funds were lost, but for
pork producers, the ``how'' is almost irrelevant. The loss and use of
funds they expected to be used for their transactions--and the apparent
lack of adequate oversight of MF Global's activities by governmental
and non-governmental entities--has shaken producers' confidence in the
futures market and in regulators' ability to police traders.
And that loss of confidence will cost producers and consumers.
NPPC Asks
U.S. pork producers need assurance that the markets will work and
that the funds in their futures accounts are safe. And while NPPC is
pleased that the Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) has
approved a rule to enhance protections for where customer funds can be
invested, it does not support more regulations for regulations' sake.
The entire futures trading system must be assessed, from exchanges
to brokers to clearinghouses, and oversight of the system must be
exercised by the public- and private-sector entities that have
responsibility. Put simply: There must be trust in the exchanges
between the buyers and sellers; commodities trading customers must have
faith in the system.
Possible ``fixes'' to prevent another MF Global situation include:

Impose stiffer criminal and/or civil penalties for misuse of
customer accounts.

Require brokers to obtain permission before using customers'
funds for purposes other than customer transactions.

Extend to commodities exchange customers insurance similar
to that provided to securities investors through the Securities
Investors Protection Corporation.

Require other financial tests and additional audits of
brokers and dealers by governmental and non-governmental
entities.
Questions
The collapse of MF Global and the missing customer funds raise a
number of questions to which NPPC hopes Congress will get answers.
Among pork producers' questions:

Are there mechanisms that can be put in place to prevent
another MF Global?

Will customers be given priority in the bankruptcy
proceedings to recover funds?

Will producers whose funds were with MF Global be made
whole?

How will the transfer of funds from MF Global to new
accounts with other clearing brokers be treated by the Internal
Revenue Service? Will such transfers be treated as taxable
events?

Will actions be taken to simplify and expedite claims to
recoup funds, which producers must file with MF Global's
bankruptcy trustee?
Conclusion
U.S. pork producers depend on, and in many cases are required by
their lenders--through the covenants of operating capital loans--to
have, risk management tools, including futures contracts. So, producers
must have confidence in the futures market; the credibility of entire
system, therefore, must be restored.
NPPC is ready to work with lawmakers and, if necessary, regulators
to re-establish integrity and faith in the system.
______

Submitted Questions
Response from Hon. Jill Sommers, Commissioner, Commodity Futures
Trading Commission
Question submitted by Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from Maine
Question. Ms. Sommers, on Tuesday the CFTC adopted the so-called
``MF Global Rule'' which bans the use of customer funds for in-house
repo-to-maturity transactions and re-defines the permitted investments
that FCMs can purchase with customer funds in repo-to-maturity
transactions with third parties. The original list of acceptable
investments for customer segregated funds is spelled out in the
Commodity Exchange Act, and hews to conservative choices such as
Treasuries, municipal bonds, and other products fully backed by the
United States or a U.S. locality.
Beginning in 2000, however, the CFTC used its discretionary
authority under the statute to expand the list of allowable
investments, first allowing the purchase of certificates of deposit,
commercial paper, and interests in government sponsored entities. In
2005, it permitted investments in foreign sovereign debt and in-house
transactions.
Now that the CFTC has rolled back those de-regulatory measures, how
can we as lawmakers ensure that a similar de-regulatory slide does not
happen again?
Answer. First, I would like to address some misconceptions
regarding the relationship between Commission Regulation 1.25 and the
investments MF Global made in foreign sovereign debt through the off-
balance sheet ``repo-to-maturity'' transactions that have been widely
reported. MF Global was a dually-registered Broker Dealer/Futures
Commission Merchant (BD/FCM). The BD arm of MF Global was regulated by
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority (FINRA). The FCM arm of MF Global was regulated by
the CFTC. The ``repo-to-maturity'' investments in foreign sovereign
debt made by MF Global were conducted through the BD arm of the company
under the oversight of the SEC and FINRA.
Commission Regulation 1.25 lists the investments that a CFTC-
regulated FCM is permitted to make with customer segregated funds.
Prior to the recent changes made to Regulation 1.25, FCMs were allowed
to invest customer funds in highly-rated foreign sovereign debt, but
only to hedge foreign currency risk posed by fluctuations in a
particular foreign currency posted by the customer to the FCM. Such
investments were strictly limited to the amount of a foreign nation's
currency that the customer posted. Investment in foreign sovereign debt
for purposes of speculation was never allowed by Regulation 1.25, and
Regulation 1.25 does not, and never has, governed investments made by
the BD arm of a dually-registered BD/FCM.
``Repo-to-maturity'' investments have never been allowed under
Regulation 1.25. Section 4d of the Commodity Exchange Act and
Regulation 1.25 require that the value of customer segregated accounts
remain intact at all times. When an FCM invests customer funds, that
actual investment, or collateral equal in value to the investment, must
remain in the customer segregated account. If customer funds are
transferred out of the segregated account to be invested by the FCM,
the FCM must make a simultaneous transfer of assets into the segregated
account. An FCM cannot take money out of a segregated account, invest
it, or use it for its own purposes, and then return the money to the
segregated account at some later time. If an FCM does so, it has
violated the law. If an FCM were to invest customer segregated funds in
foreign sovereign debt in order to speculate and hopefully make a
profit, the FCM would violate the law under either the current or
former versions of Regulation 1.25.
It is critical that customer funds be invested in a manner that
minimizes their exposure to credit, liquidity and market risks, both to
preserve their availability to customers and clearinghouses and to
enable investments to be quickly converted to cash at a predictable
value. Accordingly, Regulation 1.25 establishes a general prudential
standard by requiring that all investments be ``consistent with the
objectives of preserving principal and maintaining liquidity.'' In
order to ensure that all investments of customer funds continue to meet
this prudential standard, I believe the CFTC should receive information
from FCMs and clearinghouses on a regular basis detailing how customer
funds are invested. The Commission should also regularly review the
list of permitted investments under Regulation 1.25 and revise the list
as necessary to reflect current market conditions.
Response from Hon. Jon S. Corzine, former Chief Executive Officer, MF
Global Inc.
Questions submitted by Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from Maine
Question 1. You have described the profit MF Global obtained from
RTM transactions as the difference between the interest earned on the
security and the interest charged to MF Global for the purchase of that
security. As you described it, the interest on the security would be
greater than the interest charged for that purchase, producing income
for you.
Since these transactions involved the use of customer funds, how
much of that interest income was provided to the customers?
Answer. It is my understanding that no FCM customer funds were
invested in the RTM transactions. It is further my understanding that
the RTM transactions were entered into for the benefit of MF Global,
and that all interest income earned from the transactions was for the
benefit of MF Global.

Question 2. Do you know if customers were even aware of these
transactions?
Answer. MF Global made numerous disclosures regarding the RTM
transactions, including in its audited financial report that was issued
at the close of the 2011 Fiscal Year, and in certain quarterly
financial filings both before and after that year-end filing. MF Global
also discussed the RTM transactions during various investors calls. MF
Global also issued regulatory filings in connection with FINRA's
decision that MF Global needed to maintain additional net capital.
Response from Hon. Terrence A. Duffy, Executive Chairman, CME Group
Inc.
Question submitted by Hon. Chellie Pingree, a Representative in
Congress from Maine
Question. Part of the oversight of FCMs like MF Global involves
disclosures to one of the self-regulatory organization for the
derivatives industry. In the case of MF Global, it appears the front-
line SRP was the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME). But the CME is also
a publicly-traded entity that generates revenue through trades made
through its exchange. MF Global accounted for a significant volume of
those trades.
Is there a conflict of interest for a public company that is tasked
with regulating an entity that is a critical part of its own business
plan?
Answer.
Industry Regulation
Futures markets are commonly referred to as being ``self-
regulated,'' but ``self-regulation'' in that context is a misnomer
because the regulatory structure of the modern U.S. futures industry is
in fact a comprehensive network of regulatory organizations that work
together to ensure the effective regulation of all industry
participants. The Commodity Exchange Act (``CEA'') establishes the
Federal statutory framework that regulates the trading and clearing of
futures and futures options in the United States, and following the
recent passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer
Protection Act, its scope has been expanded to include the over-the-
counter swaps market as well. The CEA is administered by the U.S.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC'' or ``Commission''),
which establishes regulations governing the conduct and
responsibilities of market participants, exchanges and clearing houses.
The CFTC conducts its own surveillance of the markets and market
participants and actively enforces compliance with the CEA and
Commission regulations. In addition to the CFTC's Federal oversight of
the markets, exchanges separately establish and enforce rules governing
the activity of all market participants in their markets. Further, the
National Futures Association (``NFA''), the registered futures
association for the industry, establishes rules and has regulatory
authority with respect to every firm and individual who conducts
futures trading business with public customers. The CFTC, in turn,
oversees the effectiveness of the exchanges, clearing houses and the
NFA in fulfilling their respective regulatory responsibilities.
It should be clear from the foregoing that the futures industry is
a very highly-regulated industry with several layers of oversight. The
industry's current regulatory structure is not that of a single entity
governed by its members regulating its members, but rather a structure
in which exchanges, most of which are public companies, regulate the
activity of all participants in their markets--members as well as non-
members--complemented with corollary oversight by the NFA and CFTC.
CME Group Regulation
As the world's leading and most diverse derivatives marketplace,
CME Group is deeply cognizant of its important role in the context of
the global market infrastructure. We serve the risk management needs of
a wide variety of customers across a broad array of asset classes, and
economic decisions around the globe are informed by the price discovery
provided through our transparent and competitive markets. CME Group
fully appreciates the responsibilities that come with the leadership
position we occupy, and we are unequivocally and demonstrably committed
to preserving the integrity of our markets and protecting the financial
safety and soundness of our clearing house. We understand better than
anyone that our company's reputation and our customers' confidence are
on the line with every transaction executed on our markets and with the
completion of every clearing cycle.
As discussed further below, there is no per se conflict of interest
that arises simply because CME Group is a public company that is also
tasked with keeping its markets fair and open by regulating the users
of our markets. To the contrary, there is substantial evidence that
such private regulation has served the markets and market participants
very well. Although we recognize that exchange sponsored regulation
creates a theoretical possibility of conflicts, such possibilities
exist in every organization, and the operative issues are whether
organizational structures are effectively designed to mitigate the
potential for conflicts and whether appropriate controls are in place
to properly remediate any potential conflict that does in fact arise.
At CME Group, we have very compelling incentives to ensure that our
regulatory programs operate effectively and we have established a
robust set of safeguards designed to ensure these functions operate
free from conflicts of interest or inappropriate influence.
Incentives for Rigorous Regulation
In our view, no entity operating independent from CME Group could
possibly have stronger intrinsic motivations to ensure the operation of
a fair and financially sound marketplace.

Our ability to attract and retain business fundamentally
depends on our customers' confidence in the integrity of our
markets, and exceeding our customers' expectations in that
regard is one of the cornerstones of our business model.
Ensuring that our markets are defined by effective and
appropriately balanced regulation is a competitive advantage
that draws institutional, commercial and individual customers
to CME Group.

As a public company, it is only by performing our regulatory
functions well that we avoid the severe reputational
repercussions and associated impacts to shareholder value that
would arise if lax regulation or improper conflicts were to
compromise our commitment to fair, transparent and financially
sound markets.

CME Group's own capital is first at risk if a failed
clearing firm's capital and collateral posted to CME is
insufficient to cover a default at the clearing house, giving
us the strongest possible economic incentive to ensure robust
oversight of our clearing firms' compliance with our rules and
CFTC regulations.

In addition to strong economic and reputational self-
interest, CME Group is subject to robust regulatory oversight,
as further detailed in the next section, creating powerful
regulatory incentives for CME Group to effectively regulate its
markets.

No other entity that might conceivably conduct the regulation that
CME Group performs of its markets and of the financial practices of its
clearing members would have such compelling interests to perform as
well. Given this context, there can be little question that the
interests of CME Group, its customers and its shareholders are fully
aligned in promoting a rigorously effective regulatory environment.
Government Oversight
As introduced at the outset of this letter, it is important to
recognize as well that regulation at CME Group does not operate in a
vacuum, but is subject to active government oversight, primarily by the
CFTC.

CME Group's exchanges are registered as designated contract
markets (DCMs) with the CFTC, and our clearing house is
likewise registered as a derivatives clearing organization
(DCO).

In order to achieve registered status, we are required to
fulfill substantial regulatory obligations codified in the
Commodity Exchange Act's 23 core principles for DCMs and 18
core principles for DCOs. These include core principles
requiring that we establish structures and enforce rules to
minimize conflicts of interest in our decision making processes
and that we have appropriate procedures for resolving potential
conflicts.

The CFTC's Division of Market Oversight actively oversees
DCM compliance with core principles and its Division of
Clearing and Risk oversees DCO compliance. Exchanges and
clearing houses are continually subject to both formal and
informal reviews of how effectively we fulfill our regulatory
mandates. In the event CME Group's exchanges or clearing house
were to fail to comply with the core principles, the company
could face significant sanctions, reputational exposure and
even compromise the registration status which allows us to
operate our markets.
Proven Track Record as Industry Leader
CME Group has a proven track record of taking industry leading
measures to ensure that our regulatory responsibilities are executed
without conflicts or undue influence.

CME Group was the first futures exchange to create a Market
Regulation Oversight Committee (MROC) to augment the
independence of our regulatory functions. The MROC is a board-
level committee composed solely of independent (i.e., public)
members of CME Group's Board of Directors, and we created this
committee well before the CFTC determined to require that all
DCMs establish such committees. Pursuant to its publicly
available charter,\1\ the MROC provides independent oversight
of the policies and programs of CME Group's Market Regulation
and Audit Departments in order to help ensure the effective
administration of our SRO responsibilities and that those
responsibilities are executed independent of any improper
interference or conflict of interest.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/CME/1670414224x0x119341/
d801a2be-bc2f-40fa-94b1-1dadd0d59171/market-regulation-committee.pdf.

CME Group was also the first futures exchange to include
independent, public individuals on our disciplinary committees.
Again, the CFTC subsequently adopted this model for all DCMs,
establishing minimum requirements for public representation on
disciplinary panels, requirements which CME Group independently
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
chooses to exceed.

We also have a substantial ethics and compliance program and
related certification processes for all employees, as well as
an additional Confidentiality Policy for the Market Regulation
and Audit Departments \2\ which sets forth a rigid framework
that precludes the use or disclosure of information obtained in
the context of fulfilling our regulatory obligations other than
for regulatory or risk management purposes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.cmegroup.com/market-regulation/overview/files/
confidentialitypolicy.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investment in Integrity of our Markets
CME Group invests substantial resources in our efforts to protect
the integrity of our markets and the financial stability of our
clearing house. These include:

150-person Market Regulation Department.

61-person Audit Department.

Functions such as Clearing Risk Management, Regulatory
Information Technology, the Globex Control Center and the Legal
Department, among others, additionally support various facets
of our regulatory functions.

Our investment of tens of millions of dollars each year in
our regulatory efforts reflect the importance we place on this
commitment to our market participants, and also substantially
reduces the financial and operational burdens on Federal
regulatory agencies. The exchanges' regulatory programs operate
at no cost to the taxpayer and, in fact, the exchanges pay the
CFTC for the CFTC's program of oversight of exchange regulatory
programs.

Significant investments in our regulatory technology,
including staff dedicated solely to the support and continuous
development of our regulatory technology infrastructure, ensure
that our regulatory and market protection capabilities
anticipate and evolve with the changing dynamics of the
marketplace. CME Group owns or has applied for numerous patents
related to its regulatory technology and other tools designed
to help protect against disruptions in our markets. We have
developed an exceptionally granular audit trail of market
activity and powerful and flexible data query and analytical
tools that allow our regulatory staff to examine real-time and
historical order, transaction and position data, maintain
profiles of markets and market participants, and to detect
trading patterns potentially indicative of market abuses.

Following the ``Flash Crash'' on May 6, 2010, for
example, CME Group was able, later that same night, to
provide the CFTC with a detailed account, sequenced to the
millisecond, of every order, trade, cancellation and
modification that took place in its relevant markets on
that day. Moreover, it was our ingenuity and investment in
developing and implementing market controls that
effectively halted the market break that day by
automatically pausing the market long enough to source
liquidity and that helped to ensure, unlike other venues,
that no trades had to be canceled.

With respect to our open outcry markets, we independently
elect to invest in high-end, comprehensive camera surveillance
of our trading floors to detect and deter abuses--not because
any rule mandates that we do so, but because of our commitment
to effectively fulfill our mission to protect the integrity of
our markets.

Our clearing house's financial safeguards system is
continually evaluated and updated to reflect the most advanced
risk management and financial surveillance techniques and
capabilities.
Enforcement
CME Group's effectiveness and assertiveness in regulating its
markets are also reflected in the results of our surveillance and
enforcement programs.

In 2011, CME Group's exchanges opened approximately 700
regulatory inquiries, in addition to conducting proactive
regular surveillance, and took 138 formal disciplinary actions
against market participants.

Two of those recent actions, resulting in $850,000 in fines
and remedial actions, were taken against one of our most active
proprietary trading firms for failing to properly supervise and
test its deployment of automated trading systems. In another
recently resolved matter, eighteen brokers and locals in a
particular market on the trading floor were fined more than
$600,000 and subject to trading suspensions for engaging in
non-competitive trades that disadvantaged other market
participants.

Direct regulation by the exchange offers our regulators unique
proximity to the markets, market participants and the broader resources
of the exchange in ways that foster the development of expertise that
not only helps to make our regulatory staff more effective, but also
assists Federal regulators in our common objective of preserving the
integrity of the markets.

Most of our interaction with Federal agencies occurs with
the CFTC, and its Division of Enforcement publishes a report of
its activity for each fiscal year. Its most recent full report,
for FY 2010, noted that it took 57 enforcement actions.\3\ In
30% of those actions, CME Group either referred the matter to
the CFTC or provided assistance to the CFTC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The CFTC recently released statistics for FY 2011, which noted
the filing of 99 enforcement actions and the opening of more than 450
investigations, but the full report is not yet available.

Excluding enforcement actions outside of CME Group's
regulatory purview, such as forex fraud, the percentage of CFTC
actions in which CME Group referred the matter to the CFTC and/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
or provided assistance to the CFTC was 68%.

An example of how exchange sponsored regulation and Federal
regulation work together is evident in another 2011 matter
whereby CME Group regulators initially took summary and
emergency actions to bar a party engaged in violative practices
from our markets and referred the matter to the CFTC and
Department of Justice. The CFTC subsequently filed a civil
action against the individual, and in December 2011, he was
sentenced to 44 months in prison and ordered to pay restitution
of approximately $369,000 after having pled guilty to wire
fraud.

Exchange sponsored regulation also often allows for more expedient
identification of potential issues given our knowledge of and proximity
to the markets, as well as the ability to react more quickly and
flexibly to potential market and regulatory issues; in certain matters,
that speed can make all the difference between having the ability to
freeze or recoup misappropriated money and losing it forever to
wrongdoers.

For example, in a series of three separate recent cases
resolved in 2011, the CME Group exchanges were able to quickly
identify suspicious activity in our markets involving off-shore
parties seeking to misappropriate money from other unwitting
market participants. We promptly referred those matters to the
CFTC which subsequently filed suit against the parties in
Federal court. Our ability to quickly detect this activity and
assist the CFTC in its subsequent investigatory efforts
resulted in fines and restitution of more than $3.5 million
and, by quickly freezing funds, prevented $7.2 million more
from being stolen.
MF Global Bankruptcy
The MF Global bankruptcy was not a failure of exchange sponsored
regulation. CME Group's clearing house fully met its obligations to all
other clearing member firms and their customers, and our Audit team
performed its responsibilities in regard to MF Global consistent with
the highest professional standards.

As CME Group has noted in its testimony before several
Congressional committees, 100% of the customer segregated
collateral posted to CME and held at the clearing level,
amounting to $2.5 billion, was fully accounted for. The well-
publicized shortfall in customer collateral came from the
customer segregated funds held at the FCM level, not funds held
at the clearing level.

MF Global's improper transfer of customer segregated funds
held at the FCM level was a very serious violation of the
Commodity Exchange Act and exchange rules, and the resulting
shortfall in customer segregated funds was an unfortunate first
in our industry's long history. However, no regulator, whether
an exchange sponsored regulator or otherwise, can guarantee
that individuals will not break rules--regulators can seek to
establish appropriate rules, monitor compliance with the rules
and ensure that market participants are appropriately
accountable for breaches of the rules.

CME Group is fully cooperating with Federal authorities in
the MF Global matter to assist them in their investigatory
efforts and is working with the industry to review how current
safeguards for customer segregated funds held at the firm level
can be strengthened.

To put it plainly, there was no conflict of interest with respect
to CME Group's regulation of MF Global, and any suggestion that
conflicted regulation contributed to the MF Global fiasco is misplaced.
Indeed, in 2008 and 2009, CME Group fined MF Global $400,000 and
$495,000, respectively, for supervision failures and other violations
of trading practices rules, clearly indicating that CME Group's
regulators actively monitored and enforced compliance with the rules by
MF Global, just as we do with every other market participant.
Notwithstanding the fact that MF Global's misconduct was the cause
of the shortfall in customer segregated funds, CME Group's efforts in
the wake of these events speak to the level of our commitment to
ensuring our customers' confidence in our markets.

We made an unprecedented guarantee of $550 million to the
SIPC Trustee in order to accelerate the distribution of funds
to customers.

CME Trust pledged virtually all of its capital--$50
million--to cover CME Group customer losses due to MF Global's
misuse of customer funds.

CME Group has also recently announced that it will establish
a $100 million fund designed to provide additional future
protections of customer segregated funds for U.S. family
farmers and ranchers who hedge their business in our markets.

No other exchange or clearing house has taken such actions.
Conclusion
CME Group's record belies any suggestion that conflicts of interest
arising from exchange sponsored regulation have precluded us from
assertively regulating our markets. The current regulatory model has
served the futures industry, its customers and the public very well,
and MF Global's misconduct should not undermine that record.
The utility of SROs has been consistently recognized by Congress.
For example, the Commodity Futures Modernization Act of 2000 embraced
the SRO regulatory structure by further defining the SROs'
complementary role vis-a-vis the CFTC and law enforcement agencies. In
2008, in ``The Department of the Treasury Blueprint for a Modernized
Financial Regulatory Structure'', Treasury recommended that the SRO
model be preserved for the futures and securities industries ``[g]iven
its significance and effectiveness.'' Similarly, in 2009, Treasury's
``Financial Regulatory Reform--A New Foundation: Rebuilding Financial
Supervision and Regulation'' further endorsed the SRO structure. Most
recently, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act
recognized the substantial public good that effective exchange
sponsored regulation delivers and extended the core principles based
SRO regulatory regime to the previously unregulated swaps market.
In conclusion, CME Group's regulatory efforts have had a
significant impact on enhancing market integrity. We have a robust and
proven model for managing against potential conflicts of interest, and
the public's and market participants' interest in well and efficiently
regulated CME Group markets continues to be best served by our strong
and innovative self-regulatory programs buttressed by effective CFTC
oversight.


