- HEARING TO REVIEW THE ROLE OF BROADBAND ACCESS IN RURAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 112 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HEARING TO REVIEW THE ROLE OF BROADBAND ACCESS IN RURAL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON RURAL DEVELOPMENT, RESEARCH, BIOTECHNOLOGY, AND
FOREIGN AGRICULTURE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED TWELFTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 24, 2011, SPRINGFIELD, IL

__________

Serial No. 112-24

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
70-638                    WASHINGTON : 2011
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center, U.S. Government Printing Office. Phone 202�09512�091800, or 866�09512�091800 (toll-free). E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

FRANK D. LUCAS, Oklahoma, Chairman

BOB GOODLATTE, Virginia,             COLLIN C. PETERSON, Minnesota,
Vice Chairman                    Ranking Minority Member
TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois         TIM HOLDEN, Pennsylvania
STEVE KING, Iowa                     MIKE McINTYRE, North Carolina
RANDY NEUGEBAUER, Texas              LEONARD L. BOSWELL, Iowa
K. MICHAEL CONAWAY, Texas            JOE BACA, California
JEFF FORTENBERRY, Nebraska           DENNIS A. CARDOZA, California
JEAN SCHMIDT, Ohio                   DAVID SCOTT, Georgia
GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
THOMAS J. ROONEY, Florida            JIM COSTA, California
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          TIMOTHY J. WALZ, Minnesota
BOB GIBBS, Ohio                      KURT SCHRADER, Oregon
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina
SCOTT R. TIPTON, Colorado            WILLIAM L. OWENS, New York
STEVE SOUTHERLAND II, Florida        CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine
ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD, Arkansas  JOE COURTNEY, Connecticut
MARTHA ROBY, Alabama                 PETER WELCH, Vermont
TIM HUELSKAMP, Kansas                MARCIA L. FUDGE, Ohio
SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee          GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,
RENEE L. ELLMERS, North Carolina     Northern Mariana Islands
CHRISTOPHER P. GIBSON, New York      TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois
REID J. RIBBLE, Wisconsin
KRISTI L. NOEM, South Dakota

______

Professional Staff

Nicole Scott, Staff Director

Kevin J. Kramp, Chief Counsel

Tamara Hinton, Communications Director

Robert L. Larew, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign
Agriculture

TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, Illinois, Chairman

GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania         JIM COSTA, California, Ranking
MARLIN A. STUTZMAN, Indiana          Minority Member
AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia                HENRY CUELLAR, Texas
RANDY HULTGREN, Illinois             PETER WELCH, Vermont
VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri             TERRI A. SEWELL, Alabama
ROBERT T. SCHILLING, Illinois        LARRY KISSELL, North Carolina

Mike Dunlap, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     5
Johnson, Hon. Timothy V., a Representative in Congress from
Illinois, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     4
Schilling, Hon. Robert T., a Representative in Congress from
Illinois, opening statement....................................     8

Witnesses

Schroeder, Raymond E., Professor Emeritus and Director of Online
Affairs, Center for Online Learning, Research, and Service,
University of Illinois at Springfield, Springfield, IL.........     9
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Bartlett, P.E., Jay C., President and Chief Executive Officer,
Prairie Power, Inc., Jacksonville, IL..........................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    16
Campbell, Sue, Chief Executive Officer, Community Memorial
Hospital, Staunton Hospital, Staunton, IL......................    20
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Crum, Jim, beef producer, U.S. Wellness Meats, Virginia, IL......    23
Prepared statement...........................................    24
Fowler, Lester D., Legislative and Government Affairs Manager,
McDonough Telephone Cooperative, Colchester, IL; on behalf of
National Telecommunications Cooperative Association............    26
Prepard statement............................................    27

Submitted Material

Clark, Drew, Executive Director, Partnership for a Connected
Illinois, submitted statement..................................    45
Illinois Farm Bureau, submitted statement........................    47

HEARING TO REVIEW THE ROLE OF BROADBAND ACCESS IN RURAL ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT

----------

SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 2011

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research,
Biotechnology, and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Springfield, IL
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:19 p.m., at
the University of Illinois-Springfield Public Affairs
Conference Center, One University Plaza, Room C-D, Springfield,
Illinois 62703, Hon. Timothy V. Johnson [Chairman of the
Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Johnson, Thompson,
Hultgren, Schilling, Costa, and Kissell.
Staff present: Mike Dunlap, Mary Nowak, Lauren Sturgeon,
Andy Baker, and John Konya

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. TIMOTHY V. JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM ILLINOIS

The Chairman. The hearing to review the role of broadband
access for rural economic development will come to order.
I assume most of you know, I'm Congressman Tim Johnson. I
am privileged to serve as the chair of this Subcommittee. And I
want to introduce my colleagues, but I also want to make a
couple of contemporaneous remarks before we actually start the
hearing.
To my right is Mr. Jim Costa from California, who is the
Ranking Member of the Subcommittee. And I must say this is not
anything other than just factual. We are effectively co-
chairmen. Congressman Costa is extraordinary in terms of his
service not only to his district, but to agriculture around the
country. This is a privilege for him to be here with us. And I
am just honored, Jim, Congressman Costa, that you are able to
be with us.
Mr. Costa. Thank you.
The Chairman. To my left is my good friend, Congressman
Glenn Thompson from Pennsylvania, also a distinguished Member
of the Committee. To his left is my colleague from Illinois on
the Subcommittee and the full Committee, Congressman Bobby
Schilling. And to our far right, my colleague, Congressman
Larry Kissell from North Carolina.
Congressman Hultgren, who is also from Illinois will be
here relatively shortly, but is a running a bit behind his
schedule. And so, we are going to proceed.
Before I actually get to the reason we are here, I just
want to tell you, these individuals with whom I am sitting are
just an extraordinary group of people. This Subcommittee
epitomizes what America wants, and that is bipartisanship,
cooperation, civility, cooperation in an era when that is all
too lacking.
[Applause.]
The Chairman. In the nearly year that this Subcommittee has
been in existence, Congressman Costa and I, Congressman
Kissell, Thompson, Schilling, we have never had one conflict on
any major or minor point. Our ability to deal with things, and
I give credit to my colleagues more than I frankly, it is
really extraordinary. And, again, in an era when you see
everything contentious, everything partisan, everything
divided, these gentlemen serve as the total contrast. Our
ability to deal with issues, our ability to get through the
agenda is in no small part due to the fact that Jim Costa, my
co-Chairman, as well as Larry Kissell, Glenn Thompson, and
Bobby Schilling, represent that spirit. And I am just grateful
for what you are able to do and what you do for your districts.
And I will say this: I think all of us up here, with the
possible exception of Congressman Costa, may or may not have
contentious elections this year. I would be unequivocal in my
saying that these individuals are extraordinary public
servants. And I am not going to get into the election process.
I will simply say they are good to serve with, good people.
They serve the country well, and they serve their constituents
well.
So, with those introductory remarks, let me recognize
Ranking Member Costa. And I have already recognized
Representatives Thompson, Kissell, Hultgren, and Schilling. And
the chair would request, and I am going to make an opening
statement, too, if the other Members would submit their opening
statements for the record so that the witnesses can begin their
testimony and ensure there is ample time for questions.
I do have a brief opening statement to make, and
Congressman Costa will have a similar statement to make. So,
let me start.
Good afternoon, and welcome to this beautiful University of
Illinois-Springfield campus. And let me also extend my
appreciation to the chancellor, the administration here at the
university. They have been wonderful hosts. We are very, very
grateful for this great university and your willingness to host
us here today.
For this hearing to review rural broadband access and
economic development, we are delighted to have an opportunity
to hear directly from businesses and institutions from this
region who are doing the hard work of building and serving our
rural economy.
This Subcommittee oversees several areas which are
important to small towns across America. In addition to
providing oversight on rural development issues which we will
be discussing today, we pay careful attention to issues of
research, biotech, and trade promotion. Along with the private
sector, investments through our land-grant colleges and
universities help to spur innovation in agricultural
technologies to keep our farmers and ranchers competitive in a
global market. And in those markets, we work with our exporters
to overcome unfair trade barriers to high quality American
products.
Today we are taking a close look at broadband access and
how economic development can be sustained and accelerated
through connecting rural communities with information,
services, and markets. Through the discussion today, we hope to
gain a better understanding of whether infrastructure programs
are effective in reaching the most remote areas as a lender of
last resort.
Through our hearings this year, we have to work to identify
opportunities to streamline programs and application processes,
and identify where scarce Federal resources should be deployed.
The Internet is supposed to be a great equalizer to break
down the traditional barriers of distance. We can narrow the
gap between urban areas, like Springfield, and rural areas like
Calhoun County and Moultrie County when it comes to access to
jobs, education, and markets. That is why rural broadband
access is so important; it drives economic growth.
Another purpose for today's hearing is to highlight the
demographic and economic challenges that face rural America.
Just here in Illinois, as evidenced by the loss of a
Congressional seat, Illinois lost nearly 3.5 percent of its
population. According to the 2010 Census, a large number of
counties in Illinois, particularly rural counties, declined in
population. The loss of population could be attributed to the
lack of opportunity, particularly economic opportunity.
Illinois is plagued with unemployment higher than the national
average. Most striking, when one reviews unemployment county by
county, you will notice that rural counties, such as nearby
Montgomery County or Vermillion County over in the eastern part
of the state, vary between 11.5 and 10 percent, respectively.
Economic opportunity is linked to a variety of factors,
whether that is the onerous regulations from the EPA,
Department of Labor, USDA, or FDA that stifle entrepreneurship,
or the lack of access to quality jobs, quality health care,
technical skills training, or education to meet 21st century
demands. Regardless of the driving factors, rural America is
struggling. Schools are consolidating, corner grocery and
hardware stores are closing their doors, and post offices could
be closed in the near future.
Our witnesses today will provide testimony on how access to
rural broadband provides opportunities in rural health care,
rural education, and market access.
I am especially pleased that we have such a distinguished
panel of witnesses with us here today. Each of our witnesses is
here to provide a unique perspective on the rural economy and
how they are meeting the challenges faced by every small town
in America. They are broadband providers and users whose
organizations provide health and education services, food, and,
of course, access to high speed networks.
I would like to thank each one of you for taking the time
to prepare your testimony today and traveling from all over the
state to be with us. We welcome you and look forward to your
comments.
Before I turn to the Ranking Member for his opening
statement, let me say two things:
First of all, we have a wonderful Majority and Minority
staff. Mr. Costa works with them; we all do here. Mike Dunlap
has been just extraordinary, together with my staff. Sam
Pfister from Rochester, Illinois, and Kevin Johnson are just
doing an extraordinary job for us. And the staffs have been
wonderful. We appreciate you ladies and gentlemen for your
helping us.
I would also say just as a backdrop, and Mr. Costa will
elaborate on this and the witnesses will as well. We are
focusing today on broadband services, but the bigger issue to
all of us at this table who represent predominantly rural
areas, or at least significant rural areas, is arresting the
decline in rural America. We want to do what we can to marry,
so to speak, the public and private sector together so that
rural America can realize its potential to rebound, because
when rural America declines, America declines. And we have to
make sure that we address that issue in the most four square
way we can. I think all of us at the table are committed to
that.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Johnson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Timothy V. Johnson, a Representative in
Congress from Illinois

Good afternoon and welcome to the beautiful University of Illinois
Springfield campus for this hearing to review rural broadband access
and economic development. We are delighted to have an opportunity to
hear directly from businesses and institutions from this region that
are doing the hard work of building and serving our rural economy.
This Subcommittee oversees several areas which are important to
small towns across America. In addition to providing oversight on rural
development issues we will be discussing today, we pay careful
attention to issues in research, biotechnology, and trade promotion.
Along with the private sector, investments through our land-grant
colleges and universities help to spur innovation in agricultural
technologies to keep our farmers and ranchers competitive in a global
market. And in those markets, we work with our exporters to overcome
unfair trade barriers to high-quality American products.
Today we are taking a close look at broadband access and how
economic development can be sustained and accelerated through
connecting rural communities with information, services, and markets.
Through the discussion today, we hope to gain a better understanding of
whether infrastructure programs are effective in reaching the most
remote areas as a lender of last resort. Throughout our hearings this
year we have been working to identify opportunities to streamline
programs and application processes, and identify where scarce Federal
funds should be deployed.
The Internet is supposed to be a great equalizer--it can break down
the traditional barriers of distance. It can narrow the gap between
urban areas like Springfield and rural areas like Moultrie County when
it comes to access to jobs, education, and markets. That's why rural
broadband access is so important--it drives economic growth.
Another purpose for today's hearing is to highlight the demographic
and economic challenges that face rural America. Just here in Illinois,
as evidenced by the loss of a Congressional seat, Illinois lost nearly
3.5% percent of its population. According to the 2010 Census a large
number of counties in Illinois, particularly rural counties, declined
in population.
The loss of population can be attributed to the lack of
opportunity, particularly, economic opportunity. Illinois is plagued
with unemployment higher than the national average of 9.2%. Most
strikingly, when one reviews unemployment county by county you notice
that rural counties such as nearby Montgomery County and Vermillion
County between 11.5% and 10.3%, respectively.
Economic opportunity is linked to a variety of factors. Whether
that is onerous regulations from the EPA, Department of Labor, USDA, or
FDA that stifle entrepreneurship or the lack of access to quality jobs,
quality healthcare, technical skills training, or education to meet
21st century demand. Regardless of the driving factors, rural America
is struggling: schools are consolidating, corner grocers and hardware
stores are closing their doors, and post offices could be closed in the
near future. Our witnesses today will provide testimony on how access
to rural broadband provides opportunities in rural healthcare, rural
education, market access.
I am especially pleased that we have such a distinguished panel of
witnesses with us here today. Each of our witnesses is here to provide
a unique perspective on the rural economy, and how they are meeting the
challenges faced by every small town in America. With us are broadband
providers and users whose organizations provide health and education
services, food, and of course access to high-speed networks. I would
like to thank each of you for taking the time to prepare your testimony
today, and for traveling from all over Illinois to be with us.
Welcome and we look forward to your comments.

The Chairman. So, with those remarks--probably too long--I
turn to my distinguished colleague, the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee and my very, very good friend, Mr. Jim Costa?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for inviting
us to be here today in America's heartland. I think I can speak
for Congressman Kissell and Congressman Thompson, we are just
pleased to be in the Chairman's district and Mr. Schilling's
district. I understand we are kind of in both of your areas
here.
But as I was flying over this beautiful part of our country
yesterday afternoon, on the approach to the landing here at
Springfield, seeing all the farmland, seeing the rural
communities from which I come from as well in California,
realizing that so much of what really is America, not only
today, but historically, is part and parcel of this wonderful
part of rural America that we have in every State in the Union.
Sometimes, not here with this panel, of course, because we all
represent various parts of rural America, but it is sometimes
forgotten in the urban-centric districts in which our
colleagues represent. And we have to continue to remind them
that, not just of the incredible history, but our ability to
produce food and fiber and to provide an ability in the 21st
century on how the economies of scale in rural America apply to
the success of getting out of this terrible recession that we
have been in, a solid, sound economic recovery.
And so, I am glad, Mr. Chairman, that you have taken the
time to bring the Subcommittee here to the heartland of America
to really talk and advocate not only on behalf of rural
America, but the challenges we face, to focus on broadband and
the interconnectivity that is so critical to the future success
of rural America, as we consider changes in the 2012 Farm Bill
that we will be dealing with, as it relates to the
Subcommittee's focus, which is rural development, research,
biotechnology, and foreign agriculture.
So, this public hearing today on the role of broadband
access has in the rural economic development is fitting,
timely, and appropriate for us to hear from our witnesses and
from the larger participation that is reflected in this room
throughout the great State of Illinois. So, I really appreciate
that.
Before I read my statement, let me also say that I am
compelled to underline the comments that Chairman Johnson has
made, my friend, about the bipartisan cooperation on this
Subcommittee. Having come from a tradition of bipartisan
cooperation in the 1980s and the 1990s and the California
Legislature, it is one of the great frustrations that Members
of this Subcommittee daily feel in Washington. I mean, at the
end of the day, what binds us together as a nation, and I was
reminded of that this morning entering the Lincoln Library and
visiting his home, is far greater--far greater as a nation than
whatever disagreements or divisions we may have.
And so, the spirit of bipartisanship that is exhibited in
this Subcommittee I hope will continue so we can expand it to
some of our colleagues who seem to forget that sometimes.
But it is great to be in the Land of Lincoln.
Let me begin, Mr. Chairman, by saying that both Congressman
Thompson and I did have a chance to visit the Lincoln
Presidential Library. And I do not have to tell you folks
because you are from the Land of Lincoln, that President
Lincoln was the first President really to truly embrace the
benefits of the power of telecommunications through the
telegraph, relying heavily on that new technology. Just as we
look at broadband and the Internet today, the telegraph was the
state of the art way in which they were able to communicate and
deal with all the challenges and difficulties of the Civil War.
And he understood that.
You know, I was quickly going through a lot of the
different exhibits and seeing the attacks that he faced, and
the criticisms that he dealt with. But you talk about boldness,
you talk about vision. Besides being a log splitter and being
born in a log cabin, in the 1850s, and you can see it from the
home that he lived in, which was truly an upper middle class
home, he was a counsel not only on the circuit, but the Central
Illinois Railroad. He tried a very important case in the United
States Supreme Court.
And in the middle of perhaps the most divisive time in our
nation's history, the Civil War, when the fabric of our country
was being torn apart, when we had rapid inflation, deficits to
the max, and the printing of paper money--does that economic
crisis sound familiar? He said we are going to build a railroad
across the nation in 1862. I mean, talk about boldness. Talk
about vision.
So, it is fitting that we are here today as we talk about
expanding our nation's telecommunications network. More
importantly, how to harness the power of the broadband
technology to realize not only the potential of all America,
but rural America.
I look forward to hearing from our broadband providers
today on the panel regarding the Federal program, but more
importantly, the private sector participation and how we can
apply parts of that private sector participation to the areas
of rural America that still lack broadband access.
I am particularly interested in hearing the broadband users
on the panel talk about how they are utilizing it to connect
rural America with the global economy because clearly we are a
global economy.
Whether it is here in Illinois, or in my home State of
California, or any of the areas that my colleagues, that we
represent across our great nation, the importance of rural
broadband is critical to all of our districts.
Let me give you a few examples. We are going to hear the
Illinois snapshot here in a moment. But you think of
California, which has 38 million people, the most populous
state in the nation. It is the home of Silicon Valley. They do
not obviously have any problems with broadband in rural
California. Not.
According to the 2008 report by the California Broadband
Task Force, California, while we lead in broadband penetration
at 96 percent, but it is misleading; 1.4 million rural
Californians lack access to broadband, and barely \1/2\ the
state's residents--\1/2\ the state's residents out of 38
million--do not have broadband access at home.
For those households that have an annual income of less
than $25,000 a year, and I represent a significant portion of
them, an economically poorer district in the country, the
situation is even bleaker, with less than \1/4\ of the
households subscribing to broadband, if you make $25,000 or
less a year, which, if you think about it, probably is logical.
What this shows me is that despite the relative success in
putting wires in the ground by the private sector participating
with both our state and Federal Government, broadband providers
and public institutions together, and that is the private
partnership that Mr. Johnson was talking about in his opening
statement, we still have a lot of work today in terms of
bridging the divide between the haves and the have nots,
especially in rural America.
One of the challenges in my district and here in Chairman
Johnson's district is the limitations that various definitions
of rural that are placed under the United States Department of
Agriculture's definition of what rural development programs
mean. I think all of us share that frustration. We have had a
couple of Subcommittee hearings on it, and I think I know what
rural means, but it certainly does not apply to the definition
under today's law. And we need to change that, whether it is
looking at Census tracts or doing some other modifications.
So, Chairman Johnson and I are continuing to pressure the
USDA to provide a report to Congress that was required in the
2008 Farm Bill on various definitions and recommendations on
how the agency can provide more flexibility in administering
the rural development programs, while still ensuring they are
working for the benefit of rural America.
I will tell you, folks, that you are well represented by
Congressman Tim Johnson. He was relentless and tenacious in our
last Subcommittee hearing on telling the USDA that the time is
now. And as a result of that testimony, we can finally get the
reports provided to us here in the next month.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on how
they believe, who can better tell us how we can harness the
power of broadband, not only in Illinois, but throughout rural
America, and how the United States Department of Agriculture's
broadband programs might be better able to suit our needs.
So, once again thank you, Chairman Johnson, my friend Tim,
for calling this hearing. It is great to be in an area that you
always talk to me about, about the wonderful part of Illinois
that you have the honor and privilege to represent. It is
wonderful. It is great to be here today in the home of Lincoln.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Co-Chairman. And I also want
to thank, again, Mr. Kissell, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Schilling who
will play an active role in the hearing today. And they make,
together with our other Members of the Subcommittee, they make
this Subcommittee work. And I would argue that our Subcommittee
is as proactive, as active--Mike Dunlap and the Democratic
staff as well do an extraordinary job in making sure that we
are unified in our effort to represent our interests and
represent rural America.
I also want to acknowledge my good friend, Colleen
Callahan, who is the state director of the United States
Department of Agriculture and Rural Development. She is with us
here today, and we appreciate you being here, Colleen.
[Applause.]
The Chairman. And also, Chancellor Koch at the University
of Illinois-Springfield.
Now, let me just pay a special appreciation, not only to
this university, but to the City of Springfield. They have been
extraordinary in their receptiveness in putting this together
today. Matter of fact, when we finish with our various matters,
I am going to go down to the Route 66 Festival, advertisement
for Springfield. The Isles Park development--or not
development, neighborhood party. And I will be in Springfield
all day spending my money and giving my tax dollars. And I am
really looking forward to my full day in Springfield.
Mr. Costa. I saw it last night when I was downtown. I
highly recommend it for all of you.
The Chairman. I want to introduce our panel real quickly
and then we will go on.
The first member of the panel, and we will recognize you in
order from right to left, is Mr. Ray Schroeder who I have known
for, at least indirectly, for about 40 years. Director of
Online Affairs, Center for Online Learning, Research, and
Service, University of Illinois at Springfield. Mr. Jay
Bartlett, who is the President and CEO of Prairie Power in
Jacksonville, Illinois. Going quickly in between to the last
two, for Mr. Schilling to introduce, Mr. Jim Crum, beef
producer, U.S. Wellness Meats, Virginia, Illinois. And Mr.
Schilling and I arm wrestled over who got to introduce Sue
Campbell, but since he is currently representing her, and I am
going to be, he won the arm wrestling contest. So, I am going
to let Mr. Schilling introduce the other two witnesses, and
then we will get on with the testimony. Mr. Schilling?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ROBERT T. SCHILLING, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM ILLINOIS

Mr. Shilling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to give a warm welcome to Sue Campbell. She
serves as the CEO of Community Memorial Hospital in Staunton,
Illinois. Community Memorial is a critical access care
facility. Sue has more than 25 years of health care management
and more than 10 years of management experience in the hospital
setting. And it is an honor. She came out and visited our
office back in January, and we just kind of hit it off. She is
a great person. Glad to have you here.
And then next, I would like to introduce Mr. Les Fowler.
Les recently introduced me at one of their main functions, so
it is only proper that I get to introduce him.
You know, he is the Legislative and Government Affairs
Manager for McDonough Telephone Cooperative located in
Colchester, Illinois, which is right by Macomb. He calls it the
land of milk and honey, whatever that means.
But I probably represent both of these areas. Les has been
with McDonough for the past year. I have had several
opportunities to meet with him. He does great work at McDonough
to connect rural Illinois together. It is just great to be here
with the panel.
And I would like to thank my colleagues. Welcome to
Illinois. And it is an honor to have this hearing here today.
So, thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. We will proceed with the testimony, but I
also want to point out to the audience, the media, and
otherwise, that this is an extraordinary privilege having a
House Committee field hearing. These aren't very often held
around the country. This is an unusual thing, and we are
really, really fortunate to have this field hearing in this
great community. And this would not have happened without great
staff, without Larry, and Jim, and G.T., and Bobby. And we are
blessed and honored to have this hearing here today.
So, with those introductory remarks, let me just call on--
in Washington we have a clock that ticks down. It is like the
end of a basketball game. Do not worry about that. We are just
honored to have you. And we will first hear from Mr. Ray
Schroeder, and look forward to your testimony.

STATEMENT OF RAYMOND E. SCHROEDER, PROFESSOR EMERITUS AND
DIRECTOR OF ONLINE AFFAIRS, CENTER FOR ONLINE LEARNING,
RESEARCH, AND SERVICE,
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS AT SPRINGFIELD, SPRINGFIELD, IL

Mr. Schroeder. Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, Members
of the Committee, my name is Ray Schroeder, and I truly am
honored to be able to speak with you today.
I am a Professor Emeritus and Director of the Center for
Online Learning, Research, and Service here at the University
of Illinois-Springfield. I have been engaged in online teaching
for the past 15 years. I founded the Office of Technology-
Enhanced Learning in 1997, which more recently was expanded in
our services to include the three missions of faculty members
of teaching, research, and service.
I have been honored to receive national recognition in a
number of ways, including recently the Frank Mayadas Leadership
Award from the Sloan Consortium. I have worked for 34 years on
this campus and another half dozen over in Urbana.
Among our three campuses, the University of Illinois offers
more than 100 online degree and certificate programs. From the
Springfield campus alone, this semester we serve 1,425 students
enrolled in 17 online degree programs and multiple certificate
programs. These students are located in 77 of the Illinois
counties, 49 states, and 12 countries. The average age of our
online student is 34, and they are, for the most part, early
and mid-career professionals seeking to complete degrees and
certificates to enhance their careers and their understanding
of how this rapidly changing technological economic, social,
and political environment impacts their lives.
Our online programs are noted nationally for excellence in
online teaching and learning, student engagement, and success
of our graduates.
The Sloan Consortium is the leading national association
dedicated to quality in online teaching and learning. They
reported more than 4.5 million U.S. students took at least one
online class in 2009. And the estimates are that the new report
to come out in November will show that we have far exceeded six
million students; that represents more than 30 percent of the
20 million students enrolled in post-secondary education in the
U.S.
Access to online learning in the U.S. is provided in most
cases for those with disabilities, for those in urban and
suburban areas, those with non-traditional work schedules,
those who cannot travel to campus. But online learning is not
provided to all Americans. Many of the Americans who reside and
work in rural areas of our country are disenfranchised from
this 21st century delivery mode because they are not served by
affordable and reliable broadband connectivity, which is
required now to fully participate in online learning.
I teach online every semester. Among the courses I have
developed and currently teach is one titled, Internet in
American Life, for which I am the lead instructor of five
section, which we are offering this fall. As you might suspect,
the readings for our course come from the Pew Charitable Trust,
which has an ongoing series of surveys of the same name.
As part of the course for the past several years, we
complete a module on broadband access in the United States. We
look at rural, suburban and urban areas. The research, it
remains consistent with our student reports, they say that
broadband stimulates learning, economic development, and
opportunity, and a lack of this is detrimental to the schools
and the businesses, both small and large.
From this class, I can report anecdotally as recently as
last week that among our students residing in rural locales,
there is great frustration with having to pay nearly $100 a
month for less than reliable service delivered via satellite,
and capped at a transfer rate of fewer of 1 gigabyte or a
handful of gigabytes a month.
The impact of this is huge. Parents who have subscribed to
these services fear exceeding the limits because their bills
will skyrocket, and so they restrict Internet access to their
children who are students who are required to use the Internet
for their school work. It is far different in urban areas of
this country where smart phones and 4G connectivity allows
students to just walk down the street and have access, or
around the corner to a fast food store for free Internet
access, or a coffee shop. Not so in the rural areas of this
country.
I would like to briefly relate the experience of my younger
daughter, a graduate of UIS, who founded a small business in a
rural area in between Cobden and Makanda, Illinois. That is in
the far southern part of the state, Shawnee National Forest
area. The business, called InBlue, specializes in leather bound
journals, iPad cases--here is an example--with ink drawings, et
cetera. Well, this small business began as a storefront on the
boardwalk in Makanda, Illinois, a town of about 450, maybe 500
people. It really was a dad funded business. The success came
when she moved to a community, Carbondale, and later to
Asheville, North Carolina, where she now has broadband service.
More than 90 percent of her sales are made online. She
credits her success to access to broadband that allows her to
reliably connect to clients who now span the globe from U.S.
cities to regular clients in Amsterdam, London, Sidney, Abu
Dhabi, points around the world. This thriving small business
employs several staff members. It utilizes American-made goods,
leather from the U.S., ink from the U.S., thread from the
United States. And she is creating a positive cash flow across
the Atlantic to the United States from these international
buyers and from larger cities to smaller rural communities
where she has lived.
Imagine how many such business in rural areas fail or fail
to launch simply because we lack the access in those parts of
the country, access to broadband Internet that is taken for
granted in the more rural or, rather, the more urban areas of
the United States.
Speaking as an individual with some expertise in this area,
I personally believe that the solution is in a fabric that can
be woven among multiple technologies. I do not believe there is
one single technological solution. I believe it is a fabric of
3G, 4G services, support for telephone, power companies, cable
companies, other rural entrepreneurials to expand their
services, expanded use microwave frequencies, the old
Instructional Television Fixed Service, ITFS, spectrum, perhaps
even super WiFi where appropriate using UHF bandwidth, support
for further expansion of satellite services in ways that enable
asymmetric services to provide practical, affordable, and
useful service levels, support for school systems, in
particular, and libraries, related educational enterprises to
offer broadband services for both educational and, where
appropriate, general access within the rural area; and,
finally, for support for higher education, including community
colleges and universities to extend their programs online in
support of degree completion as well as rural economic
development.
Finally, as we speak here in Springfield, Illinois, I
remind you, as you have noted, this is the home of Abraham
Lincoln. It is Lincoln who had the vision and foresight to
bring higher learning to the people of our country through the
Morrill Act of 1862 conceiving land-grant universities,
including the University of Illinois. This vision of Abraham
Lincoln is realized in the 21st century through online
learning.
In many ways, the Internet has become the land, the
location of campuses and learning. We have that same obligation
that we had 150 years ago when the Morrill Act was passed and
enacted and signed by Abraham Lincoln to advance the learning
opportunities and advantages to the citizens of all parts of
the United States.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Schroeder follows:]

Prepared Statement of Raymond E. Schroeder, Professor Emeritus and
Director of Online Affairs, Center for Online Learning, Research, and
Service, University of Illinois at Springfield, Springfield, IL

Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, my name is Ray Schroeder. I
am a Professor Emeritus and Director of the Center for Online Learning,
Research and Service at the University of Illinois Springfield.
I have been engaged in online learning for the past 15 years,
including founding the Office of Technology-Enhanced Learning in 1997
that more recently became the Center for Online Learning, Research and
Service on our campus. I have been humbled to receive national
recognition in a number ways, most recently as the inaugural recipient
of the Frank Mayadas Leadership in Online Learning award from the Sloan
Consortium. I am fortunate to have worked on this campus for the past
34 years and another half dozen years on the Urbana campus of the
University of Illinois. Among our three campuses, the University offers
more than 100 online degree and certificate programs. From the
Springfield campus, we now serve 1,425 online-only students enrolled in
our 17 online degree programs and various certificate programs. These
students are located in 49 states and 12 countries this fall semester.
The average age of our online students is 34. They are, for the most
part, early and mid-career professionals seeking to complete degrees
and certificates to enhance their careers and understanding of the
rapidly changing technological, economic, social and political
environment in which we live. Our online programs are noted nationally
for excellence in online teaching and learning; student engagement; and
success in degree completion.
The Sloan Consortium, the leading national association dedicated to
quality in online teaching and learning, reported that more than 4.5
million U.S. students took at least one online class in 2009. That
number has since risen to an estimated more than six million students
in the past year. This represents thirty percent of the twenty million
students enrolled in post-secondary education in this country. In the
State of Illinois, the Illinois Virtual Campus has been tracking the
growth of online learning for the past dozen years. It is an impressive
record of annual increases in enrollments among students in community
colleges as well as private and public colleges and universities across
the state: http://www.ivc.uillinois.edu/report/pdf/Spring11.pdf.
Online learning provides access to higher education for those busy
Americans who are working, caring for families, and/or seeking to
advance their careers. The University Professional and Continuing
Education Association (UPCEA) and the Association of Continuing Higher
Education (ACHE) just last week cosponsored a national Summit on the
Future of Online Learning in Chicago. The Summit examined the important
and growing role of online learning in adult, professional and
continuing education. UPCEA will convene the organizations represented
at the Summit in a follow-up conference to be held in Washington, D.C.
in the coming months. Several organizations with a stake in adult and
online programs will develop a joint policy agenda and a blueprint for
expanding access to quality online learning programs.
Access to online learning in the U.S. is provided, in most cases,
for those with disabilities, those with non-traditional work schedules,
those who cannot travel to a campus. But, online learning does not
provide access to all Americans. Many of those Americans who reside and
work in rural areas of our country are disenfranchised from the 21st
century delivery mode because they are not served by the affordable
broadband connectivity required to fully participate in online
learning.
I teach online every semester and most summers. Among the courses I
have developed and continue to teach online is ``Internet in American
Life'' for which I am the lead instructor of the five sections we are
offering this fall. As you might suspect, the readings for our course
are from the Pew Charitable Trust ongoing initiative of the same name.
As part of the course, for the past several years, we complete a module
on broadband access in rural, suburban, and urban areas. The research
is consistent with our student anecdotal reports--broadband stimulates
learning, economic development and opportunity; the lack of such access
is detrimental to schools and business (both small and large)
development. From that class, as recently as last week, I can relay
comments from students residing in rural locales reporting their
frustration with having to pay nearly $100 a month for less-than-
reliable broadband service capped at as little as one or a few
gigabytes. The fear of exceeding the limit causes parents to restrict
Internet access to children doing schoolwork. It is far different in
urban areas where smart phones connect at 4G speeds and free access to
high speed WiFi is available at libraries, McDonald's and coffee shops
around the corner.
I would like to briefly relate the experience of my younger
daughter, a graduate of UIS, who founded a small business in a rural
area near Cobden, Illinois in 2008. The business, InBlue, specializes
in leather bound journals; iPod and iPad cases; wallets; and related
leather bound articles that are personalized with ink drawings and
lettering. This small business began as a storefront on the boardwalk
in the small community of Makanda, Illinois. The business only became
successful when she was able to move to Carbondale, and eventually to
Asheville, North Carolina. Her success in both communities was not due
to local sales, a scarcity of workers or supplies, but to the more than
90% of her sales that are made online. She credits the success to
access to broadband services that allowed her to reliably connect to
clients who now span the globe from large U.S. cities, to Amsterdam;
London; Sydney; Abu Dhabi and other points around the world as she
sells online at http://inblue.etsy.com. This is a thriving small
business that employs several staff members utilizing American made and
produced supplies (leather, ink, thread, etc.), creating a positive
cash flow into the small City of Asheville, NC, through sales to other
countries and elsewhere. Imagine how many such small businesses in
rural areas fail, or fail to launch, simply because of lack of access
to that which we take for granted in more urban areas, broadband
Internet service.
Speaking as an individual with expertise in this area, I personally
believe that among the fabric of solutions that may be woven to address
this problem are:

Expansion of 3G and 4G services to deep rural areas--not
just along the interstate highway system.

Support for telephone and cable companies--as well as rural
entrepreneurs--to expand services to connect rural residents.

Expanded use of available microwave frequencies to serve
areas where this distribution mode is practical.

Support for further expansion of satellite services in ways
that enable asymmetric services that provide practical and
useful service levels.

Support for school systems, libraries and related
educational enterprises to offer broadband services for both
educational, and where appropriate, general access.

Support for higher education, including community colleges,
colleges and universities; to extend programs online in support
of degree completion as well as rural economic development.

As you meet here in Springfield, Illinois, I remind you that our
great forefather, Abraham Lincoln, had the vision and foresight to
bring higher learning to the people of our country through the Morrill
Act in 1862, conceiving land-grant universities, including the
University of Illinois. The vision of Abraham Lincoln is realized in
the 21st century through online learning. In many ways, the Internet
has become the land, the location, of campuses and learning. We have
the same obligation 150 years after the first Morrill Act to open
learning opportunities and advantages to the citizens of all parts of
our country.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee, for your
kind attention.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Schroeder.
I might also note that we have been joined by my colleague
and good friend, and frankly many years a Member of the
Illinois General Assembly here in Springfield, Randy Hultgren,
who represents the area that is a little bit to the north, and
then somewhat to the northeast of here, and does an
extraordinary job, and is really a part of our whole center
aisle caucus mentality. And we are honored to have you with us,
Randy, as well.
I also mentioned to people here and otherwise that to the
extent we can with the time constraints we have when we are
done, we are going to go out in the western portion of the
city, go out to Stone Seed, and then have the opportunity to
visit with them a little bit on GPS and a number of other
technological aspects of the subject matter with which we deal.
I am going to recognize Mr. Bartlett. Feel free, any of the
four witnesses here, to do what you need to do. We do have your
written statements, and feel free to do that, reread them if
you want, but if you want to kind of summarize for us so we can
get into a little more questions, we would be glad to do that.
We will be glad to do whatever you would like to do, but just
for the record, we do have your written statements, which are
extraordinarily well prepared and most gratefully received.
So, with that, let me introduce Mr. Bartlett of Prairie
Power, Inc.

STATEMENT OF JAY C. BARTLETT, P.E., PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, PRAIRIE POWER, INC.,
JACKSONVILLE, IL

Mr. Bartlett. Thank you very much, and good afternoon,
Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Costa, and Members of the
Committee. I am Jay Bartlett. I am the President and CEO of
Prairie Power, Inc., commonly referred to PPI.
Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to speak
to you about rural broadband. This is something that is near
and dear to our hearts. It is something that we approach with a
great deal of urgency in our business.
PPI is a not-for-profit electric generation transmission
cooperative headquartered in Jacksonville, Illinois. PPI is a
Touchstone Energy Cooperative that is owned by ten rural
electric distribution co-ops.
Our service territory covers about 17,500 square miles of
rural Illinois. To put this in context, that is the same areas
of New Jersey, Connecticut, Delaware, and Rhode Island combined
approximately. However, the number of customers that we serve
is just slightly less than the number of people that are in
Springfield, Illinois. I hope that gives some context to the
idea that we serve a very sparsely populated area.
PPI itself is a technology oriented company, and our core
business is absolutely dependent on high speed data
communications.
Two trends have thrust PPI into taking a proactive role
within the development of rural broadband. First, PPI has
experienced a steady decline in our ability to obtain high
quality data communication services from our traditional
service providers. Second in striving to reduce costs and
lessen the impact on our environment of producing electricity,
PPI is taking a very proactive stance in the development of
smart grid services. The development of the smart grid means to
PPI that we need to change from moving megabytes of data from
our remote locations to terabytes of data to our remote
locations.
So that is one of the comments that I would like to make,
and I am going to paraphrase a lot of my testimony.
The next point that I would like to make in terms of making
sure that the rural economy is served well is that we believe
it is essential that rural broadband be looked at in two
separate tiers. One I call tier one, which is wireless
services. Some of our members sell and deliver wireless
services to their members, both 3G and advanced 4G services.
The other is fiber optic services. We believe that both of
these are very, very important, and it has been troubling to us
that there has been a tendency for people to lump generally
broadband services into one category, and they are not the
same.
Fiber optic services are going to be needed in rural areas
to support things, such as telemedicine. I was fortunate enough
to be involved in the development of a metropolitan area fiber-
optic network here in Springfield. We built a 160 mile fiber-
optic network here. Every medical institution in Springfield is
linked. The medical schools are linked; 51 public school sites
are linked. We have tremendous and have seen tremendous
economic growth happen due to the presence of that advanced
technology. So, I have seen what it can do. I see when it does
not happen in the rural countryside.
To date, we have been very appreciative of the fact that
the Federal Government, USDA in particular, has tried very hard
to support broadband development. Unfortunately, we have not
seen much of it materialize in the remote parts of Illinois.
That is not due to anything less than Herculean efforts on
their part, but nonetheless it is not there yet.
So, we have moved to a place where we need to seek
solutions. I mean, like I said, we need to do it with urgency.
What we are doing is we are forming a consortium of not-
for-profits like PPI to come together and essentially make it
happen. And it will be a combination of both wireless solutions
and fiber solutions in the countryside. And I will speak a
little bit more about that.
Of course, the absolute requirement for broadband access is
of no surprise. It has been known for some time that it would
be a requirement for the economic stability and growth of the
rural economy. It is also just common sense to understand that
achieving this goal is more expensive in lower population
density than urban areas. Last, it is will understood that our
cities, indeed many parts of the world, depend on the rural
U.S. for sustenance. There is no room for failure, none
whatsoever, in keeping rural America economically healthy. It
is a symbiotic relationship between us and not just the United
States, but I believe the rest of the world, is so important.
We feed so much of the world.
So, the importance of broadband quality to improve the
rural economy is not just common sense; it is something that we
can do. It is attainable.
PPI is, again, you are looking at a common sense approach
really needs to dictate what we do and how we move forward. It
is a not a highly profitable venture to build broadband
infrastructure into the countryside. If it were, it would have
already been done, and that is why we are here talking today.
In light of this fact, we took a fresh look at what resources
we could marshal, and trying to accomplish the goal of getting
the broadband, the quality, taken care of.
The following is a synopsis of the elements we intend to
use to reduce the cost and yield greater availability of both
wireless and wired broadband solutions in rural Illinois.
First, we are creating a consortium of not-for-profit and
for profit entities to construct and operate broadband
infrastructure. We believe the not-for-profit cooperative
business model is ideal to accomplish much of the task at hand.
The cooperatives have conquered the task of building capital
intensive electric networks to serve sparsely-populated areas.
We believe that the same cooperatives are ideal candidates to
facilitate the deployment of advanced telecommunications
facilities.
Rural co-ops already have a great deal of infrastructure in
place that can be used to accomplish broadband proliferation at
low costs. The development of relationships between our
members, the local businesses, and the economic development
communities are already in place.
There are not enough resources available to build on
wisely, and our relationships, I guess, give us the knowledge
to know where we have to build.
To finally sum things up, here is what I will say. I want
to make four points. Self-help is what is important with us, a
major part that we think is very important that is commensurate
with the importance of the rural America to the entire country.
Finding ways to leverage each dollar spent to gain multiple
benefits, including both increasing broadband access, but also
helping smart grid and other initiatives that help the
environment are important. Local control and governance is very
important and absolutely essential to make sure we utilize the
sparse resources that are available. And finally an emphasis on
the limitation of the one size fits all solutions.
So, Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, thank you
for inviting me to testify today. I will be happy to answer
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bartlett follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jay C. Bartlett, P.E., President and Chief
Executive Officer, Prairie Power, Inc., Jacksonville, IL

Good afternoon, Chairman Johnson, Ranking Member Costa, and Members
of the Subcommittee. I am Jay Bartlett, and I am the President and CEO
of Prairie Power, Inc. (PPI). Thank you for the opportunity to testify
on the importance of access to broadband telecommunications to support
economic development in rural areas. More specifically, I would like to
share with you some of the challenges we face in serving rural areas
due to the lack of suitable broadband communications infrastructure,
and our plan to overcome these obstacles. There are certainly many ways
to accomplish rural broadband proliferation. It is my honor to present
the solution we are pursuing to deploy broadband infrastructure in that
part of central and western Illinois served by PPI's member
distribution cooperatives. This solution was conceived with rural
economic development as a primary goal.
As a matter of background, PPI is a not-for-profit electric
generation and transmission cooperative headquartered in Jacksonville,
Illinois. PPI is a Touchstone Energy Cooperative that is owned by its
ten members which are all rural electric distribution cooperatives in
Illinois. PPI and its member distribution cooperatives provide electric
service to rural residential, farm and business members in a combined
service territory that covers approximately 17,500 square miles. PPI's
primary mission is to generate, procure and deliver reliable electric
energy to its members via approximately 78 electrical transmission or
distribution substations. It is also PPI's function to support economic
development and to support energy efficiency initiatives on behalf of
its members. PPI's member cooperatives understand the challenge of
delivering service to sparsely populated rural areas. To put this
challenge in perspective, the combined service territories of PPI
member cooperatives cover an area slightly smaller than the combined
area of New Jersey, Connecticut, Delaware and Rhode Island, while the
number of member/consumers that the PPI member cooperatives serve is
just slightly less than those located in just Springfield, Illinois.
Prior to joining PPI in 2009, I had been directly involved in the
construction of a metropolitan-area fiber-optic network. As a result, I
have witnessed firsthand the positive impact that the availability of
an advanced telecommunications network infrastructure can have on
economic development, education and improved delivery of healthcare
services.
PPI is a technology-oriented entity, and our core business is
absolutely dependent on reliable, secure high-speed data
communications. Two trends have thrust PPI into taking a proactive role
in the development of rural broadband. First, PPI has experienced a
steady decline in our ability to obtain data communications services
from the traditional commercial service providers. Second, in striving
to reduce costs and lessen our impact on the environment, PPI requires
drastically increased bandwidth to realize the benefits to be derived
from implementation of new smart-grid technologies. Stated differently,
PPI suffers from the lack of rural broadband access, and we are in a
prime position to witness and understand the impact this lack of access
has on the rural economy and quality of life. PPI is also in a prime
position to attack the problem. It is not in our nature to complain or
stand by idly in the face of adversity. It is our job to find and
implement solutions to benefit our distribution cooperative members
and, in turn, their residential, farm and business members, no matter
how challenging the endeavor.
PPI commends the commitment made by the Federal Government and the
Rural Utilities Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture in
particular for striving to improve access to broadband for rural
citizens. It is our hope that this commitment is sustained and improved
upon until ubiquitous broadband access is attainable to all. Our
distribution cooperative members were founded to provide the benefits
of electric energy to rural America at a time that commercial entities
had little interest in serving rural locations. The result of this
effort has contributed to the evolution of the greatest and most
efficient agricultural system in the world. It is our belief that to
sustain and advance this advantage, the delivery of broadband services
to rural America will be equally as important as was rural
electrification. Perhaps even more important, the lack of broadband
services to rural areas is akin to depriving those citizens of both the
energy to mechanize and the libraries to learn.
We believe it is essential to separate the rural broadband services
issue into two distinct tiers that both have merit, but require
separate consideration. These tiers, which I will define as tier 1 and
tier 2, differ in the level of service provided and in the type of
technologies which are generally used to deploy them. Most rural
broadband discussions to date have centered on expanding broadband
access in general terms, a one-size-fits-all approach that is noble in
its cause. But, in our opinion, this approach is insufficient to
realize the full range of benefits that remain unrealized by fully
engaging rural America.
Tier 1 is the lowest cost technology to deploy and can be
categorized generally by wireless, point-to-multipoint broadband
delivery. These deployments oftentimes also use wireless connections to
support backhaul of network traffic to a point of aggregation for
connection to the Internet. This broad category of technologies that
has been rapidly developing in terms of its capabilities minimally fits
the above-mentioned analogy of access to libraries for rural citizens.
These technologies also certainly can support many forms of e-commerce
that can help spur economic development.
However, we believe that access to higher speed, highly reliable
symmetrical bandwidth is just as important to rural areas. There are
various technologies employed to deliver these services, but they are
generally characterized by the transport of data via optical or
``wired'' means. From an economic development standpoint, this type of
service must be part of the rural broadband deployment plan for the
United States. Many business operations, and more in the future, will
depend on this level of network to thrive. We believe this fits the
electrical energy part of the previous analogy. Unquestionably, there
is overlap between the two loosely-described technologies that I have
mentioned, and the proponents of each technology pervasively argue
their respective merits. However, we believe it will require a
deployment of a mixture of both types of technologies ultimately to
close the digital divide and place rural areas on an even footing with
their urban counterparts.
Tier 1 broadband access is important for many reasons to support
economic development in rural areas. This level of service is capable
of improving rural quality of life by allowing rural residents to join
the growing social networking fabric of the world and to participate in
non-critical or non-time-sensitive e-commerce with other businesses.
This level of service also allows for non-time- or non-bandwidth-
critical maintenance of remotely hosted (cloud-based) business
solutions located in remote data centers with higher speed, higher
reliability network access. Finally, this level of service also
provides alternative means of supporting voice communications.
Tier 2 broadband services are required to attract and enable an
entirely different segment of business activities. In our opinion, it
is vital to ensure this segment is not overlooked. Examples of entities
that require this tier 2 level of service are many, and the following
are some examples.

Financial and commodities service businesses which require
highly reliable, low-latency access to remote trading systems.

Warehousing and order fulfillment centers which require
rock-solid reliability to ensure transaction processing is
available continuously.

Telemedicine applications which require both high
reliability and high bandwidth to support applications such as
remote radiography with distant medical centers.

Enterprises that generate substantial amounts of data
locally in their operations that require high-bandwidth
connections to support off-site backup and disaster recovery,
such as local government entities and utilities.

Educational institutions seeking to apply high-quality
distance learning. These applications require high bandwidth
and low latency to allow real-time multimedia interaction with
remote participants. Highly reliable, high bandwidth
connections also greatly expand the suite of offerings
available to small, rural school systems.

Any business that has multiple locations which can realize
efficiency benefits by collapsing its information technology
infrastructures to fewer centralized locations to reduce
expenses if it has access to reliable, high bandwidth
connections.

Finally, this infrastructure can provide ideal backhaul
support of tier 1 systems.

As mentioned earlier, PPI and its member electric cooperatives
serve as a prime example of how tier 2 level services could create
economic development opportunities by lowering energy prices and
improve the environment through lower emissions by implementing
elements of the smart grid. This result will not happen without drastic
increases in the availability of bandwidth to our remote locations.
PPI's rural electric cooperatives are already well poised to take
advantage of these new technologies, as the vast majority of our
members have already installed advanced customer metering systems. To
gain the next level of benefits from this investment will require the
transmission and storage of terabytes of usage information, and the
ability to signal large numbers of electric loads (member/consumers) in
near real time.
PPI can realize the benefits of such a system through the use of
wireless technology at less cost to PPI than it can with fiber-optic
cable. But, by using wireless technology, rather than fiber-optic
cable, PPI would miss an opportunity to support future economic
development. By striving to drive fiber-optic deployment to the
electric substation level, PPI would ensure that tier 2 network
services are within reasonable distances of other potential users
throughout most of PPI's cooperative members' service territories. This
fiber-optic proximity would then allow for selective build-out of
fiber-based solutions where needed and provide excellent tower
locations for tier 2 services.
The point of these efforts is very simple. The rural areas served
by PPI and its members are in desperate need of economic development to
support the continued health of the nation's breadbasket. The service
territories of the PPI members offer many unique advantages to
businesses. Relatively low-cost labor and real estate, a more flexible
workforce due to the cyclical labor demands of agriculture, and an
attractive quality of life are all ready and waiting to enhance the
productivity and efficiency of America's businesses. The one factor
that is missing is the requisite connection to the digital fabric on
which businesses now run.

Seeking Solutions
The absolute requirement for broadband access is of no surprise. It
has been known for some time that it would be a requirement for the
economic stability and growth of the rural economy. It is also just
common sense to understand that achieving this goal is more expensive
in areas with lower population densities than urban areas. Lastly, it
is also well understood that our cities, and indeed many parts of the
world, depend upon the rural United States for sustenance. There is no
room for failure in the endeavor of keeping rural America economically
stable, as the symbiotic relationship between it and the rest of the
world is too important.
PPI was very pleased to see the tremendous importance the Federal
Government placed on rural broadband development and hoped these
programs would lead to the necessary investments for businesses like
our own to continue to evolve. In our area, this has not been the case.
Despite funding opportunities offered through the American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, and the programs offered through the USDA, the
telecommunication systems needed for our communities to thrive have not
materialized. So, we have elected to ``go it on our own''.
Common sense dictates that it is not a highly profitable venture to
build broadband infrastructure into low population densities. If it
were, it would already have been done. In light of this fact, we took a
fresh look at what resources we could marshal to accomplish our goal of
establishing broadband equality. The following is a synopsis of the
elements we believe can be marshaled to reduce costs and yield a
greater density of both types of broadband services previously
described.

Endeavor to create a consortium of not-for-profit and for-
profit entities to construct and operate the infrastructure. We
believe the not-for-profit cooperative business model is ideal
to accomplish the task at hand. Rural electric cooperatives and
rural telecommunication cooperatives have stood the test of
time, and serve as a proven example of how to accomplish
essentially the same task now at hand. The cooperatives have
conquered the task of building extremely capital intensive
electric networks to serve sparsely populated areas. We believe
the same cooperatives are ideal candidates to facilitate the
deployment of advanced telecommunication facilities.

Utilize the existing right-of-ways already possessed by
rural electric and telecommunication cooperatives to minimize
expenditures on easements and right-of-ways.

Leverage the existing close relationships between our member
cooperatives and the local businesses and economic development
officials to ensure we build the correct infrastructure to the
right places. There are not enough resources available to build
unwisely, and the cooperatives have detailed knowledge of the
local requirements.

Find multiple, non-competitive uses for the same dollar
spent. In our case, PPI has needs and limited funds available
to support smart-grid development and electric system control.
The same optical fiber that we construct to accomplish this
goal can be used by telecommunication providers to deliver
broadband services. In kind, the telecommunication cooperatives
can provide access to their existing fiber-optic
infrastructures to facilitate PPI's accomplishment of its
smart-grid and electric reliability enhancement goals without
constructing unnecessary, redundant communications facilities.

Seek ways of leveraging staff from the member consortiums to
reduce overall labor costs. For example, PPI already operates a
continuously-manned control center that can be utilized for
network monitoring and maintenance dispatch, while the
telecommunication providers can provide provisioning services
and fiber-splicing services.

Both the telecommunication cooperatives and some of the
electric cooperatives are already providing third and fourth
generation wireless Internet services. We will strive to
streamline service and support of these ventures and provide
more robust data backhaul means.

The electric cooperatives own many communications towers,
some of which are already also in use to provide Internet
services. We believe these towers could be used to a greater
extent to help facilitate providing tier 2 services.

Last, accountability is essential to successfully tackling a
challenge of this magnitude. Accountability is a cornerstone of
the cooperative business model, as it is wholly-owned and
democratically-controlled by the members that we serve.

In summary, we are attempting to use many of the same principles
that were used to accomplish rural electrification \3/4\ of a century
ago. In some ways, we are clearly ahead of our position 70+ years ago.
We know who our customers are and much about their needs, because they
are our owners. We already have established rights-of-way, and we know
how to conduct business in the rural environment.
What is different, is that we will be moving forward largely
without the financial support of the government which was a prominent
part of enabling rural electrification. We are hopeful that by
demonstrating successful, responsible and effective solutions to
bringing modern telecommunications capabilities to rural areas, state
and Federal Government will recognize this unique approach to solving
the rural broadband issue is worthy of special consideration. With the
addition of governmental support, we will be able to provide deeper
network penetration at a more rapid rate.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for inviting me to testify today. I am
happy to answer any questions you or the Members of the Committee may
have.

The Chairman. We appreciate it, Mr. Bartlett.
And I am going to politely ask the next three witnesses if
we can do the best we can to try to meet--we have some time
objectives in terms of being able to ask questions and be able
to do our tours and so forth. So, we want to hear everything,
but we appreciate your willingness to help us move along here.
Now, since I lost the arm wrestling contest, Mr. Schilling,
I get to introduce Sue Campbell now. I was with she and her
husband a week ago at a function down in beautiful southern
Macoupin County, and really enjoyed the opportunity to meet you
and your family. And we are privileged to have you today.
So, with that I would introduce Sue Campbell, the CEO of
Community Memorial Hospital in Staunton, Illinois, right down
in God's country.

STATEMENT OF SUE CAMPBELL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, COMMUNITY
MEMORIAL HOSPITAL, STAUNTON HOSPITAL, STAUNTON, IL

Ms. Campbell. Oh, absolutely. Thank you so kindly, Chairman
Johnson, also Ranking Member Costa, and Bobby Schilling, my
Congressional Representative. Thank you for the invitation. It
is indeed a pleasure and a privilege to be here.
I am currently the CEO of a critical access hospital in
Staunton, Illinois. We are one of 51 critical access hospitals
within Illinois, and we have the privilege and the honor to
provide medical services to some of our more elderly and poorer
people within our county and out state.
Critical access hospitals also are usually one of the main
driving economic factors in the communities that they serve.
They are usually one of the larger employers, and they provide
critical health services to these people.
I had a personal experience back in 2007. Our hospital was
getting ready to upgrade our CAT scanner from a single slice,
which was very limited on the studies that it could perform to
a state of the art 64-slice CAT scanner. This was a huge step
for our small hospital. However, we quickly determined our
Internet access was served by a T1 line, which really provided
less than one megabyte. We shared this T1 line with the local
public library and the high school. It was not dependable, it
often broke down. it would not serve our purposes.
We were very fortunate. We have an excellent local
provider, Madison Communications. We partnered with them. They
rapidly assessed the situation, and they were able to bring
fiber optic connection to our door. We were able to then have
broadband with 5 megs, which was extremely like a super highway
for us, totally met our needs at that time. And soon our CAT
scan studies were flying down the highway, and the reports were
coming back. Our cardiologists that come and visit were
extremely happy. We were able to do much more extensive studies
with less radiation exposure to the patients. It was wonderful.
Hospital administration thought, we have solved our
broadband needs for years to come. We were wrong.
As equipment upgrades have come along, new technology that
we have added to the hospital, the platform has moved from
analog to digital. It all requires a connectivity of greater
broadband width. And it will not be too long before we are
going to have to consider doubling our broadband width from 5
megs up to 10 megs.
Teleradiology is a huge and wonderful new adaptation. Many
of our critical access hospitals throughout this nation have to
staff their ERs with mid-level practitioners, nurse
practitioners, sometimes EMTs, because they do not have the
ability to attract a physician to come in and provide that
service. These are the departments that provide life-saving
services to the members of these communities.
Through teleradiology, it has enabled that mid-level
provider to have access to a physician many, many miles away at
a remote location. It is fast, it is economic, and it is the
best thing for the patient. They are able to assist in the
diagnosis and the treatment plan for those patients, and it has
been life-saving in many, many instances.
One of the huge needs that we are experiencing in our ER
today is mental health patients that are in treatment for both
substance abuse as well as mental health and emotional issues.
In our rural, remote areas, we do not have local psychiatrists,
local psychologists, local social workers. The wonderful SIU
School of Medicine here in Springfield has initiated a
collaborative program with many of our critical access
hospitals to provide access to their psychiatric department to
help assess and determine a treatment plan and proper
disposition of a patient that enters our ER. This, again, is
cost saving.
Many times a patient will come in with mental health or
behavioral health issues, and they literally have to be held
over many, many hours until we can determine a proper treatment
plan for the patient. That costs lots of money. With this new
connection to telemedicine and the psychiatric access, it has
really helped to promote the service to these patients.
One last thing I really would like to address is I would be
very remiss if I did not talk about the expansion of the
electronic medical records that is required by the Health Care
Reform Act today. Every single hospital and every single health
care provider is being required to convert to electronic
medical records and to reach meaningful use, and this is a
wonderful initiative. However, every single provider will have
to have a very dependable, secure, rapid Internet connection to
accomplish this initiative.
Just, please, as you take consideration of the need for
broadband throughout this country, that those are the huge
needs within health care, and it will continue to grow.
Thank you for the honor to be here.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Campbell follows:]

Prepared Statement of Sue Campbell, Chief Executive Officer, Community
Memorial Hospital, Staunton Hospital, Staunton, IL
September 24, 2011

To: Subcommittee Members on Rural Development, Research, Biotechnology,
and Foreign Agriculture

My testimony will focus on both the challenges and the
opportunities for the expansion of broad-band service into the offices
and facilities of rural and remote healthcare providers throughout the
nation.
In the fall of 2007, our hospital, Community Memorial in Staunton,
IL, was planning the upgrade and installation of a state of the art 64-
slice CAT scanner to replace a single-slice cat scanner that had been
in place for well over a decade. The new 64-slice scanner would enable
the hospital to perform a much broader scope of testing with
significantly improved images at a much faster rate and less radiation
exposure for the patient. However, the images had to be transmitted
electronically to a Radiology Group over 50 miles away for
interpretation due to the fact that our small, rural hospital does not
have a Radiologist on staff on a full-time basis.
Up to that point in time, the hospital's broad-band connection
consisted of a T1 line that was shared with the local high school as
well as the city library, and connectivity was often interrupted or
extremely slow. This connection would not begin to meet the
requirements of the new cat scan equipment and enable the hospital to
perform teleradiology. It quickly became apparent a significant upgrade
in the broadband width, quality, speed and security must be made.
We were fortunate! Our hospital was able to partner with the local
communication provider, Madison Communications, and they were able to
deliver a fiber-optic connection to the hospital that provided 5 megs
of high quality, dependable, rapid and secure broadband service. Soon
the cat scan studies were flying down the cyber super highway. Hospital
Administration thought they had secured sufficient broadband width for
many years to come, but we were wrong! As additional medical equipment
has been replaced with newer and upgraded models, the technology has
been upgraded from analog to digital, and each piece of equipment
demands a fast, dependable and secure broadband connection. We continue
to consume the broadband width we presently have and will soon have to
make a decision to increase and most likely double it.
The advancement of telemedicine has opened up a multitude of
opportunities for improved medical care especially in rural and remote
areas. It literally allows a physician many miles away to look directly
into the exam room and provide consultation to another physician,
nurse, or other care-giver and greatly increases a better out-come for
the patient, and often at a lower cost.
It is a well-documented fact that the nation faces a shortage of
primary care physicians as well as specialty care. This fact is
glaringly evident in the rural and remote healthcare facilities
throughout the nation. Many rural hospitals are forced to staff their
Emergency Departments with mid-level practitioners such as Nurse
Practitioners, Physician Assistants, or Emergency Medical Technicians
who work under the direction of a physician at a remote location. This
could not be done without the development of telemedicine. This
technology provides a window into the Emergency Department, or any
other department within the hospital such as the Operating Room, and it
greatly aids the local care-giver in establishing a diagnosis and
treatment plan for the patient. This is especially beneficial and can
be life-saving for the patient that may have suffered a critical
cardiac episode or stroke. In addition, telemedicine can help reduce
costs and help keep the patient at the local facility. The specialty
physician can consult via the computer terminal and assist the local
primary care physician develop a course of treatment that does not
require a transfer to another larger facility. This save time and
money, and the patient can remain in their local hospital and closer to
their home and family.
A number of the Critical Access Hospitals within Illinois are
presently talking with the SIU School of Medicine in Springfield to
collaborate and develop pathways to access mental health specialists
such as Psychiatrists. This collaboration has been driven primarily due
to the increased number of behavioral and mental health cases showing
up in the rural Emergency Departments, and the rural health facilities
do not have the resources or access to local mental health specialists
to adequately treat these patients. These patients are often ``held-
over'' in the Emergency Department until an appropriate transfer to a
mental health facility can be arranged. Access to a mental health
provider such as a Psychiatrist via telemedicine would greatly enhance
and expedite the proper treatment of the patient. In addition, cost
savings would be recognized because the patient would not be ``held-
over'' for hours in the Emergency Department waiting for a mental
health evaluation.
Broadband connectivity is also enhancing opportunities for the
members of the medical staff to participate in continuing education and
Grand Rounds at some of the teaching institutions through-out the
country. Physicians that are living and practicing in the rural and
remote areas of the country have little opportunity to shut down their
practice for a day or two and travel a distance to attend a conference
to interact and learn from their peers. The Internet has totally
changed and increased the opportunity for continuing education for not
only physicians but all members of the clinical staff, and it is a very
cost effective method to reach many students at the same time.
I would be remiss if I did not discuss the huge demand for
broadband connectivity throughout every corner of this country that has
been created by the Affordable Care Act of 2010, also known as the
Healthcare Reform Act. The requirement of all healthcare providers to
adopt an electronic medical record and reach meaningful use in order to
meet the requirements of this law and maintain their level of
reimbursement, has been staggering. There is not a single physician's
office, hospital, or healthcare facility that has not been impacted by
this law. Every provider will have to be able to successfully transmit
electronic health records to a Health Information Exchange (HIE) site
and have the capability of sending and receiving electronic health
records. The demand for high-quality, rapid and secure broadband
connectivity will be greater than ever in the history of this country.
The demand for access to this connectivity does not come without a
price, and many rural and remote healthcare providers will be hard-
pressed to find the money to invest in certified computer systems that
meet the requirements of meaningful use as well as the access to
broadband connectivity to carry their data. This is indeed a
challenging time.
I thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony to the
Subcommittee.
Respectfully Submitted,

Sue Campbell, CEO,
Community Memorial Hospital,
Staunton, IL.

The Chairman. Thank you, Ms. Campbell. We appreciate your
testimony.
And now, we will go to our fourth witness, Mr. Jim Crum,
from U.S. Wellness Meats in Virginia, Illinois?

STATEMENT OF JIM CRUM, BEEF PRODUCER, U.S. WELLNESS MEATS,
VIRGINIA, IL

Mr. Crum. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am one of the members
or people that have put a company together starting in 1996. A
dozen farmer producers got together and went to a meeting with
Allen Savery's people that put together how to lead a
sustainable business to rural communities. With that came the
idea of rotational grazing, grasslands, to increase the
productivity of the grasslands, capture carbon by creating
organic matter from the grasslands. And we decided to sell
grass-fed beef online on the Internet.
We formed a company in 2000 and started marketing grass-fed
beef, killed some cattle, and put them in boxes, and thought
the world would beat a path to our door. But they did not. We
had dial up at that time. We were sort of ahead of the curve on
all the local food. We were ahead of the curve on the health
food. And we sort of sat there and wondered when it was going
to happen.
Along the way, we had some Value-Added Producer Grants that
helped us put a road map on to create where we wanted to go. We
had feasibility study marketing plans, business plan. Marketing
was a main idea that we had to come up with to reach the
people. We had updated Internet service along the way also. And
with that, you will see in the presentation the map of the U.S.
where our customers are. It is mainly East Coast, West Coast
locales where most of our customers are based. Population
centers, partly people that are more health conscious.
Plus also we feel that the Internet access might be part of
the reason for it.
It is a growing business. Along with starting with grass-
fed beef, we added poultry and lamb, pork, all natural
products. And we have them fabricated, and then put in cold
storage facilities in Ames, Iowa. And then, people get on the
Internet and find our company, and then find our products,
order off the Internet, and then they are shipped directly to
their door, frozen.
Internet is an invaluable tool to our company. The service
we have is very good, but things could always be better. We
have several You Tube videos that we have with our websites,
and they are shown along with it.
It is an Internet-based company that markets 90 percent
direct to the consumer. It adds value to the rural communities.
Via the Internet, we buy other producers' products, so it is
not just our products that are sold; it is other producers'
products.
And we applaud you for your diligence on improving Internet
access to the rural communities because we feel that is where a
lot of this starts, whether it is food production or families.
But, all people, in general, have some agriculture tie either
in their family, a few generations removed. We are trying to
improve it, and maybe the rural communities will prosper in the
future.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crum follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jim Crum, Beef Producer, U.S. Wellness Meats,
Virginia, IL
Date: September 24, 2011

To: Congressman Timothy V. Johnson,
Chairman,
Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign
Agriculture,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

From: Jim Crum,
U.S. Wellness Meats.

RE: Testimony on Role of Broadband Access in Rural Economic Development

Grassland Beef LLC dba U.S. Wellness Meats is honored to
participate in this crucial discussion on Broadband Access in the rural
community.
Grassland Beef was well ahead of the retail Internet curve when we
opened for business on November 7, 2000. We had the right idea but
failed to understand the art of building trust and sales with online
marketing. To say we were pioneers is an understatement. With
determined persistence we were able to build the business from the
ground up over time.
Key points of our journey:

Forty-five total sales orders in November and December 2000
with only two orders from customers we did not know, pointed
out the degree of difficulty in being found online and creating
trust for actual cash sales.

In the beginning, we were dealing with dial up Internet that
was painfully slow. Ten years later we have access to 3 mbs
down and 2 mbs up, which is a significant improvement from dial
up, but not where the rural community needs to be. We would
prefer to see 10 mbs up and down and can only dream of 25 mbs
up and down which is available in some areas of the country.

Broadband technology is a lifeline for the rural economy.
The ability to tap into all fifty states and the international
market is the wave of the future for small business like ours.
Entrepreneurs will change the business landscape in our
lifetime and corporate America will take note as some of the
brightest and most ambitious choose to make their own destiny.
In a struggling economy with unemployment at record highs, we
should be encouraging start-up companies and small business and
making Internet access available to them is a very strong step
in the right direction. In one sense, the unrest in Northern
Africa this past summer is a result of technology not available
10 years ago.

Grassland Beef has enjoyed a growth rate of 30% per year to
date from our inception in 2000. This would have been nearly
impossible without the unlimited access available online.
August of 2011 was a record for revenue when we received 2,837
sales orders during that one month.

Our local Fed Ex sales representative reported in 2009 that
half of their volume was edible, which demonstrates how many
consumers are now buying food online. Please remember that the
rural community is where an abundance of our food is produced.

Direct to consumer food marketing grew 104.7% between 1997
and 2007 while total ag sales only increased 47.6% (source page
3 http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/
getfile?dDocName=STELPRDC5076729) GLB is in a perfect position
to capitalize on this direct to consumer link.

Grassland Beef has over 700 affiliates that use the web to
direct clients from their websites to ours. By utilizing online
resources such as these, we are able to gain market growth and
increased sales.

In 2006, Grassland Beef utilized a VAPG USDA Rural
Development Grant which has been instrumental in our growth to
a better business platform and left us with tools we use every
day to successfully manage the business.

In 2009, GLB recognized the marketing power of social media
and devoted one employee full time to tap into Facebook,
Twitter and blogging. Being able to point traffic to an online
website helped push sales further up the marketing ladder of
success.

90% of our business is direct to the consumer via Fed Ex.
Most of our competition has chosen to sell direct to
distributors and grocery chains. The online technology we
employ in order to sell direct to consumer reduces the risk of
large client turnover which will occur when you are selling in
large volume to any one customer.

The majority of our online sales are centered around urban
areas. There are several factors that lead to this, but one is
certainly the fact that decent Internet service is not readily
available in the Midwest and other rural areas. This can be
seen clearly in the map below:

Data compiled March 31, 2011.

In closing, we have been enjoying high demand and riding a
strong wave of Internet success over the last 3 years. We are
able to operate a complicated business without debt thanks to
being able to open this local region to every county in the
USA, as well as some international business, mainly through
Internet access.

We are hopeful that the Subcommittee on Rural Development,
Research, Biotechnology, and Foreign Agriculture will see the
unlimited potential for putting high speed broadband in the
rural community.

Time is money, and speeding up communications between the
producers of smart foods and consumers is a win-win situation
for everyone in the chain.

Finally, there will be new uses for the inherit speed of
broadband that no one in this room can envision today but these
will certainly amaze all of us within the next 5 years.

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Now, we are at our last witness, Mr. Les Fowler, McDonough
Telephone Cooperative in Colchester. And I must say, my
grandparents, until they passed away, lived in Macomb, so I
spent a good part of childhood, about every week, in Macomb and
Colchester and the surrounding area. So, I have a special
relationship with that area.
Glad to have you here, Mr. Fowler.

STATEMENT OF LESTER D. FOWLER, LEGISLATIVE AND
GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS MANAGER, McDONOUGH
TELEPHONE COOPERATIVE, COLCHESTER, IL; ON BEHALF OF NATIONAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS COOPERATIVE
ASSOCIATION

Mr. Fowler. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, other Members, for
this invitation to participate in today's discussion on rural
broadband access and rural economic development.
For the past year, I have served as the Legislative and
Government Affairs Manager on the McDonough Telephone
Cooperative, which is headquartered in Colchester. Our industry
is uniquely qualified to participate in today's discussion
because we are small businesses that lead the way in deploying
high speed, sustainable broadband in rural America.
McDonough serves over 3,400 customer lines. Our 1,016
square mile service area is spread across the western portion
of Illinois. We employ 48 people who help provide 5 megabyte
broadband to our entire service area, with plans to deliver
higher speeds.
America's 11,000 rural telecom providers serve
approximately 40 percent of the nation's landmass, yet only 5
percent of that population. Thanks to rural providers, rural
Americans enjoy universal voice service, broadband Internet,
and enhanced emergency preparedness.
The American economy runs on broadband. As the Federal
Communications Commission stated earlier this year, broadband
infrastructure has become crucial to our nation's economic
development and civic life. Businesses need broadband to start
and grow. Adults need broadband to find jobs. Children need
broadband to learn. As important as these benefits are in
American cities, broadband could even be more important in
America's more remote small towns, rural, and insular areas,
and tribal lands.
Yet as many as 24 million Americans, 1 in 13 of us, live in
areas where there is no access to any broadband network.
Broadband's economic benefits are well known. Areas that gained
broadband from 1999 through 2006 realized a 6.4 percent
employment growth on average. Polls reveal that 66 percent of
consumers see the lack of broadband access as a disadvantage to
identifying job opportunities. Rural providers have made basic
levels of broadband service available to over 90 percent of the
rural customers.
The Universal Service Fund and intercarrier compensation
are crucial in deploying telecommunications in rural areas. USF
is a public-private partnership that built quality, affordable
voice service to nearly every American. The FCC is reforming
USF and ICC to support broadband service, and may finalize a
rule as early as October.
The rural carriers, large price cap carriers, recently
submitted a consensus framework that represents a landmark
agreement among parties that are often at odds. Difficult
compromises were made for the sake of regulatory certainty
needed to build out to high cost, sparsely populated areas.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Rural Utilities
Service provides essential financing for broadband for
broadband deployment in rural areas that must be paid back with
interest, creating a win-win situation for rural broadband
consumers and taxpayers.
Our U.S. lending has become crucial to broadband
provisioning as private lenders withhold financing due to
regulatory uncertainty created by USF and ICC reform under way
at the FCC.
We sincerely thank the Subcommittee Chairman Johnson for
leading the House in March of this year to encourage the FCC to
implement reform carefully and consider the impact on our U.S.
borrowers' ability to repay loans.
We gratefully also thank Ranking Member Costa and
Congressman Schilling for joining. The Subcommittee has had a
long history of allocating our U.S. telecommunication program
in a manner best suited to ensure the high cost of sparsely
populated rural areas receive service.
For those not familiar with what rural providers and USF
and RUS can provide, I will provide you an example.
McDonough Telephone Cooperative completed a network upgrade
in 2003 that deployed fiber to within 2 miles of our rural
customers, every one of them. And it was made possible by a $14
million loan from RUS.
American needs a strong USF and vibrant RUS.
The rural industry has been the leader in deploying
advanced telecommunication services in America's rural areas.
The rural providers and associations are eager to continue
working with you to fulfill a national objective of making
broadband universally available. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fowler follows:]

Prepared Statement of Lester D. Fowler, Legislative and Government
Affairs Manager, McDonough Telephone Cooperative, Colchester, IL; on
Behalf of National Telecommunications Cooperative Association

I. Introduction
Thank you for the invitation to participate in today's discussion
on the role of broadband access in rural economic development.
Broadband has quickly become an essential service that plays a key role
in creating and keeping jobs in rural America.
For the past year I have served as the Legislative and Government
Affairs Manager of McDonough Telephone Cooperative, which is
headquartered in Colchester, IL. Prior to my current position, I served
as a data processing commercial office supervisor for 29 years. I
regularly work with the National Telecommunications Cooperative
Association (NTCA), which represents small, community-based
telecommunications cooperatives and other small telecom providers in
Washington, D.C. My remarks today are on behalf of McDonough, as well
as NTCA and its more than 570 small community-based members that
provide a variety of communications services throughout the rural far
reaches of the nation.
We believe our industry is uniquely qualified to participate in
today's discussion because we are consumer-centric small businesses
that are leading the way in deploying high-speed, sustainable broadband
to rural America. McDonough, similar to nearly half of NTCA's other
members, operates and functions as a cooperative. In a cooperative
structure, the consumers are also the owners, so every idea and every
action is made from both an owner and a consumer perspective--the two
are truly one and the same. Likewise, with regard to the other half of
NTCA's members, those that are family or commercially owned and
operated, again their focus is consumer-centric because they are
locally owned and operated. And, very importantly, in both cases these
companies exist to provide service rather than to generate owner value.
McDonough's top priority has always been to provide every one of
our consumers, who are also our owners, with the very best
communications and customer service possible. McDonough has several
lines of business, including ILEC, CLEC and ISP. Make no mistake--while
our headquarters are in Colchester, we in fact serve over 3,400
customer lines across our 1,016 square mile rural service area that is
spread across the western portion of the State of Illinois. This
constitutes about 3.4 customers per square mile. We employ a total of
48 people and in 2010 our annual operating revenue was about $6.5
million. Our service area is rural and sparsely populated, requiring
great effort to get advanced services to our customers. In our
industry's parlance, as a small rural provider of this size, McDonough
is a Tier 3 carrier.
Let me give you a quick snapshot of how McDonough compares with
several other industry entities. Verizon, AT&T, and CenturyLink are
classified as large, or Tier 1 carriers, and also operate in multiple
states. Verizon has a workforce of nearly 194,000 and annual revenues
of $106.6 billion. AT&T has a workforce of 266,590 and annual revenues
of more than $123 billion. CenturyLink has a workforce of 45,000 and
operates in 37 states. Clearly with operations of this size, the
priorities, objectives, and sources of capital are generally far
different from McDonough's community-based limited-scale approach to
doing business.
The entrepreneurial spirit of McDonough is representative of our
approximately 1,100 small rural counterparts in the industry, who
together serve approximately 40% of the nation's land mass, yet about
5% percent of the population. Like the vast majority of our rural
colleagues, McDonough has always been an early adopter of new
technologies and services. McDonough currently has 5 Megabit broadband
service available to 100% of our service area and we are currently
working on a strategic network plan to deliver even higher speed
services that our members are demanding. Rural Americans throughout
McDonough's service area, and indeed throughout the markets of NTCA
members, are enjoying universal voice service, access to broadband
Internet services, and enhanced emergency preparedness.

II. Broadband Drives Economic Development
The American Economy runs on broadband. As the FCC stated in its
February Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for Universal Service Fund and
intercarrier compensation reform:

Ubiquitous broadband infrastructure has become crucial to our
nation's economic development and civic life. Businesses need
broadband to start and grow; adults need broadband to find
jobs; children need broadband to learn. Broadband enables
people with disabilities to participate more fully in society
and provides opportunity to Americans of all income levels.
Broadband also helps lower the costs and improve the quality of
health care. As important as these benefits are in America's
cities--where more than \2/3\ of residents have come to rely on
broadband--the distance-conquering benefits of broadband can be
even more important in America's more remote small towns, rural
and insular areas, and Tribal lands. Furthermore, the benefits
of broadband grow when all areas of the country are connected.
More users online means more information flowing, larger
markets for goods and services, and more rapid innovation.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Connect America Fund, A National Broadband Plan for Our Future,
Establishing Just and Reasonable Rates for Local Exchange Carriers,
High-Cost Universal Service Support, Developing a Unified Intercarrier
Compensation Regime, Federal-State Joint Board on Universal Service,
Lifeline and Link-Up: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and Further Notice
of Proposed Rulemaking, WC Docket No. 10-90, GN Docket No. 09-51, WC
Docket No. 07-135, WC Docket No. 05-337, CC Docket No. 01-92, CC Docket
No. 96-45, WC Docket No. 03-109, FCC 11-13, at para. 3 (2011) (NPRM).

To not have access to high speed Internet in this day and age is
unimaginable to most people, but as many as 24 million Americans--one
in thirteen of us--live in areas where there is no access to any
broadband network. According to the FCC's National Broadband Plan, 14
million people do not have access to terrestrial broadband capable of
download speeds that ``can support today's and tomorrow's
applications,'' and such housing units are more common in rural areas.
The National Telecommunications and Information Administration's
November 2010 report titled ``Exploring the Digital Nation: Home
Broadband Adoption in the United States'' stated that home broadband
usage went from 51% in 2007 to 64% in 2009.\2\ Since 2001, household
broadband Internet use has grown from 9% to 64%, an increase of more
than 600%. Sixty-six percent of urban (metropolitan) Americans
subscribe to broadband at home, as compared with 51% of rural
(nonmetropolitan) Americans. If rural America is going to keep pace
with urban America, then rural Americans need to understand the
benefits of broadband and have affordable access to it.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ http://www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/documents/
report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The economic benefits of broadband have been reported far and wide.
Recent studies conclude that every one percentage point increase in
broadband penetration in a state increases overall employment by 0.2%
to 0.3% a year.\3\ Further, an area moving from no broadband providers
to one to three providers during the years 1999 through 2006 realized
6.4% employment growth on average.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ http://www.brookings.edu/ /media/Files/rc/papers/2007/
06labor_crandall/06labor_crandall.pdf.
\4\ http://www.ppic.org/content/pubs/report/R_110JKR.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Consumers view broadband as an advantage: 66% of consumers see the
lack of broadband access as a disadvantage in identifying job
opportunities and gaining job skills, 62% see the lack of broadband
access to be a disadvantage in obtaining health information, and 56%
see lack of broadband as a disadvantage in using government
services.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Home-Broadband-2010.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The numbers demonstrate that broadband is being deployed to rural
America. USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service's August 2011
report on Farm Computer Usage and Ownership revealed that 62 percent of
U.S. farms now have Internet access, compared with 59 percent in 2009.
Broadband DSL is now utilized on 38% of U.S. farms. Dialup access on
farms went from 23 percent in 2009 to 12 percent in 2011. Rural
providers have made basic levels of broadband service available to over
90 percent of rural consumers in sparsely populated areas.
At the same time, USDA's Economic Research Service reports that
over the course of the past decade the rural population has grown at
less than half the rate of the metropolitan population. And as Chairman
Johnson stated when he announced this hearing, many rural communities
are experiencing ``more deaths than births.'' Broadband deployment and
adoption in rural America must increase at a faster rate in order to
reverse the trend of rural flight. As more and more commerce,
government services, and education moves over broadband, it will only
become more important to provide this service to rural areas to bolster
economic activity that will be necessary to attract and retain more
Americans.

III. Universal Service/Intercarrier Compensation Reform
The Universal Service Fund (USF) and intercarrier compensation
(ICC) have long played a role in supporting telecommunication services
in rural areas. These programs enable a public-private partnership and
have ensured that Americans living in rural areas of the country
receive voice service comparable in performance and price to those
living in more urban areas. However, the time has come to update these
important network support mechanisms to ensure that all Americans have
the opportunity to experience the benefits offered by a nationwide
integrated advanced communications network.
Today, telecom providers and policy makers alike are shifting their
focus from voice services to broadband, which offers the promise of
being the great equalizer between rural and non-rural areas of our
nation. Rural communications service providers are working to replicate
the success of their telephone service build-out by steadily deploying
broadband infrastructure and related services to an increasing
percentage of their subscribers.
But this task is not easy, and more remains to be done. A typical
self-sustaining business plan in an urban area is much more difficult
to implement in rural markets. It is in these high-cost areas that
universal service remains critical to overcome the economic challenges
of deploying communications networks.
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is currently undergoing
a proceeding to reform USF and ICC and may act as early as October on a
final ruling. As part of this effort, the rural local exchange carriers
submitted a reform proposal in April 2011, and later modified it to
reach a Consensus Framework agreement with larger providers. This
agreement advances the Commission's objectives for reform while
targeting the current budget as a goal and adhering to the principles
for universal service mandated by the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
The Consensus Framework reflects extensive discussions and
development efforts among representatives of the nation's largest and
smallest telecommunications service providers. It represents a landmark
agreement among parties whose individual views of USF and ICC reform
diverge greatly. Difficult and meaningful compromises were made in the
negotiating process, as parties sought to promote broadband deployment
and support network maintenance in a way that would meet Commission
goals and restore regulatory certainty. Adopting the Consensus
Framework will restore investor confidence in the telecommunications
industry and better enable carriers to deploy broadband in rural areas.
If implemented as proposed, consumers and businesses in the rural
areas served by rural rate-of-return carriers will see continued access
to high-quality, affordable broadband services, without loss of access
to quality voice services or unreasonable increases in rates. In
addition, the plan will lead to increased broadband build-out to areas
currently unserved.
While technological advances may help to reduce some costs
associated with broadband deployment, it is still always going to be
more expensive to serve rural America due to low population density,
expansive distances, and often-rugged terrain. Without Federal policies
such as universal service to ensure adequate and predictable cost
recovery mechanisms for broadband, our national goal of universal
broadband access may never be realized.

IV. Rural Utilities Service
Another important tool that has helped achieve broadband deployment
in rural areas is access to financing from the Department of
Agriculture's Rural Utilities Service (RUS). Many rural communication
providers were at one time RUS borrowers and many continue to borrow
from RUS today. There can be no question regarding the ongoing
essential nature of RUS's telecommunication programs.Broadband is
critical to providing access to economic growth, job creation, distance
learning, health care, and national security in rural America. As noted
above, millions of Americans still lack access to effective broadband.
Therefore, the job is not done.
As Congress continues to grapple with deficit reduction efforts,
it's important to note that RUS Broadband Loan Program and the
traditional Telecommunication Infrastructure Loan programs are funded
with loans that must be paid back with interest--creating a win/win
situation for rural broadband consumers and taxpayers. To address other
concerns with the program, including findings that some loans had been
approved for areas that were not truly rural or unserved, Congress
reformed the RUS Broadband Loan Program as part of the 2008 Farm Bill
(new loans were not approved until these reforms were finally
implemented in March 2011).
In addition, as a result of the regulatory uncertainty created by
ongoing cost recovery reform proposals at the FCC, private lenders have
become less willing to provide financing for rural broadband projects,
which has further slowed broadband penetration in high-cost areas.
Therefore, the RUS Broadband Loan Program and other RUS communications
programs have become more vital than ever before.
We also would like to take this opportunity to thank Subcommittee
Chairman Johnson for leading a letter in March of this year that
encouraged the FCC to implement USF/ICC reforms in a manner that
manages a provider's transition. In addition, the letter asked the FCC
several important questions regarding the impact of such reforms on RUS
borrowers' ability to repay loans. We appreciate your leadership on
these important matters.
Rural providers have a history of working with RUS to provide
modern communications infrastructure to rural America, and we look
forward to continuing that partnership.

V. Government Role in Broadband Deployment
In my testimony thus far, I have outlined the status of broadband
deployment in America today, and particularly how critical such
deployment is to economic and community development. Additionally I
have reviewed the commitment of rural providers to consumers throughout
their markets and how essential the cost recovery mechanisms and
structure they rely upon have been, and will be, to meeting their
consumers' needs. And, finally, I have detailed the crucial reasons why
reforms to the communications industry's cost recovery structure must
closely adhere to the carefully crafted parameters of the industry's
Consensus Framework.
Truly, we can all be proud regarding just how far our nation has
come over the course of the past decade regarding the evolution of
broadband and the resulting penetration and adoption of this technology
and its related services. I cannot state emphatically enough that this
success has only been possible due to the unique cooperation that has
existed between the industry, the American people, and policymakers to
make this a reality. Together, through a spirit of entrepreneurship, a
can-do attitude, and a deep national confidence, the appropriate mix of
programs and policies have been cultivated and maintained that ensure
widespread broadband deployment and adoption.
This commitment and partnership will be essential to America's
quest to secure and maintain a level of global broadband preeminence.
To underscore this assessment I draw the Committee's attention to a May
2009 U.S. Government Accountability Office report (GAO-09-494) that,
among other things, considers the Federal Government's approach to
broadband deployment. In the study's opening remarks it notes that
according to government officials, ``the Federal approach to broadband
deployment is focused on advancing universal access.''
The GAO report goes on to state that historically the role of the
government in carrying out a market-driven policy has been to create
market incentives and remove barriers to competition, while the role of
the private sector has been to fund broadband deployment. It continues
that under this policy, broadband infrastructure has been deployed
extensively yet, doing so in rural areas is more difficult and in some
instances gaps remain, primarily due to the limited profit potential
associated with such initiatives. The Rural Utilities Service (RUS)
Telecommunications Program and the high cost element of the Universal
Service Fund (USF) exist to help fund advanced telecommunications
infrastructure deployment. Industry stakeholders credit such programs
with helping to increase broadband deployment--especially in rural
areas--and that to achieve universal access, support of this nature
will be essential in the future.
Despite the long history of success associated with these programs,
a small but vocal minority of voices exists that refuse to accept this
reality. Throughout this debate over the government's role in broadband
deployment, the rural sector of the industry has routinely been
directed to ``think outside the box'' in a search for more economical
solutions to communications infrastructure deployment. If I do nothing
else here today, it is my overarching desire to ensure that everyone
participating and listening to this discussion ultimately leaves with
the recognition and understanding that rural carriers always have and
always will ``think outside the box.'' Truly, they have no other
choice.
What segment of the industry was the first to have completely
converted to digital switched systems? What segment of the industry was
a pioneer in providing wireless options to their hardest to reach
customers? From what segment of the industry did the first company to
deploy an all-fiber system come? What segment of the industry was the
first to offer distance learning and tele-health applications? What
segment of the industry was an early leader in providing cable-based
video, then satellite video, and now IP video to their markets? What
segment of the industry quickly moved into Internet Service Provision
in the early stages of the Internet's public evolution? And what
segment of the industry continues to lead in the deployment of high
speed broadband capable infrastructure?
In every instance the answer to those questions is--the small rural
segment of the communications industry. Many might be asking why these
carriers care or have this unique perspective and approach to their
mission. The answer to that question is relatively simple, because in
the case of cooperative and commercially structured systems alike, the
businesses are owned and operated by members of the local community.
Clearly, these are entrepreneurs who care about their communities and
their nation and obviously these are individuals who are continually
``thinking outside the box.''
It is obvious to the rural sector of the communications industry
that the Rural Development Subcommittee has an appropriate perspective
on such matters. As the panel with oversight responsibilities over the
RUS, this Subcommittee has a long history of allocating the RUS
Telecommunications Program in the manner best suited to ensuring rural
needs are met. But there may be others with us here today that are not
as familiar with this program and what it, the USF, and the rural
sector of the industry have accomplished. I invite them to take a
closer look at what is happening in my company's service area as well
as throughout out state. McDonough Telephone Cooperative completed a
network upgrade in 2003. This upgrade deployed fiber to within 2 miles
of our rural customers. This upgrade was made possible by a $14 million
loan from RUS. We are currently in the application process for a $15
million loan to take fiber to the home to our rural/rural customers. We
began this process in May of 2009 and the engineering portion of the
application has just been approved. Perhaps best of all, the Federal
programs that have helped make this a reality have simultaneously
helped ensure that all Americans can uniformly enjoy advanced
communications connectivity that is comparable in price and scope.
There can be no doubt regarding the grave nature of the debt crisis
confronting our nation, the interest of the public in appropriately
responding to it, and the absolute necessity of doing so in a manner
that is consistent with legal precedents and mandates. Yet the Federal
response to this calamity has at times given cause for concern that
solutions under consideration could harm rural America and hurt
taxpayers when the full effect of cuts is accounted for.
Our concern first materialized upon reviewing the dangerous and
defective recommendation in the December 2010 report of the National
Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform that identified the
private USF and the venerable RUS as a source of public debt reduction.
Some months later we were further troubled to learn that Congressional
debt negotiators were giving serious consideration to raiding the USF
program. And in recent days our alarm has grown as we have learned that
the Joint Select Committee on Deficit Reduction may also consider
raiding USF as well as cutting the RUS program which Congressional
appropriators in both the House and Senate just agreed to maintain.
With regard to the USF it is particularly imperative that
policymakers and the public alike understand the unique nature of the
federally mandated, yet privately funded and managed, USF. The USF has
a long history and since its inception, has been maintained outside the
U.S. Treasury and managed by a non-governmental entity. Were this
private fund to be raided in the name of Federal debt reduction, it
would amount to little more than a governmental taking and would
qualify as a stealth tax on an unwitting public. Surely this is not the
sort of deception the America people want or deserve.
Today we are on the cusp of fully moving into a world where data,
video, and mobility are the primary objectives of consumers and voice
will be secondary, or even an afterthought. Yet, regardless of whether
consumers are focused on voice or some other form of communication,
they will still require the underlying infrastructure to ensure their
communication gets to its destination. The only difference is that with
regard to broadband and advanced-services-capable infrastructure, the
costs and subsequent need for support are even greater than they are
for voice-only infrastructure. Thus, again I underscore the ongoing
need for a strong USF and a vibrant RUS.

VI. Conclusion
America stands at a crossroads between a narrowband and broadband
world. The choice is clear. The rural industry has long been the leader
in deploying advanced telecommunications services to America's rural
areas. The rural providers and associations are eager to continue
working with you to move forward aggressively to fulfill the national
objective of making broadband universally available as is envisioned by
so many and indeed mandated by statute. Thank you.

The Chairman. I appreciate that. I am going to forego my
questions and call on the Ranking Member to begin with.
I might point out that Mr. Schroeder, Terry McClennan in
the audience, Joan Dyskter, district director, myself, as well
as our staff are not only privileged to be here, we are making
a major sacrifice by not being at the University of Illinois-
Urbana Champaign watching the Fighting Illini demolish Western
Michigan, and increase its 24th ranking in the country.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. So, we are putting in extra miles here.
With that, let me introduce for questions, Mr. Jim Costa.
I will also say one of the beauties about colleagues from
North Carolina, California, obviously Illinois and
Pennsylvania, we actually have a Member from Alabama, Georgia,
is just the opportunity to understand about these states, and
agriculture specifically. And one of the things Mr. Costa has
pointed out to me, and I am going to visit his district at some
point, is what stone fruit is and how that is a component, and
it is obviously a critical component of our agricultural
sector. And so, that is the beauty of it.
Let me also point out before I recognize all my colleagues,
and I am going to let them do the questioning. I point out this
to the media. You know, my colleagues ask me sometimes, or my
constituents ask me sometimes why do you all not get along? Why
do you not stop the bickering? And I point out to them this. It
is not news when people get along with each other. The news,
the 24/7 cycle is when people conduct themselves in a street
fight, a food fight, with each other. And to actually have this
opportunity, and this is not just for show, this is for real.
And to have these colleagues here with me, I just want to
emphasize that there are people in Congress who do get along
with each other, who try to work together for common solutions.
And with that introduction and with my appreciation for his
being here with us today, my distinguished co-Chairman and
Ranking Member of the Committee, Mr. Costa of California, for
questions of the panel?
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I could not
agree with you more in terms of our working relationship. And
maybe again we still hold ourselves up as an example on the
right to legislate and do oversight. The oversight that we are
doing is important, and I empathize with you are there in
spirit with the Fighting Illini. I am tonight wanting to be
with my Fresno State Bulldogs. They are in Idaho tonight. So, I
will be flying somewhere over the country as they are playing
the game.
I want to, Mr. Schroeder, focus and with other witnesses on
the issue of where we are and how we expand our efforts on
broadband, and the challenges we face, and what exists within
the loan program, or the guarantee, or the grants with regards
to both the USDA and other efforts and funds.
I was interested in your online program. You said you are
in 12 countries. How do folks find out about Illinois, and how
do you finance that?
Mr. Schroder. Excellent question. The adage in our field is
that one finds online students online, and the converse is
true; they find the University of Illinois online. So, if you
type the words ``online learning'' into Google, even in
Washington, D.C. where I was earlier this week, UIS will appear
on the top four or five listings regarding online learning.
Mr. Costa. The various courses you offer.
Mr. Schroeder. And then, of course----
Mr. Costa. How much does that cost?
Mr. Schroeder. We use e-tuition, so the tuition online is
very close to that which is required in state.
Mr. Costa. How does the university finance it?
Mr. Schroeder. And each of the online programs is self-
sustaining. That was a stipulation back when we began, yes.
Mr. Costa. So, if I am one of those foreign students, I pay
for it at a different rate than if you are a----
Mr. Schroeder. No, you pay the same rate, whether you are
in North Carolina, California, or Illinois.
Mr. Costa. What are the technological challenges that you
face in expansion?
Mr. Schroeder. The challenges for us are not in the
delivery; it is, rather, in the students. And I will note that,
of course, the largest number of our students are in Illinois.
The second largest number are in California. And those
students----
Mr. Costa. Good.
Mr. Schroeder.--we have a relationship with the----
Mr. Costa. How can we provide better opportunities for you
to expand your services?
Mr. Schroeder. It really is to provide access in rural
communities so that students or prospective students there can
sign up for our programs. If they do not have broadband, it
will not work. You cannot do it with dial up.
Mr. Costa. I have more questions. I will submit them later.
Mr. Bartlett, I loved your comment about we feed much of
the world because we do. and something that regardless of what
part of rural America you come from, it is part of our
tremendous contribution.
You talked about wireless versus fiber optics, and not
being one and the same, in the broad geographical area that you
tried to provide access. How did you finance it?
Mr. Bartlett. Well, our build out will be a finance
completely privately as it goes right now. Now, what I said is
we are working toward a consortium, so what our job is, one of
the members of our consortium will be Mr. Fowler's company. He
will be using USDA funds, funds that PPI utilizes, generally
come from our cooperative banks, private sources.
Mr. Costa. And you talked about leverage in your statement.
You leverage the USDA funds with private sector funding?
Mr. Bartlett. Well, what we are trying to do is leverage
our members' rates that they pay to us to make sure that each
one of their dollars goes toward more than one thing. It goes
toward improving the environment, the smart grid. It goes to
helping us control the electric system and helping people like
Mr. Fowler and small telecom companies provide much higher
bandwidth and broadband services.
Mr. Costa. This goes for all of the witnesses as I quickly
go through because my time is running out. Suggest to us ideas
on how we can improve the RUS rural loan program and the
guarantee program within broadband, as well----
Mr. Bartlett. Very quickly how I would recommend right away
is that we streamline it and that we get more local control of
the program. Right now it is managed----
Mr. Costa. You mentioned that in your statement. What do
you mean by more local control?
Mr. Bartlett. More local control in that these are very
difficult businesses or communities sometimes to do business
because they are small. And the local knowledge of where build
out is needed and where it is not is so hard to obtain in
Washington compared to in the counties in which these things
are carried out. I think a closer participation with the State
Director and the local USDA offices, and local cooperatives is
key.
Mr. Costa. You work pretty closely with your State
Director?
Mr. Bartlett. Yes, we do. We have an excellent
relationship.
Mr. Costa. Ms. Campbell, you talked about going from 5 megs
to 10 megs and all the expansion of providing better health
care for your----
Ms. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Costa.--communities. How are you going to finance that?
Ms. Campbell. It is going to be privately. We have
partnered with our local communications provider. They have
been willing to work with us financially, but it is private
funds that will pay for that.
Mr. Costa. And does that include your comments about the
electronic medical records efforts? And what is your timeline
to make that transition?
Ms. Campbell. We hope to reach meaningful use by June of
2012. Right now, it is all private funding that has been
invested to upgrade that technology. And then, we will apply
for the RF funds by reimbursement.
Mr. Costa. All right, Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I
have some additional questions, I appreciate the wonderful
testimony that has been provided today and all your good
efforts to make this a very substantive hearing.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
And with that, I would call on the gentleman from
Pennsylvania who has an update on the football scores.
Mr. Thompson. I do.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. Mr. Glenn Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman. Well, in the spirit of
brotherhood and with good folks from Illinois who are playing,
was it Western Michigan, Penn State is up 24 to 0 over Eastern
Michigan.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Thompson. So, we have both sides covered.
I want to, Ms. Campbell, come back to, first of all,
congratulations on what you have done using telecommunications
for access to health care. It is an important issue for me. I
actually have introduced, passed out of the House the
Servicemember Telemedicine and E-Health Portability Act, which
frankly is a piece of legislation I wrote with folks at the
Pentagon after--we have a son and daughter-in-law in the 3rd
Infantry Division. When I looked at the alarming rates of
suicides----
Ms. Campbell. Yes.
Mr. Thompson.--among our active duty servicemembers, those
veterans, Guard, reservists, and it just relies on broadband
access out to rural America.
And so, a couple of questions real quick. One is kind of an
observation. We talked about the electronic medical records and
meaningful use. You referenced that. And I know the answer to
this, but I want you to say, what are the consequences to our
hospital if you are not in compliance with the meaningful use
requirement put forth under the Health Care Act.
Ms. Campbell. The consequences are that our reimbursement
for Medicare begins declining, and it goes in increments, but
eventually you would not reimbursed by Medicare at all.
Medicare is at our hospital probably 75 percent of our volume.
Mr. Thompson. Yes, which is paying 80 cents to 90 cents for
every dollar of costs that you have.
Ms. Campbell. That is correct.
Mr. Thompson. At this point.
Ms. Campbell. At this point, this is correct.
Mr. Thompson. So it is incredibly important obviously----
Ms. Campbell. It is.
Mr. Thompson.--this access to broadband. I actually was a
manager in one of the first critical access hospitals, and you
talk about the importance of access to high quality health care
services. You know, with the reimbursement rates, which are--
well, we just said what they were. They do not meet costs.
Smaller economies of scale.
Ms. Campbell. Correct.
Mr. Thompson. You are limited by definition to the number
of beds that you may have in terms of Census----
Ms. Campbell. And the length of time they can stay, yes.
Mr. Thompson. And the tremendous government mandates that
you have to respond to. How does broadband access help deal
with those issues, the fund balance in the end?
Ms. Campbell. First of all, access to high quality
specialty care is excellent. We do not have the opportunity to
have cardiologists, neurologists, orthopedics in our campus
every week, so this access through broadband has been
tremendous.
It also, though, helps contain some costs because we are
able to access offsite providers that provide direction to our
physicians, to our medical staff. Our physicians have also been
able to participate in grand rounds, get additional education
that has been very, very helpful. We have been able to provide
also continuing education to our nurses and our staff where we
do not have to send them offsite. And it has all been
accomplished through broadband.
Mr. Thompson. Less down time, that is great.
Ms. Campbell. Exactly.
Mr. Thompson. Congratulations.
Mr. Crum, one of the problems we face in this country of
the citizens and certainly Members of Congress, we are too many
generations removed from the farm. We do not understand where
our food comes from, although there does seem to be a movement
towards what I call farms to the family dining table where
people want to have confidence in their food.
Using the direct marketing that you do with your beef, is
that something that you are able to provide for public
confidence when people reach out using that direct marketing,
this is where your food is coming from, it is safe, it is high
quality?
Mr. Crum. Yes. The Internet has helped with that. We have a
weekly newsletter. We communicate with our customers. We have
You Tube videos, Twitter, Facebook, everything in the paper
that I did not read is presented there.
But that one-to-one connection, having an 800 number and
calling up at all hours of the day or not, having access to the
owners is a very important tool because it puts confidence in
the product.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Mr. Schroeder, I know we talked
about earlier, I have a son and a daughter-in-law in the United
States Army. They are doing their education online, and they
are doing it no matter where they are in the world. It is
pretty impressive.
Your testimony mentions the affordability of broadband
access as a barrier to online learning. I am on the Education
Workforce Committee as well, and so I was interested to see
what your knowledge is. Are some of the tools required
currently for online learning--eligible educational expenses
for financial aid, computer connection fees, other expenses?
Mr. Schroeder. They are, yes. Right, yes. Those that are
required for the courses, so if a course requires or a program
requires the computer, then it is financial aid eligible.
Mr. Thompson. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I might point out that our spirit of
cooperation between Penn State and Illinois and all the
civility is going to come to a quick end when they play----
Mr. Thompson. They play in a couple of weeks.
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. In a couple of weeks, we are playing each
other, and then you are going to see a food fight.
Mr. Thompson. Want to guess which side I am on?
[Laughter.]
The Chairman. I recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, my good friend, Mr. Larry Kissell.
Mr. Kissell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to all the folks
who made this possible, staff, people at the university, our
witnesses, my colleagues, thank you for this because it is very
important. And I know there is a risk of overdoing the fact
that this Committee does get along, but it is very important
for folks to hear that when you do get along, you get things
accomplished. And with our Chairman and our co-Chairman and
colleagues, our concern, our love is rural America, and that is
what unites us, whether it is the different parts of rural
America that we see, that common element of rural America is so
important to all of us.
Several important questions--Mr. Chairman, did I hear
something about a Route 66?
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kissell. I have a Route 66 sign in my house. I grew up
with that love with the mythology of Route 66, and I could not
help but notice coming in, flying in today the beautiful
farmlands. And it reminded me of a trip that I took with my
daughters in the Dakotas and Iowa and Nebraska. And my
daughters would get so excited when they would see trees
because they knew if there were trees, there were going to be
houses in a town. And there is something beautiful about this
land which I appreciate tremendously. And some of the names of
the communities. I could regale you with terms of North
Carolina from Abner to Uwharrie, but I will not do that today.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Kissell. I have several questions. And, Mr. Bartlett
and Mr. Fowler, we recently had the groundbreaking in North
Carolina of around 1,200 miles, literally a highway of fiber
optics that will encircle the state. And unfortunately there
are still many counties that will not be there. Are you
concerned about our ability, and Mr. Costa talked about the
transcontinental highway. We know that the population went with
where the railroad was. Are you concerned at all about creating
a subdivision of have nots within our rural areas because they
do not have access to broadband, especially to fiber optics in
all of the hospitals, schools, universities, and things that
will be associated with that? Are we creating a separate level
of have nots?
And how do you feel about our ability to reach those areas?
Either one?
Mr. Bartlett. I would be happy to start real quickly
because the story maybe moves from me to him.
There are communities of have notes, and Prairie Power
being a long distance transmission provider, that is our role.
We are moving in to take businesses like Mr. Fowler's and small
communications companies from one market to the next that they
cannot currently reach. That was the point of our consortium.
Mr. Fowler. I believe he has basically answered the
question, but we have seen some needs in some neighboring
communities that we do not serve. And we have been able to use
some local money to provide services, well, to Western Illinois
University and Macomb. We have a 200 meg pipe into them.
We have connected all the schools in Macomb with fiber
optics. These were needs that people needed that they required.
They came to us and we saw an opportunity to provide the
service.
In one of our latest ventures is we have taken fiber optics
to two of the very large apartment complexes that service
Western Illinois University. I believe it is 350 housing units
that right now they are taking 60 meg and anticipate going up
to 200 meg.
Mr. Kissell. Well, I would ask everyone here, but obviously
on our panel, to continue to feed ideas about how we can not
have this subsection of have nots, because you talked about,
Mr. Bartlett, just the vast geography of what you cover. We
just got to watch that.
And, Ms. Campbell, are you concerned with--you talked about
you all went to--and I am computer illiterate, but you went to
one level of service and you had to have another, went to
another level, now you have to have another. Are you concerned
that we are going to be perpetually in a we cannot get enough,
and there is always going to be something else we need, and we
just will not be able to--even with the haves to be able to
have enough service. Are you concerned at all about that?
Ms. Campbell. I am to a certain extent. I think once I
reach a certain level as our particular hospital, I probably
will have adequate Internet service. I am small. But the larger
metropolitan areas that continue to grow, grow, grow, their
needs may continue to do that.
I do believe I will reach a level that I will be saturated
and I will be fine. But it is just going to continue to grow
and grow and grow.
Mr. Kissell. So, that is going to be an ongoing challenge.
Ms. Campbell. It is.
Mr. Kissell. And, Mr. Schroeder, in my previous life before
Congress, I worked 27 years in textiles, and the red light is
flashing, so I will make this quick. I literally quit my old
job on a Monday and started teaching high school on a Tuesday.
They gave me a book and a key and said, good luck.
I took two online classes as a preparation for getting my
teaching certificate. Neither one involved visuals or audio.
The online classes, how can you tell me that the education for
online class--not seeing a professor, not seeing other
students--can be measured in quality and be as good as
something that is more traditional?
Mr. Schroeder. We regularly run studies comparing the same
faculty members teaching the same course on campus and online.
And in fact, in many cases, we got superior outcomes online.
Though mediating variables can be that the online students are
a bit older, so a 35 year old may perform better than an 18
year old. But in any event, with current technology, our
emphasis is on interaction, engagement. They see the faculty
member, many times have wide interaction in many of the online
classes.
Mr. Kissell. And just really quickly, it hasn't stopped
yet. It is just flashing. Are most of your online courses that
do involve a video back and forth between the students and the
teacher?
Mr. Schroeder. All of them involve exchanges. I have not
yet taught a class with fewer than 2,500 exchanges with 25
students in the class.
Mr. Kissell. Okay. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I now recognize my colleague and actually a
former Member of the Illinois General Assembly, Mr. Randy
Hultgren?
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you for hosting
this. And I want to thank the University of Illinois-
Springfield for hosting this. It is just a wonderful facility,
a wonderful place. And I really appreciate you doing this. This
is a very, very important discussion that really is the start
of a discussion that we need to continue. So, thank you so
much.
I want to address my first question, Mr. Fowler, if I could
to you. I think you had mentioned in your written testimony
talking about the 24 million Americans who have no access to
any broadband network. I wonder if you could expand on this a
little bit and how wireless or satellite coverage plays a role.
And from your perspective, what speed really is at least a
minimally accepted speed for people to be able to survive and
do business and be engaged in education?
Mr. Fowler. I do not think there is any doubt that we need
to concentrate on areas where people do not have any service
today.
I believe that there is a complement between wireless and
wireline and fiber and satellite. There are different
tendencies to each one of those technologies. Satellite still
has a latency problem, which I do not know if that is ever
going to be cured. But there probably needs to be a stronger
consideration for those areas that do not have any service.
From the rural standpoint, that is kind of where the USF
and ICC has been helping address those problems or taking care
of those problems for quite some time.
Mr. Hultgren. Kind of getting into that next step of what
really does start it? Is it private investment that really gets
this going with assistance of public investment? Does it really
have to be the public sector, do you think, or through
governments, or some of these agencies, and some of the grants
that are out there? Is that what is really going to start us to
the next level? From your perspective, what is the key to get
the funding that will take us to address this glaring problem
with 24 million people without adequate access to broadband?
Mr. Fowler. Well, unfortunately there is not a good
business model for a lot of these areas. And getting private
funding for that is probably going to be extremely difficult.
There is not going to be a huge opportunity for a lot of profit
taking in those scenarios. So, it is going to take a jump start
from the public sector to get this going.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you.
Mr. Crum, I want to just talk a little bit--I am interested
in the amazing growth of your company, but also just been very
interested and have been working on the Agriculture Committee
quite a bit with the shift of how producers have really almost
prepared the new insurances--hedging and using the commodities
markets. I also know that is key in very rural areas if you are
going to be involved in hedging or commodities, working with
that as almost an insurance policy of uncertainty from year to
year.
First of all, has you company been involved in that, and do
you have adequate technology to be able to be involved in that?
Does that make sense?
Mr. Crum. In hedging in particular?
Mr. Hultgren. Yes.
Mr. Crum. Currently we are not. I am not saying we will not
be in the future, but it is a commodity and it is a volatile
commodity in this day and age. And that is how you protect
yourself with risk tools. But our producers as a general rule,
the people that we buy products from, they do not.
It is apparently a low input system with grass and fencing
and rotational grazing that produce the product itself. We then
assimilate it and put it out to the general consumers through
the Internet. But currently we do not use any hedging, no.
Mr. Hultgren. With the people that you are using, the firms
that you are using, or those that are near you, can you share
any experiences that they have had in accessing risk management
tools from their farm? Has that been a part of it really, or is
it really more the----
Mr. Crum. It has not really been that big of a part of the
risk management tools. As a general rule, these are established
farms, and this is a fairly low input system with not very many
high agriculture inputs as we are used to today. And mainly
farm family operations that market their products through us.
Mr. Hultgren. Thank you.
Mr. Schroeder, with the little time I have left, I wondered
if I could ask you a little bit, we talked some about the
benefits of opening up education to rural areas and students
who would not have access to coming to the schools. I wonder if
you could just give me a feel for what you see some of the
benefits to the institution, to the university, by having this
new relationship.
Mr. Schroeder. It is so important to us to be able to put
together classes that represent a diversity of views. Our
emphasis in so many of our online classes comes on discussions,
case studies, analysis. And if we can bring to those classes a
rural point of view, not just an urban point of view, our
classes are enhanced.
Mr. Hultgren. Let me ask you on that, too, does it also
open up opportunities for professors that maybe would not have
access, too. I wonder if you could just share a little bit
about that as well.
Mr. Schroeder. Yes. It certainly is two ways. And, in fact,
just recently, literature has been published on access for
faculty members with disabilities who cannot meet all the time,
cannot make all the classes on campus. And this facilitates
some who might be hospitalized part of the year, can then
continue to teach their classes. And, of course, it allows us
to bring faculty members on a visiting basis from other states
around the country.
Mr. Hultgren. Again, thank you all. I appreciate you being
here today. So thankful to the university and the Chairman for
putting this together.
The Chairman. The last Member, certainly not least, my
colleague, who actually represents Sangamon County, Bobby
Schilling?
Mr. Schilling. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to say is this is music to my ears because I
hear a lot of private sector jobs here, across the board, and I
think that is totally awesome.
I want to start out with Mr. Fowler. I have Henderson,
Mercer County, Warren County. And I go to the school districts
there. And I tell you, they are struggling because they do not
have what other school districts have across the United States
of America. And their concern, which I believe is legitimate,
is that they are going to continue to fall behind. And with the
budgets, as we have across America, specifically here in
Illinois, we have a huge mess here.
And I guess, what are we doing maybe to try to help those
areas out, or what can we do to try to give that jump start, so
to speak, and have those people reach out to you maybe?
Mr. Fowler. Well, our local school districts, we provide 5
meg connections. And as far as financing, I think possibly that
could be shared between the state, the companies, and the
Federal level. You know, between the three, a combination could
probably help support that.
I do not think we serve the schools in those counties, but
possibly they might want to go to their provider first and see
if they can offer some assistance to get them the broadband
connections that they need.
Mr. Schilling. Okay. And then quickly, rough idea of how
much the cost of basic service is to a person?
Mr. Fowler. Our lowest package is a 1 meg package that is
$39.95 a month. And we offer residential packages up to 5 megs,
up to $64.95. And we discount that if they bundle it with
additional broadband services. We also offer a video product.
So, that is just the range we are selling it at, yes.
Mr. Schilling. Okay, very good. And then, I just want to
hit over here to Mr. Crum.
Your company, sir, since you got the Internet straight and
around, roughly the amount of jobs that increased with your
company?
Mr. Crum. Currently there is roughly nine to ten full time
equivalent employees. That includes the office staff and then
the packing staff. The fabrication and killing is all custom
hire, and that is not included in that.
Mr. Schilling. Right. Yes, very good. And that has spin off
would be, of course, great also. So, very good. Just kind of
curious on that.
And then, this is kind of like speed dating.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Schilling. Though I have never done that before.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Schilling. But, Ms. Campbell----
Ms. Campbell. Yes?
Mr. Schilling.--a couple of things I have for you is as you
reduce costs and increase your capacity through telemedicine,
does that free up capital to do other things?
Ms. Campbell. Yes, indeed. Renovation to our facility is
one our strategic goals within the next 18 to 24 months. And
this should help free up some capital for us to a certain
extent.
It also opens a lot of opportunities with the advancement
of technology, smart phones and iPads, to actually place those
types of tools in patients' homes where they can connect
directly with their primary care physician or the specialist.
Also, our EMT providers when they are in the field, they can
literally use a smart phone. We do not yet have that
capability, but we have seen it. They can then connect to a
physician to actually get a scan of the condition of the
patient. That is life-saving technology.
It is also cost saving technology. So, the more
connectivity that they have and the more technology and tools
that they can use, it should just help advance the medical care
of the patient, and hopefully reduce costs, which we know
reducing the cost of medical care is one of the biggest things
for the government today.
Mr. Schilling. Yes. And you have done a pretty darn good
job with telemedicine. I mean, everything that I have read is
phenomenal with what you guys have done with it.
And I do not know if you know this: How many rural
hospitals have been able to achieve what you guys have done?
Ms. Campbell. Within Illinois, I have more knowledge of the
critical access hospitals. There are 51, and I would say
probably at least 75 percent of them are using some form of
telemedicine whether teleradiology or actually telemedicine
within their ER departments.
Mr. Schilling. Okay, very good. Yes. You know, I live in a
rural area, so I know how important those are. And I also have
some slow Internet, but anyway.
Ms. Campbell. But anyway.
Mr. Schilling. I appreciate your answer.
And then, Mr. Schroeder, you were telling the story about
your daughter. I think that that's something that is
imperative, and it is back to where I kind of started out with
here is the fact that these are jobs. These are private sector
permanent jobs that this is what our country needs, things that
are going to be long term, not some short term things that are
just going to be burdening our kids and our grandkids long
term. And the key here is that these create taxpayers that pay
in, which help make a lot of our problems in the United States
of America go away.
But I just want to say that it has been an honor to be here
at this facility. This is a great facility, and we look forward
to coming back. And thank you for having me, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. I am going to go on with maybe a couple more
questions, but also mention with the five witnesses here, Bob,
my good friend, who has joined me in saying that one of the
witnesses, that several years ago would have been extraordinary
years of Senator Vince Demuzio, who was extraordinarily
directly involved in this whole arena. And obviously his
presence and his role in this area is something we will feel
for generations.
I have no intentions of asking any more questions. Mr.
Costa said likewise. We do and be glad to take any other
questions people have. We do have a little quick media session
afterwards, and then we are going to start our tour around 2
p.m. or thereabouts. So, hopefully we can wrap up accordingly.
With that, I recognize whomever wants to ask a couple more
questions. Anybody have anything? More questions?
I am going to do a quick closing statement, Mr. Costa
likewise, and then we will wrap it up and go from there.
I think we may have on this panel or on the Subcommittee,
the full Committee, a variation from time to time on some
issues, maybe even the stimulus bill that was passed 2\1/2\
years ago. But regardless of our position on that issue, I
think we can all agree with this: rural America faces a
critical time, and broadband service, postal service, economic
development in small town rural America is critical in the
judgment of all of us to the future of America. This is one
element of it.
I think we can also agree that regardless of whether the
stimulus was or was not a good idea, that a loan approval
process and application process, funds that were intended for
small towns that wind up in big cities, the lack of capacity is
something we all want to address because it is in our common
interest. And that is what we are about, is common bipartisan
solutions to the crisis that rural America faces. And we want
to do what we can as Members of the Committee, you all, and
certainly as Americans, to try to arrest the potential decline
of rural America.
So, with my thanks again to that, turn it over to the
Ranking Member, Mr. Costa, for his closing remarks.
Thanks to all the panel. Terrific audience. Great
witnesses, and a great university for their being willing to
host us for what I think is a real privilege for downstate
Illinois.
And with that, Mr. Costa?
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for bringing
this Subcommittee hearing to, as I said in my opening
statement, to the heartland of America.
The University of Illinois here at the campus in
Springfield, we really appreciate everything that you are
doing, and being a co-host for us today to hold this
Congressional hearing. It is a wonderful campus, and it is a
reflection of the tremendous universities that we have
throughout our country. And I know that Chairman Johnson is
very proud to have a chance to bring the Subcommittee here to
hold the hearing on this campus.
I think the testimony today by our witnesses really points
out the need to build on what we have developed so far because
we know that the way of the future for rural America is to be
able to effectively compete on a level playing field. And that
level playing field is the Internet, and the way that we
provide access to the Internet is through the broadband that
allows every American the same opportunities to be educated, to
communicate, to do business, to provide all the functions that
are really a part of this global economy that we live in today.
So, as we look at reauthorizing the 2012 Farm Bill, we will
take very carefully under consideration the suggestions that
you have made here today. I know that Chairman Johnson and my
colleagues here in a bipartisan fashion feel very strongly that
one of our most important parts of our job is to advocate on
behalf of rural America because those are our constituencies,
and those are people that we represent. So, their voices must
be heard through our voices.
So, as we look at the RUS rural telephone loan and loan
guarantee program, the broadband loan program, how we look on
providing greater local control, as was suggested, as we look
at dealing with the challenges of start-up business, when you
want to provide good quality foods for our entire nation, that
you have the opportunity to have that level playing field.
So, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you again. I want to,
most importantly, thank our witnesses and all that were a part
of this effort. You noted on several occasions that our staff
did a terrific job in making this hearing a reality. They
always do. Frankly, if it weren't for them, we would not be
able to make this happen. So, I, too, want to commend the
Majority and Minority staff that came to the Springfield campus
for the University of Illinois to make this hearing a reality.
Thank you, thank you, and thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the terrific job you do. I am
honored to serve as the Ranking Member on your Subcommittee,
and we all look forward to working together as we reform the
2012 Farm Bill, and make sure that rural America is an
important part of that farm bill.
Thank you very much.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Costa.
Under the rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 30 calendar days to receive
additional material and supplementary or written responses from
the witnesses to any question posed by a Member.
So now, with, again, my appreciation, this hearing on the
Subcommittee on Rural Development, Research, Biotechnology, and
Foreign Agriculture is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:49 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]

Submitted Statement by Drew Clark, Executive Director, Partnership for
a Connected Illinois

Good morning, Chairman Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee.
The deployment and adoption of high speed Internet services and
information technology has resulted in enhanced economic development
and public safety for Illinois's communities, improved healthcare and
educational opportunities, and a better quality of life for Illinois
residents. Continued progress in the deployment and adoption of high-
speed Internet services and information technology is vital to ensuring
that Illinois remains competitive and continues to create business and
job growth.
Partnership for a Connected Illinois, also known as
BroadbandIllinois, is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization with a three-
fold mission: (a) to collect and publish broadband data; (b) to ensure
broadband access throughout the state; and (c) to maximize broadband's
impact and use.
The PCI is the nonprofit association authorized under the High-
Speed Internet Services and Information Technology Act (Public Law 95-
684, enacted in 2007) through a contract with the Illinois Department
of Commerce and Economic Opportunity. The Partnership for a Connected
Illinois is the designated entity by the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration (NTIA) under the State Broadband Data
and Development grant program.
The Act sets forth the goals of the Illinois' high-speed Internet
deployment strategy:

Ensuring that Illinois residents and businesses have access
to affordable and reliable high-speed Internet service;

Improving technology literacy, computer ownership, and high-
speed Internet use among residents and businesses;

Establishing local technology planning teams to plan for
improved technology use; and

Establishing and sustaining an environment that facilitates
high-speed Internet access and technology investment.

At PCI, our activities are based on the Illinois General Assembly's
findings that these efforts will result in enhanced economic
development and public safety for our communities, improved health care
and educational opportunities, and a better quality of life for
Illinois residents.
PCI works in partnership with the State of Illinois to ensure that
Illinois remains competitive and continues to create business and job
growth.
PCI also works collaboratively with broadband providers and local
leaders to ensure their communities benefit from high speed Internet
access.
In conjunction with the NTIA, PCI also develops a statewide
inventory and map of existing broadband services and capabilities, and
works to enhance the adoption of Federal and state investments in
broadband to ensure they are sustainable.
Both the Federal and state governments have had the foresight to
advance investment in broadband technology. Many areas are well-served
by existing broadband and telecommunication carriers. And in many
places, particularly larger cities, there is robust competition.
However, businesses and service providers are just beginning to scratch
the surface on how broadband Internet service can be of benefit to
consumers.
PCI' s efforts are therefore also focused on ensuring that
communities in Illinois understand how they can maximize the value of
this technology in accordance with Federal Communication Commission's
seven purposes: Jobs and economic opportunity, public safety,
telemedicine, energy conservation, education, civic engagement and
government performance. PCI is also focused on ways that broadband can
assist rural Illinois and benefit agriculture.
We are also beginning to see competition in some of our smaller
communities. For example, where Verizon previously chose not to provide
broadband service, its successor, Frontier, is now ambitiously offering
competitive options.
In many areas of the state, however, there is a lack of what we
call middle-mile fiber. You could liken this middle-mile fiber to
electric transmission lines that serve a variety of electric customers
through investor-owned utilities, municipalities and electric
cooperatives. Each has a role in transmitting bulk quantities of
electricity to electric utility systems throughout Illinois. Some of
these electric providers would not exist without the foresight of
elected officials who created the Rural Utilities Service or pioneers
in municipalities who wanted their residents to enjoy the benefits of
electricity for their homes and businesses. In many respects, the goal
of providing broadband service to rural Illinois is similar to rural
electrification efforts of the 1930s.
Just as we know electric service enables commerce to develop in our
communities and state, so too will broadband Internet service. Better
broadband means better lives.
Historians recognize that Abe Lincoln once exhibited a passionate
interest in infrastructure improvements as a means to overcome
obstacles to equal opportunity and commerce. Broadband infrastructure
and deployment is the mission of our time.
PCI is helping to coordinate public and private partnerships, with
a goal of filling the gaps necessary to link our communities to the
rest of the nation and, indeed, the world.
Allow me to share but a few examples of Federal and state
investments are will enhance the quality of life:

In the northwestern part of the state, Northern Illinois
University is working with community leaders, schools,
healthcare providers and public safety officials to install 870
miles of fiber that will be available for broadband deployment.

In southern Illinois, Clearwave is installing 740 miles of
fiber that will connect communities in 23 counties. This
investment in broadband infrastructure is deemed vital to the
future success of Southern Illinois University and promises to
revitalize the economy in the southern region of our state--
creating opportunities that otherwise might not have been
envisioned.

In far southern Illinois, the Shawnee Telephone Company
serves among the most disadvantaged areas of the state in terms
of health care and economics. Many of its schools no longer
offer options like foreign languages or chorus or band. The
closing of coal mines has taken its toll on these communities.
Imagine the difference broadband can make with the installation
of fiber optic cable, which promises to bring distance learning
and advances in health care to help the region achieve
prosperity once again. Broadband infrastructure in Gallatin,
Pope and Hardin Counties can equate to prosperity and progress
in these communities and has the potential to lead to new
economic development opportunities.

The Connected Living program in Cook, Kankakee and Will
Counties is offering Internet training to citizens with
disabilities and seniors so that they may participate in
commerce, on-line learning, manage their utility bills and
become more involved in community and government activities.

The Smart Communities Program is a joint venture of the City
of Chicago, Chicago Public Library Foundation and Chicago
Community Trust to promote comprehensive technology adoption
among 270,000 residents and small businesses in five pilot
digitally-underserved Chicago neighborhoods.

In summary, our objective is ensure that broadband and high speed
Internet are available for all Illinois citizens so that they may
benefit from broadband and technology advancements that otherwise might
not be available to them.

Drew Clark,
Executive Director,
Partnership for a Connected Illinois,
Springfield, IL.
attachment
Illinois Broadband Coverage

This map represents wireline and wireless broadband
availability at several tiers of maximum advertised speeds, and
areas with no broadband coverage.
Green represents the highest speeds. Orange represents the
slowest speeds.
Created by: Ruben Clark, GISP.
______

Submitted Statement by Illinois Farm Bureau

September 21, 2011

Please accept these comments from Illinois Farm Bureau
'

on the important role of broadband access in rural economic
development.
Illinois Farm Bureau is a nonprofit membership organization
representing more than 75% of farmers in Illinois. Those farmers, along
with our associate members, make up our more than 420,000 members.
Agricultural producers, being rural in nature, are typical of the
rural residents that stand to benefit from improved access to high-
speed Internet. Growing reliance on digital/electronic transfer of data
makes access to high-speed Internet a necessity. More and more units of
local government, businesses (including farming), education and health
care providers are communicating electronically.
Farmers are facing a number of proposed changes in the distribution
of information necessary to operate their business. These changes
include a switch from hardcopy distribution to delivery through online
services. Farmers that are either unserved or underserved are facing
significant efficiency challenges when considering the benefits
broadband offers, including:

EPA considering rules allowing a move towards web-based
label information for some pesticides

Government farm programs and applications moving to online
distribution

Up-to-date market information provided electronically

Purchasing and ordering farm supplies through online
services

Our policy, established by our members, calls for:

Opportunities to work with rural electric cooperatives,
telephone cooperatives, and other entities that have existing
infrastructure and expertise to provide broadband service to
all rural areas. We encourage these entities to use grants and
other sources of monetary assistance to provide these broadband
services.

Support for increased sources and levels of funding for
developing and expanding broadband telecommunications service
to rural areas.

While building infrastructure is a key part in improving access,
additional hurdles to establishing more private projects and carriers
are adoption and utilization in rural areas. The Federal Communication
Commission (FCC) reports in their Nation Broadband Plan that 22% of
non-adopters claim ``digital literacy'' as an obstacle to broadband
adoption. The report states that an additional 19% of potential users
do not feel information delivered over broadband is useful to them.
As a result, adoption and utilization barriers have the potential
to reduce the number of ``customers'' in rural communities where
potential users are already limited due to sparse population.
By addressing adoption and utilization concerns through education
and awareness in rural areas, private providers will gain a stronger
``customer'' base. Creating demand provides incentives to private
providers and the opportunity for price reduction for service in rural
areas.
Other needs as we see them include:

Efforts to increase adoption and utilization of broadband in
rural areas

Development of public and/or private training and consumer
education programs targeting rural residents

Thank you for the opportunity to comment.
Sincerely,

Illinois Farm Bureau.


